Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
अथात: श्रुयतां राजन् वंश: सोमस्य पावन: ।
यस्मिन्नैलादयो भूपा: कीर्त्यन्ते पुण्यकीर्तय: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
athātaḥ śrūyatāṁ rājan
vaṁśaḥ somasya pāvanaḥ
yasminn ailādayo bhūpāḥ
kīrtyante puṇya-kīrtayaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; atha — now (after hearing the history of the dynasty of the sun); ataḥ — therefore; śrūyatām — just hear from me; rājan — O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); vaṁśaḥ — the dynasty; somasya — of the moon-god; pāvanaḥ — which is purifying to hear about; yasmin — in which (dynasty); aila-ādayaḥ — headed by Aila (Purūravā); bhūpāḥ — kings; kīrtyante — are described; puṇya-kīrtayaḥ — persons of whom it is glorious to hear.

Translation
Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī said to Mahārāja Parīkṣit: O King, thus far you have heard the description of the dynasty of the sun-god. Now hear the most glorious and purifying description of the dynasty of the moon-god. This description mentions kings like Aila [Purūravā] of whom it is glorious to hear.

Text 2
सहस्रशिरस: पुंसो नाभिह्रदसरोरुहात् ।
जातस्यासीत् सुतो धातुरत्रि: पितृसमो गुणै: ॥ २ ॥
sahasra-śirasaḥ puṁso
nābhi-hrada-saroruhāt
jātasyāsīt suto dhātur
atriḥ pitṛ-samo guṇaiḥ
Synonyms
sahasra-śirasaḥ — who has thousands of heads; puṁsaḥ — of Lord Viṣṇu (Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu); nābhi-hrada-saroruhāt — from the lotus produced from the lake of the navel; jātasya — who appeared; āsīt — there was; sutaḥ — a son; dhātuḥ — of Lord Brahmā; atriḥ — by the name Atri; pitṛ-samaḥ — like his father; guṇaiḥ — qualified.

Translation
Lord Viṣṇu [Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu] is also known as Sahasra-śīrṣā Puruṣa. From the lake of His navel sprang a lotus, on which Lord Brahmā was generated. Atri, the son of Lord Brahmā, was as qualified as his father.

Text 3
तस्य द‍ृग्भ्योऽभवत् पुत्र: सोमोऽमृतमय: किल ।
विप्रौषध्युडुगणानां ब्रह्मणा कल्पित: पति: ॥ ३ ॥
tasya dṛgbhyo ’bhavat putraḥ
somo ’mṛtamayaḥ kila
viprauṣadhy-uḍu-gaṇānāṁ
brahmaṇā kalpitaḥ patiḥ
Synonyms
tasya — of him, Atri, the son of Brahmā; dṛgbhyaḥ — from the tears of jubilation from the eyes; abhavat — was born; putraḥ — a son; somaḥ — the moon-god; amṛta-mayaḥ — full of soothing rays; kila — indeed; vipra — of the brāhmaṇas; oṣadhi — of the drugs; uḍu-gaṇānām — and of the luminaries; brahmaṇā — by Lord Brahmā; kalpitaḥ — was appointed or designated; patiḥ — the supreme director.

Translation
From Atri’s tears of jubilation was born a son named Soma, the moon, who was full of soothing rays. Lord Brahmā appointed him the director of the brāhmaṇas, drugs and luminaries.

Text 4
सोऽयजद् राजसूयेन विजित्य भुवनत्रयम् ।
पत्नीं बृहस्पतेर्दर्पात् तारां नामाहरद् बलात् ॥ ४ ॥
so ’yajad rājasūyena
vijitya bhuvana-trayam
patnīṁ bṛhaspater darpāt
tārāṁ nāmāharad balāt
Synonyms
saḥ — he, Soma; ayajat — performed; rājasūyena — the sacrifice known as Rājasūya; vijitya — after conquering; bhuvana-trayam — the three worlds (Svarga, Martya and Pātāla); patnīm — the wife; bṛhaspateḥ — of Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods; darpāt — out of pride; tārām — Tārā; nāma — by name; aharat — took away; balāt — by force.

Translation
After conquering the three worlds [the upper, middle and lower planetary systems], Soma, the moon-god, performed a great sacrifice known as the Rājasūya-yajña. Because he was very much puffed up, he forcibly kidnapped Bṛhaspati’s wife, whose name was Tārā.

Text 5
यदा स देवगुरुणा याचितोऽभीक्ष्णशो मदात् ।
नात्यजत् तत्कृते जज्ञे सुरदानवविग्रह: ॥ ५ ॥
yadā sa deva-guruṇā
yācito ’bhīkṣṇaśo madāt
nātyajat tat-kṛte jajñe
sura-dānava-vigrahaḥ
Synonyms
yadā — when; saḥ — he (Soma, the moon-god); deva-guruṇā — by the spiritual master of the demigods, Bṛhaspati; yācitaḥ — was begged; abhīkṣṇaśaḥ — again and again; madāt — because of false pride; na — not; atyajat — did deliver; tat-kṛte — because of this; jajñe — there was; sura-dānava — between the demigods and the demons; vigrahaḥ — a fight.

Translation
Although requested again and again by Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods, Soma did not return Tārā. This was due to his false pride. Consequently, a fight ensued between the demigods and the demons.

Text 6
शुक्रो बृहस्पतेर्द्वेषादग्रहीत् सासुरोडुपम् ।
हरो गुरुसुतं स्‍नेहात् सर्वभूतगणावृत: ॥ ६ ॥
śukro bṛhaspater dveṣād
agrahīt sāsuroḍupam
haro guru-sutaṁ snehāt
sarva-bhūta-gaṇāvṛtaḥ
Synonyms
śukraḥ — the demigod named Śukra; bṛhaspateḥ — unto Bṛhaspati; dveṣāt — because of enmity; agrahīt — took; sa-asura — with the demons; uḍupam — the side of the moon-god; haraḥ — Lord Śiva; guru-sutam — the side of his spiritual master’s son; snehāt — because of affection; sarva-bhūta-gaṇa-āvṛtaḥ — accompanied by all kinds of ghosts and hobgoblins.

Translation
Because of enmity between Bṛhaspati and Śukra, Śukra took the side of the moon-god and was joined by the demons. But Lord Śiva, because of affection for the son of his spiritual master, joined the side of Bṛhaspati and was accompanied by all the ghosts and hobgoblins.

Text 7
सर्वदेवगणोपेतो महेन्द्रो गुरुमन्वयात् ।
सुरासुरविनाशोऽभूत् समरस्तारकामय: ॥ ७ ॥
sarva-deva-gaṇopeto
mahendro gurum anvayāt
surāsura-vināśo ’bhūt
samaras tārakāmayaḥ
Synonyms
sarva-deva-gaṇa — by all the different demigods; upetaḥ — joined; mahendraḥ — Mahendra, the King of heaven, Indra; gurum — his spiritual master; anvayāt — followed; sura — of the demigods; asura — and of the demons; vināśaḥ — causing destruction; abhūt — there was; samaraḥ — a fight; tārakā-mayaḥ — simply because of Tārā, a woman, the wife of Bṛhaspati.

Translation
King Indra, accompanied by all kinds of demigods, joined the side of Bṛhaspati. Thus there was a great fight, destroying both demons and demigods, only for the sake of Tārā, Bṛhaspati’s wife.

Text 8
निवेदितोऽथाङ्गिरसा सोमं निर्भर्त्स्य विश्वकृत् ।
तारां स्वभर्त्रे प्रायच्छदन्तर्वत्नीमवैत् पति: ॥ ८ ॥
nivedito ’thāṅgirasā
somaṁ nirbhartsya viśva-kṛt
tārāṁ sva-bhartre prāyacchad
antarvatnīm avait patiḥ
Synonyms
niveditaḥ — being fully informed; atha — thus; aṅgirasā — by Aṅgirā Muni; somam — the moon-god; nirbhartsya — chastising severely; viśva-kṛt — Lord Brahmā; tārām — Tārā, the wife of Bṛhaspati; sva-bhartre — unto her husband; prāyacchat — delivered; antarvatnīm — pregnant; avait — could understand; patiḥ — the husband (Bṛhaspati).

Translation
When Lord Brahmā was fully informed by Aṅgirā about the entire incident, he severely chastised the moon-god, Soma. Thus Lord Brahmā delivered Tārā to her husband, who could then understand that she was pregnant.

Text 9
त्यज त्यजाशु दुष्प्रज्ञे मत्क्षेत्रादाहितं परै: ।
नाहं त्वां भस्मसात् कुर्यां स्त्रियं सान्तानिकेऽसति ॥ ९ ॥
tyaja tyajāśu duṣprajñe
mat-kṣetrād āhitaṁ paraiḥ
nāhaṁ tvāṁ bhasmasāt kuryāṁ
striyaṁ sāntānike ’sati
Synonyms
tyaja — deliver; tyaja — deliver; āśu — immediately; duṣprajñe — you foolish woman; mat-kṣetrāt — from the womb meant for me to impregnate; āhitam — begotten; paraiḥ — by others; na — not; aham — I; tvām — you; bhasmasāt — burnt to ashes; kuryām — shall make; striyam — because you are a woman; sāntānike — wanting a child; asati — although you are unchaste.

Translation
Bṛhaspati said: You foolish woman, your womb, which was meant for me to impregnate, has been impregnated by someone other than me. Immediately deliver your child! Immediately deliver it! Be assured that after the child is delivered, I shall not burn you to ashes. I know that although you are unchaste, you wanted a son. Therefore I shall not punish you.

Text 10
तत्याज व्रीडिता तारा कुमारं कनकप्रभम् ।
स्पृहामाङ्गिरसश्चक्रे कुमारे सोम एव च ॥ १० ॥
tatyāja vrīḍitā tārā
kumāraṁ kanaka-prabham
spṛhām āṅgirasaś cakre
kumāre soma eva ca
Synonyms
tatyāja — gave delivery; vrīḍitā — being very much ashamed; tārā — Tārā, the wife of Bṛhaspati; kumāram — to a child; kanaka-prabham — having a bodily effulgence like gold; spṛhām — aspiration; āṅgirasaḥ — Bṛhaspati; cakre — made; kumāre — unto the child; somaḥ — the moon-god; eva — indeed; ca — also.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: By Bṛhaspati’s order, Tārā, who was very much ashamed, immediately gave birth to the child, who was very beautiful, with a golden bodily hue. Both Bṛhaspati and the moon-god, Soma, desired the beautiful child.

Text 11
ममायं न तवेत्युच्चैस्तस्मिन् विवदमानयो: ।
पप्रच्छुऋर्षयो देवा नैवोचे व्रीडिता तु सा ॥ ११ ॥
mamāyaṁ na tavety uccais
tasmin vivadamānayoḥ
papracchur ṛṣayo devā
naivoce vrīḍitā tu sā
Synonyms
mama — mine; ayam — this (child); na — not; tava — yours; iti — thus; uccaiḥ — very loudly; tasmin — for the child; vivadamānayoḥ — when the two parties were fighting; papracchuḥ — inquired (from Tārā); ṛṣayaḥ — all the saintly persons; devāḥ — all the demigods; na — not; eva — indeed; uce — said anything; vrīḍitā — being ashamed; tu — indeed; sā — Tārā.

Translation
Fighting again broke out between Bṛhaspati and the moon-god, both of whom claimed, “This is my child, not yours!” All the saints and demigods present asked Tārā whose child the newborn baby actually was, but because she was ashamed she could not immediately answer.

Text 12
कुमारो मातरं प्राह कुपितोऽलीकलज्जया ।
किं न वचस्यसद् वृत्ते आत्मावद्यं वदाशु मे ॥ १२ ॥
kumāro mātaraṁ prāha
kupito ’līka-lajjayā
kiṁ na vacasy asad-vṛtte
ātmāvadyaṁ vadāśu me
Synonyms
kumāraḥ — the child; mātaram — unto his mother; prāha — said; kupitaḥ — being very angry; alīka — unnecessary; lajjayā — with shame; kim — why; na — not; vacasi — you say; asat-vṛtte — O unchaste woman; ātma-avadyam — the fault you have committed; vada — say; āśu — immediately; me — unto me.

Translation
The child then became very angry and demanded that his mother immediately tell the truth. “You unchaste woman,” he said, “what is the use of your unnecessary shame? Why do you not admit your fault? Immediately tell me about your faulty behavior.”

Text 13
ब्रह्मा तां रह आहूय समप्राक्षीच्च सान्‍त्वयन् ।
सोमस्येत्याह शनकै: सोमस्तं तावदग्रहीत् ॥ १३ ॥
brahmā tāṁ raha āhūya
samaprākṣīc ca sāntvayan
somasyety āha śanakaiḥ
somas taṁ tāvad agrahīt
Synonyms
brahmā — Lord Brahmā; tām — unto her, Tārā; rahaḥ — in a secluded place; āhūya — putting her; samaprākṣīt — inquired in detail; ca — and; sāntvayan — pacifying; somasya — this son belongs to Soma, the moon-god; iti — thus; āha — she replied; śanakaiḥ — very slowly; somaḥ — Soma; tam — the child; tāvat — immediately; agrahīt — took charge of.

Translation
Lord Brahmā then brought Tārā to a secluded place, and after pacifying her he asked to whom the child actually belonged. She replied very slowly, “This is the son of Soma, the moon-god.” Then the moon-god immediately took charge of the child.

Text 14
तस्यात्मयोनिरकृत बुध इत्यभिधां नृप ।
बुद्ध्या गम्भीरया येन पुत्रेणापोडुराण्मुदम् ॥ १४ ॥
tasyātma-yonir akṛta
budha ity abhidhāṁ nṛpa
buddhyā gambhīrayā yena
putreṇāpoḍurāṇ mudam
Synonyms
tasya — of the child; ātma-yoniḥ — Lord Brahmā; akṛta — made; budhaḥ — Budha; iti — thus; abhidhām — the name; nṛpa — O King Parīkṣit; buddhyā — by intelligence; gambhīrayā — very deeply situated; yena — by whom; putreṇa — by such a son; āpa — he got; uḍurāṭ — the moon-god; mudam — jubilation.

Translation
O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, when Lord Brahmā saw that the child was deeply intelligent, he gave the child the name Budha. The moon-god, the ruler of the stars, enjoyed great jubilation because of this son.

Texts 15-16
तत: पुरूरवा जज्ञे इलायां य उदाहृत: ।
तस्य रूपगुणौदार्यशीलद्रविणविक्रमान् ॥ १५ ॥
श्रुत्वोर्वशीन्द्रभवने गीयमानान् सुरर्षिणा ।
तदन्तिकमुपेयाय देवी स्मरशरार्दिता ॥ १६ ॥
tataḥ purūravā jajñe
ilāyāṁ ya udāhṛtaḥ
tasya rūpa-guṇaudārya-
śīla-draviṇa-vikramān
śrutvorvaśīndra-bhavane
gīyamānān surarṣiṇā
tad-antikam upeyāya
devī smara-śarārditā
Synonyms
tataḥ — from him (Budha); purūravāḥ — the son named Purūravā; jajñe — was born; ilāyām — in the womb of Ilā; yaḥ — one who; udāhṛtaḥ — has already been described (in the beginning of the Ninth Canto); tasya — his (Purūravā’s); rūpa — beauty; guṇa — qualities; audārya — magnanimity; śīla — behavior; draviṇa — wealth; vikramān — power; śrutvā — by hearing; urvaśī — the celestial woman named Urvaśī; indra-bhavane — in the court of King Indra; gīyamānān — when they were being described; sura-ṛṣiṇā — by Nārada; tat-antikam — near him; upeyāya — approached; devī — Urvaśī; smara-śara — by the arrows of Cupid; arditā — being stricken.

Translation
Thereafter, from Budha, through the womb of Ilā, a son was born named Purūravā, who was described in the beginning of the Ninth Canto. When his beauty, personal qualities, magnanimity, behavior, wealth and power were described by Nārada in the court of Lord Indra, the celestial woman Urvaśī was attracted to him. Pierced by the arrow of Cupid, she thus approached him.

Texts 17-18
मित्रावरुणयो: शापादापन्ना नरलोकताम् ।
निशम्य पुरुषश्रेष्ठं कन्दर्पमिव रूपिणम् ।
धृतिं विष्टभ्य ललना उपतस्थे तदन्तिके ॥ १७ ॥
स तां विलोक्य नृपतिर्हर्षेणोत्फुल्ललोचन: ।
उवाच श्लक्ष्णया वाचा देवीं हृष्टतनूरुह: ॥ १८ ॥
mitrā-varuṇayoḥ śāpād
āpannā nara-lokatām
niśamya puruṣa-śreṣṭhaṁ
kandarpam iva rūpiṇam
dhṛtiṁ viṣṭabhya lalanā
upatasthe tad-antike
sa tāṁ vilokya nṛpatir
harṣeṇotphulla-locanaḥ
uvāca ślakṣṇayā vācā
devīṁ hṛṣṭa-tanūruhaḥ
Synonyms
mitrā-varuṇayoḥ — of Mitra and Varuṇa; śāpāt — by the curse; āpannā — having obtained; nara-lokatām — the habits of a human being; niśamya — thus seeing; puruṣa-śreṣṭham — the best of males; kandarpam iva — like Cupid; rūpiṇam — having beauty; dhṛtim — patience, forbearance; viṣṭabhya — accepting; lalanā — that woman; upatasthe — approached; tat-antike — near to him; saḥ — he, Purūravā; tām — her; vilokya — by seeing; nṛpatiḥ — the King; harṣeṇa — with great jubilation; utphulla-locanaḥ — whose eyes became very bright; uvāca — said; ślakṣṇayā — very mild; vācā — by words; devīm — unto the demigoddess; hṛṣṭa-tanūruhaḥ — the hairs on whose body were standing in jubilation.

Translation
Having been cursed by Mitra and Varuṇa, the celestial woman Urvaśī had acquired the habits of a human being. Therefore, upon seeing Purūravā, the best of males, whose beauty resembled that of Cupid, she controlled herself and then approached him. When King Purūravā saw Urvaśī, his eyes became jubilant in the ecstasy of joy, and the hairs on his body stood on end. With mild, pleasing words, he spoke to her as follows.

Text 19
श्रीराजोवाच
स्वागतं ते वरारोहे आस्यतां करवाम किम् ।
संरमस्व मया साकं रतिर्नौ शाश्वती: समा: ॥ १९ ॥
śrī-rājovāca
svāgataṁ te varārohe
āsyatāṁ karavāma kim
saṁramasva mayā sākaṁ
ratir nau śāśvatīḥ samāḥ
Synonyms
śrī-rājā uvāca — the King (Purūravā) said; svāgatam — welcome; te — unto you; varārohe — O best of beautiful women; āsyatām — kindly take your seat; karavāma kim — what can I do for you; saṁramasva — just become my companion; mayā sākam — with me; ratiḥ — a sexual relationship; nau — between us; śāśvatīḥ samāḥ — for many years.

Translation
King Purūravā said: O most beautiful woman, you are welcome. Please sit here and tell me what I can do for you. You may enjoy with me as long as you desire. Let us pass our life happily in a sexual relationship.

Text 20
उर्वश्युवाच
कस्यास्त्वयि न सज्जेत मनो द‍ृष्टिश्च सुन्दर ।
यदङ्गान्तरमासाद्य च्यवते ह रिरंसया ॥ २० ॥
urvaśy uvāca
kasyās tvayi na sajjeta
mano dṛṣṭiś ca sundara
yad-aṅgāntaram āsādya
cyavate ha riraṁsayā
Synonyms
urvaśī uvāca — Urvaśī replied; kasyāḥ — of which woman; tvayi — unto you; na — not; sajjeta — would become attracted; manaḥ — the mind; dṛṣṭiḥ ca — and sight; sundara — O most beautiful man; yat-aṅgāntaram — whose chest; āsādya — enjoying; cyavate — gives up; ha — indeed; riraṁsayā — for sexual enjoyment.

Translation
Urvaśī replied: O most handsome man, who is the woman whose mind and sight would not be attracted by you? If a woman takes shelter of your chest, she cannot refuse to enjoy with you in a sexual relationship.

Text 21
एतावुरणकौ राजन् न्यासौ रक्षस्व मानद ।
संरंस्ये भवता साकं श्लाघ्य: स्त्रीणां वर: स्मृत: ॥ २१ ॥
etāv uraṇakau rājan
nyāsau rakṣasva mānada
saṁraṁsye bhavatā sākaṁ
ślāghyaḥ strīṇāṁ varaḥ smṛtaḥ
Synonyms
etau — to these two; uraṇakau — lambs; rājan — O King Purūravā; nyāsau — who have fallen down; rakṣasva — please give protection; māna-da — O one who gives all honor to a guest or visitor; saṁraṁsye — I shall enjoy sexual union; bhavatā sākam — in your company; ślāghyaḥ — superior; strīṇām — of a woman; varaḥ — husband; smṛtaḥ — it is said.

Translation
My dear King Purūravā, please give protection to these two lambs, who have fallen down with me. Although I belong to the heavenly planets and you belong to earth, I shall certainly enjoy sexual union with you. I have no objection to accepting you as my husband, for you are superior in every respect.

Text 22
घृतं मे वीर भक्ष्यं स्यान्नेक्षे त्वान्यत्र मैथुनात् ।
विवाससं तत् तथेति प्रतिपेदे महामना: ॥ २२ ॥
ghṛtaṁ me vīra bhakṣyaṁ syān
nekṣe tvānyatra maithunāt
vivāsasaṁ tat tatheti
pratipede mahāmanāḥ
Synonyms
ghṛtam — clarified butter or nectar; me — my; vīra — O hero; bhakṣyam — eatable; syāt — shall be; na — not; īkṣe — I shall see; tvā — you; anyatra — any other time; maithunāt — except at the time of sexual intercourse; vivāsasam — without any dress (naked); tat — that; tathā iti — shall be like that; pratipede — promised; mahāmanāḥ — King Purūravā.

Translation
Urvaśī said: “My dear hero, only preparations made in ghee [clarified butter] will be my eatables, and I shall not want to see you naked at any time, except at the time of sexual intercourse.” The great-minded King Purūravā accepted these proposals.

Text 23
अहो रूपमहो भावो नरलोकविमोहनम् ।
को न सेवेत मनुजो देवीं त्वां स्वयमागताम् ॥ २३ ॥
aho rūpam aho bhāvo
nara-loka-vimohanam
ko na seveta manujo
devīṁ tvāṁ svayam āgatām
Synonyms
aho — wonderful; rūpam — beauty; aho — wonderful; bhāvaḥ — postures; nara-loka — in human society or on the planet earth; vimohanam — so attractive; kaḥ — who; na — not; seveta — can accept; manujaḥ — among human beings; devīm — a demigoddess; tvām — like you; svayam āgatām — who has personally arrived.

Translation
Purūravā replied: O beautiful one, your beauty is wonderful and your gestures are also wonderful. Indeed, you are attractive to all human society. Therefore, since you have come of your own accord from the heavenly planets, who on earth would not agree to serve a demigoddess such as you.

Text 24
तया स पुरुषश्रेष्ठो रमयन्त्या यथार्हत: ।
रेमे सुरविहारेषु कामं चैत्ररथादिषु ॥ २४ ॥
tayā sa puruṣa-śreṣṭho
ramayantyā yathārhataḥ
reme sura-vihāreṣu
kāmaṁ caitrarathādiṣu
Synonyms
tayā — with her; saḥ — he; puruṣa-śreṣṭhaḥ — the best of human beings (Purūravā); ramayantyā — enjoying; yathā-arhataḥ — as far as possible; reme — enjoyed; sura-vihāreṣu — in places resembling the heavenly parks; kāmam — according to his desire; caitraratha-ādiṣu — in the best gardens, like Caitraratha.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: The best of human beings, Purūravā, began freely enjoying the company of Urvaśī, who engaged in sexual activities with him in many celestial places, such as Caitraratha and Nandana-kānana, where the demigods enjoy.

Text 25
रममाणस्तया देव्या पद्मकिञ्जल्कगन्धया ।
तन्मुखामोदमुषितो मुमुदेऽहर्गणान् बहून् ॥ २५ ॥
ramamāṇas tayā devyā
padma-kiñjalka-gandhayā
tan-mukhāmoda-muṣito
mumude ’har-gaṇān bahūn
Synonyms
ramamāṇaḥ — enjoying sex; tayā — with her; devyā — the heavenly goddess; padma — of a lotus; kiñjalka — like the saffron; gandhayā — the fragrance of whom; tat-mukha — her beautiful face; āmoda — by the fragrance; muṣitaḥ — being enlivened more and more; mumude — enjoyed life; ahaḥ-gaṇān — days after days; bahūn — many.

Translation
Urvaśī’s body was as fragrant as the saffron of a lotus. Being enlivened by the fragrance of her face and body, Purūravā enjoyed her company for many days with great jubilation.

Text 26
अपश्यन्नुर्वशीमिन्द्रो गन्धर्वान् समचोदयत् ।
उर्वशीरहितं मह्यमास्थानं नातिशोभते ॥ २६ ॥
apaśyann urvaśīm indro
gandharvān samacodayat
urvaśī-rahitaṁ mahyam
āsthānaṁ nātiśobhate
Synonyms
apaśyan — without seeing; urvaśīm — Urvaśī; indraḥ — the King of the heavenly planet; gandharvān — unto the Gandharvas; samacodayat — instructed; urvaśī-rahitam — without Urvaśī; mahyam — my; āsthānam — place; na — not; atiśobhate — appears beautiful.

Translation
Not seeing Urvaśī in his assembly, the King of heaven, Lord Indra, said, “Without Urvaśī my assembly is no longer beautiful.” Considering this, he requested the Gandharvas to bring her back to his heavenly planet.

Text 27
ते उपेत्य महारात्रे तमसि प्रत्युपस्थिते ।
उर्वश्या उरणौ जह्रुर्न्यस्तौ राजनि जायया ॥ २७ ॥
te upetya mahā-rātre
tamasi pratyupasthite
urvaśyā uraṇau jahrur
nyastau rājani jāyayā
Synonyms
te — they, the Gandharvas; upetya — coming there; mahā-rātre — in the dead of night; tamasi — when the darkness; pratyupasthite — appeared; urvaśyā — by Urvaśī; uraṇau — two lambs; jahruḥ — stole; nyastau — given in charge; rājani — unto the King; jāyayā — by his wife, Urvaśī.

Translation
Thus the Gandharvas came to earth, and at midnight, when everything was dark, they appeared in the house of Purūravā and stole the two lambs entrusted to the King by his wife, Urvaśī.

Text 28
निशम्याक्रन्दितं देवी पुत्रयोर्नीयमानयो: ।
हतास्म्यहं कुनाथेन नपुंसा वीरमानिना ॥ २८ ॥
niśamyākranditaṁ devī
putrayor nīyamānayoḥ
hatāsmy ahaṁ kunāthena
napuṁsā vīra-māninā
Synonyms
niśamya — by hearing; ākranditam — crying (because of being stolen); devī — Urvaśī; putrayoḥ — of those two lambs, which she treated as sons; nīyamānayoḥ — as they were being taken away; hatā — killed; asmi — am; aham — I; ku-nāthena — under the protection of a bad husband; na-puṁsā — by the eunuch; vīra-māninā — although considering himself a hero.

Translation
Urvaśī treated the two lambs like her own sons. Therefore, when they were being taken by the Gandharvas and began crying, Urvaśī heard them and rebuked her husband. “Now I am being killed,” she said, “under the protection of an unworthy husband, who is a coward and a eunuch although he thinks himself a great hero.”

Text 29
यद्विश्रम्भादहं नष्टा हृतापत्या च दस्युभि: ।
य: शेते निशि सन्त्रस्तो यथा नारी दिवा पुमान् ॥ २९ ॥
yad-viśrambhād ahaṁ naṣṭā
hṛtāpatyā ca dasyubhiḥ
yaḥ śete niśi santrasto
yathā nārī divā pumān
Synonyms
yat-viśrambhāt — because of depending upon whom; aham — I (am); naṣṭā — lost; hṛta-apatyā — bereft of my two sons, the lambs; ca — also; dasyubhiḥ — by the plunderers; yaḥ — he who (my so-called husband); śete — lies down; niśi — at night; santrastaḥ — being afraid; yathā — as; nārī — a woman; divā — during the daytime; pumān — male.

Translation
“Because I depended on him, the plunderers have deprived me of my two sons the lambs, and therefore I am now lost. My husband lies down at night in fear, exactly like a woman, although he appears to be a man during the day.”

Text 30
इति वाक्सायकैर्बिद्ध: प्रतोत्त्रैरिव कुञ्जर: ।
निशि निस्त्रिंशमादाय विवस्त्रोऽभ्यद्रवद् रुषा ॥ ३० ॥
iti vāk-sāyakair biddhaḥ
pratottrair iva kuñjaraḥ
niśi nistriṁśam ādāya
vivastro ’bhyadravad ruṣā
Synonyms
iti — thus; vāk-sāyakaiḥ — by the arrows of strong words; biddhaḥ — being pierced; pratottraiḥ — by the goads; iva — like; kuñjaraḥ — an elephant; niśi — in the night; nistriṁśam — a sword; ādāya — taking in hand; vivastraḥ — naked; abhyadravat — went out; ruṣā — in anger.

Translation
Purūravā, stricken by the sharp words of Urvaśī like an elephant struck by its driver’s pointed rod, became very angry. Not even dressing himself properly, he took a sword in hand and went out naked into the night to follow the Gandharvas who had stolen the lambs.

Text 31
ते विसृज्योरणौ तत्र व्यद्योतन्त स्म विद्युत: ।
आदाय मेषावायान्तं नग्नमैक्षत सा पतिम् ॥ ३१ ॥
te visṛjyoraṇau tatra
vyadyotanta sma vidyutaḥ
ādāya meṣāv āyāntaṁ
nagnam aikṣata sā patim
Synonyms
te — they, the Gandharvas; visṛjya — after giving up; uraṇau — the two lambs; tatra — on the spot; vyadyotanta sma — illuminated; vidyutaḥ — shining like lightning; ādāya — taking in hand; meṣau — the two lambs; āyāntam — returning; nagnam — naked; aikṣata — saw; sā — Urvaśī; patim — her husband.

Translation
After giving up the two lambs, the Gandharvas shone brightly like lightning, thus illuminating the house of Purūravā. Urvaśī then saw her husband returning with the lambs in hand, but he was naked, and therefore she left.

Text 32
ऐलोऽपि शयने जायामपश्यन् विमना इव ।
तच्चित्तो विह्वल: शोचन् बभ्रामोन्मत्तवन्महीम् ॥ ३२ ॥
ailo ’pi śayane jāyām
apaśyan vimanā iva
tac-citto vihvalaḥ śocan
babhrāmonmattavan mahīm
Synonyms
ailaḥ — Purūravā; api — also; śayane — on the bedstead; jāyām — his wife; apaśyan — not seeing; vimanāḥ — morose; iva — like that; tat-cittaḥ — being too much attached to her; vihvalaḥ — disturbed in mind; śocan — lamenting; babhrāma — traveled; unmatta-vat — like a madman; mahīm — on the earth.

Translation
No longer seeing Urvaśī on his bed, Purūravā was most aggrieved. Because of his great attraction for her, he was very much disturbed. Thus, lamenting, he began traveling about the earth like a madman.

Text 33
स तां वीक्ष्य कुरुक्षेत्रे सरस्वत्यां च तत्सखी: ।
पञ्च प्रहृष्टवदन: प्राह सूक्तं पुरूरवा: ॥ ३३ ॥
sa tāṁ vīkṣya kurukṣetre
sarasvatyāṁ ca tat-sakhīḥ
pañca prahṛṣṭa-vadanaḥ
prāha sūktaṁ purūravāḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he, Purūravā; tām — Urvaśī; vīkṣya — observing; kurukṣetre — at the place known as Kurukṣetra; sarasvatyām — on the bank of the Sarasvatī; ca — also; tat-sakhīḥ — her companions; pañca — five; prahṛṣṭa-vadanaḥ — being very happy and smiling; prāha — said; sūktam — sweet words; purūravāḥ — King Purūravā.

Translation
Once during his travels all over the world, Purūravā saw Urvaśī, accompanied by five companions, on the bank of the Sarasvatī at Kurukṣetra. With jubilation in his face, he then spoke to her in sweet words as follows.

Text 34
अहो जाये तिष्ठ तिष्ठ घोरे न त्यक्तुमर्हसि ।
मां त्वमद्याप्यनिर्वृत्य वचांसि कृणवावहै ॥ ३४ ॥
aho jāye tiṣṭha tiṣṭha
ghore na tyaktum arhasi
māṁ tvam adyāpy anirvṛtya
vacāṁsi kṛṇavāvahai
Synonyms
aho — hello; jāye — O my dear wife; tiṣṭha tiṣṭha — kindly stay, stay; ghore — O most cruel one; na — not; tyaktum — to give up; arhasi — you ought; mām — me; tvam — you; adya api — until now; anirvṛtya — having not gotten any happiness from me; vacāṁsi — some words; kṛṇavāvahai — let us talk for some time.

Translation
O my dear wife, O most cruel one, kindly stay, kindly stay. I know that I have never made you happy until now, but you should not give me up for that reason. This is not proper for you. Even if you have decided to give up my company, let us nonetheless talk for some time.

Text 35
सुदेहोऽयं पतत्यत्र देवि दूरं हृतस्त्वया ।
खादन्त्येनं वृका गृध्रास्त्वत्प्रसादस्य नास्पदम् ॥ ३५ ॥
sudeho ’yaṁ pataty atra
devi dūraṁ hṛtas tvayā
khādanty enaṁ vṛkā gṛdhrās
tvat-prasādasya nāspadam
Synonyms
su-dehaḥ — very beautiful body; ayam — this; patati — will now fall down; atra — on the spot; devi — O Urvaśī; dūram — far, far away from home; hṛtaḥ — taken away; tvayā — by you; khādanti — they will eat; enam — this (body); vṛkāḥ — foxes; gṛdhrāḥ — vultures; tvat — your; prasādasya — in mercy; na — not; āspadam — suitable.

Translation
O goddess, now that you have refused me, my beautiful body will fall down here, and because it is unsuitable for your pleasure, it will be eaten by foxes and vultures.

Text 36
उर्वश्युवाच
मा मृथा: पुरुषोऽसि त्वं मा स्म त्वाद्युर्वृका इमे ।
क्‍वापि सख्यं न वै स्त्रीणां वृकाणां हृदयं यथा ॥ ३६ ॥
urvaśy uvāca
mā mṛthāḥ puruṣo ’si tvaṁ
mā sma tvādyur vṛkā ime
kvāpi sakhyaṁ na vai strīṇāṁ
vṛkāṇāṁ hṛdayaṁ yathā
Synonyms
urvaśī uvāca — Urvaśī said; mā — do not; mṛthāḥ — give up your life; puruṣaḥ — male; asi — are; tvam — you; mā sma — do not allow it; tvā — unto you; adyuḥ — may eat; vṛkāḥ — the foxes; ime — these senses (do not be under the control of your senses); kva api — anywhere; sakhyam — friendship; na — not; vai — indeed; strīṇām — of women; vṛkāṇām — of the foxes; hṛdayam — the heart; yathā — as.

Translation
Urvaśī said: My dear King, you are a man, a hero. Don’t be impatient and give up your life. Be sober and don’t allow the senses to overcome you like foxes. Don’t let the foxes eat you. In other words, you should not be controlled by your senses. Rather, you should know that the heart of a woman is like that of a fox. There is no use making friendship with women.

Text 37
स्त्रियो ह्यकरुणा: क्रूरा दुर्मर्षा: प्रियसाहसा: ।
घ्नन्त्यल्पार्थेऽपि विश्रब्धं पतिं भ्रातरमप्युत ॥ ३७ ॥
striyo hy akaruṇāḥ krūrā
durmarṣāḥ priya-sāhasāḥ
ghnanty alpārthe ’pi viśrabdhaṁ
patiṁ bhrātaram apy uta
Synonyms
striyaḥ — women; hi — indeed; akaruṇāḥ — merciless; krūrāḥ — cunning; durmarṣāḥ — intolerant; priya-sāhasāḥ — for their own pleasure they can do anything; ghnanti — they kill; alpa-arthe — for a slight reason; api — indeed; viśrabdham — faithful; patim — husband; bhrātaram — brother; api — also; uta — it is said.

Translation
Women as a class are merciless and cunning. They cannot tolerate even a slight offense. For their own pleasure they can do anything irreligious, and therefore they do not fear killing even a faithful husband or brother.

Text 38
विधायालीकविश्रम्भमज्ञेषु त्यक्तसौहृदा: ।
नवं नवमभीप्सन्त्य: पुंश्चल्य: स्वैरवृत्तय: ॥ ३८ ॥
vidhāyālīka-viśrambham
ajñeṣu tyakta-sauhṛdāḥ
navaṁ navam abhīpsantyaḥ
puṁścalyaḥ svaira-vṛttayaḥ
Synonyms
vidhāya — by establishing; alīka — false; viśrambham — faithfulness; ajñeṣu — unto the foolish men; tyakta-sauhṛdāḥ — who have given up the company of well-wishers; navam — new; navam — new; abhīpsantyaḥ — desiring; puṁścalyaḥ — women very easily allured by other men; svaira — independently; vṛttayaḥ — professional.

Translation
Women are very easily seduced by men. Therefore, polluted women give up the friendship of a man who is their well-wisher and establish false friendship among fools. Indeed, they seek newer and newer friends, one after another.

Text 39
संवत्सरान्ते हि भवानेकरात्रं मयेश्वर: ।
रंस्यत्यपत्यानि च ते भविष्यन्त्यपराणि भो: ॥ ३९ ॥
saṁvatsarānte hi bhavān
eka-rātraṁ mayeśvaraḥ
raṁsyaty apatyāni ca te
bhaviṣyanty aparāṇi bhoḥ
Synonyms
saṁvatsara-ante — at the end of every year; hi — indeed; bhavān — your good self; eka-rātram — one night only; mayā — with me; īśvaraḥ — my husband; raṁsyati — will enjoy sex life; apatyāni — children; ca — also; te — your; bhaviṣyanti — will generate; aparāṇi — others, one after another; bhoḥ — O my dear King.

Translation
O my dear King, you will be able to enjoy with me as my husband at the end of every year, for one night only. In this way you will have other children, one after another.

Text 40
अन्तर्वत्नीमुपालक्ष्य देवीं स प्रययौ पुरीम् ।
पुनस्तत्र गतोऽब्दान्ते उर्वशीं वीरमातरम् ॥ ४० ॥
antarvatnīm upālakṣya
devīṁ sa prayayau purīm
punas tatra gato ’bdānte
urvaśīṁ vīra-mātaram
Synonyms
antarvatnīm — pregnant; upālakṣya — by observing; devīm — Urvaśī; saḥ — he, King Purūravā; prayayau — returned; purīm — to his palace; punaḥ — again; tatra — at that very spot; gataḥ — went; abda-ante — at the end of the year; urvaśīm — Urvaśī; vīra-mātaram — the mother of one kṣatriya son.

Translation
Understanding that Urvaśī was pregnant, Purūravā returned to his palace. At the end of the year, there at Kurukṣetra, he again obtained the association of Urvaśī, who was then the mother of a heroic son.

Text 41
उपलभ्य मुदा युक्त: समुवास तया निशाम् ।
अथैनमुर्वशी प्राह कृपणं विरहातुरम् ॥ ४१ ॥
upalabhya mudā yuktaḥ
samuvāsa tayā niśām
athainam urvaśī prāha
kṛpaṇaṁ virahāturam
Synonyms
upalabhya — getting the association; mudā — in great jubilation; yuktaḥ — being united; samuvāsa — enjoyed her company in sex; tayā — with her; niśām — that night; atha — thereafter; enam — unto King Purūravā; urvaśī — the woman named Urvaśī; prāha — said; kṛpaṇam — to he who was poor-hearted; viraha-āturam — afflicted by the thought of separation.

Translation
Having regained Urvaśī at the end of the year, King Purūravā was most jubilant, and he enjoyed her company in sex for one night. But then he was very sorry at the thought of separation from her, so Urvaśī spoke to him as follows.

Text 42
गन्धर्वानुपधावेमांस्तुभ्यं दास्यन्ति मामिति ।
तस्य संस्तुवतस्तुष्टा अग्निस्थालीं ददुर्नृप ।
उर्वशीं मन्यमानस्तां सोऽबुध्यत चरन् वने ॥ ४२ ॥
gandharvān upadhāvemāṁs
tubhyaṁ dāsyanti mām iti
tasya saṁstuvatas tuṣṭā
agni-sthālīṁ dadur nṛpa
urvaśīṁ manyamānas tāṁ
so ’budhyata caran vane
Synonyms
gandharvān — unto the Gandharvas; upadhāva — go take shelter; imān — these; tubhyam — unto you; dāsyanti — will deliver; mām iti — exactly like me, or me factually; tasya — by him; saṁstuvataḥ — offering prayers; tuṣṭāḥ — being satisfied; agni-sthālīm — a girl produced from fire; daduḥ — delivered; nṛpa — O King; urvaśīm — Urvaśī; manya-mānaḥ — thinking; tām — her; saḥ — he (Purūravā); abudhyata — understood factually; caran — while walking; vane — in the forest.

Translation
Urvaśī said: “My dear King, seek shelter of the Gandharvas, for they will be able to deliver me to you again.” In accordance with these words, the King satisfied the Gandharvas by prayers, and the Gandharvas, being pleased with him, gave him an Agnisthālī girl who looked exactly like Urvaśī. Thinking that the girl was Urvaśī, the King began walking with her in the forest, but later he could understand that she was not Urvaśī but Agnisthālī.

Text 43
स्थालीं न्यस्य वने गत्वा गृहानाध्यायतो निशि ।
त्रेतायां सम्प्रवृत्तायां मनसि त्रय्यवर्तत ॥ ४३ ॥
sthālīṁ nyasya vane gatvā
gṛhān ādhyāyato niśi
tretāyāṁ sampravṛttāyāṁ
manasi trayy avartata
Synonyms
sthālīm — the woman Agnisthālī; nyasya — immediately giving up; vane — in the forest; gatvā — on returning; gṛhān — at home; ādhyāyataḥ — began to meditate; niśi — the whole night; tretāyām — when the Tretā millennium; sampravṛttāyām — was just on the point of beginning; manasi — in his mind; trayī — the principles of the three Vedas; avartata — became revealed.

Translation
King Purūravā then left Agnisthālī in the forest and returned home, where he meditated all night upon Urvaśī. In the course of his meditation, the Tretā millennium began, and therefore the principles of the three Vedas, including the process of performing yajña to fulfill fruitive activities, appeared within his heart.

Texts 44-45
स्थालीस्थानं गतोऽश्वत्थं शमीगर्भं विलक्ष्य स: ।
तेन द्वे अरणी कृत्वा उर्वशीलोककाम्यया ॥ ४४ ॥
उर्वशीं मन्त्रतो ध्यायन्नधरारणिमुत्तराम् ।
आत्मानमुभयोर्मध्ये यत् तत् प्रजननं प्रभु: ॥ ४५ ॥
sthālī-sthānaṁ gato ’śvatthaṁ
śamī-garbhaṁ vilakṣya saḥ
tena dve araṇī kṛtvā
urvaśī-loka-kāmyayā
urvaśīṁ mantrato dhyāyann
adharāraṇim uttarām
ātmānam ubhayor madhye
yat tat prajananaṁ prabhuḥ
Synonyms
sthālī-sthānam — the place where Agnisthālī was left; gataḥ — going there; aśvattham — an aśvattha tree; śamī-garbham — produced from the womb of the śamī tree; vilakṣya — seeing; saḥ — he, Purūravā; tena — from that; dve — two; araṇī — pieces of wood required for igniting a fire for sacrifice; kṛtvā — making; urvaśī-loka-kāmyayā — desiring to go to the planet where Urvaśī was present; urvaśīm — Urvaśī; mantrataḥ — by chanting the required mantra; dhyāyan — meditating upon; adhara — lower; araṇim — araṇi wood; uttarām — and the upper one; ātmānam — himself; ubhayoḥ madhye — in between the two; yat tat — that which (he meditated upon); prajananam — as a son; prabhuḥ — the King.

Translation
When the process of fruitive yajña became manifest within his heart, King Purūravā went to the same spot where he had left Agnisthālī. There he saw that from the womb of a śamī tree, an aśvattha tree had grown. He then took a piece of wood from that tree and made it into two araṇis. Desiring to go to the planet where Urvaśī resided, he chanted mantras, meditating upon the lower araṇi as Urvaśī, the upper one as himself, and the piece of wood between them as his son. In this way he began to ignite a fire.

Text 46
तस्य निर्मन्थनाज्जातो जातवेदा विभावसु: ।
त्रय्या स विद्यया राज्ञा पुत्रत्वे कल्पितस्त्रिवृत् ॥ ४६ ॥
tasya nirmanthanāj jāto
jāta-vedā vibhāvasuḥ
trayyā sa vidyayā rājñā
putratve kalpitas tri-vṛt
Synonyms
tasya — of Purūravā; nirmanthanāt — because of interaction; jātaḥ — was born; jāta-vedāḥ — meant for material enjoyment according to the Vedic principles; vibhāvasuḥ — a fire; trayyā — following the Vedic principles; saḥ — the fire; vidyayā — by such a process; rājñā — by the King; putratve — a son’s being born; kalpitaḥ — it so became; tri-vṛt — the three letters a-u-m combined together as om.

Translation
From Purūravā’s rubbing of the araṇis came a fire. By such a fire one can achieve all success in material enjoyment and be purified in seminal birth, initiation and in the performance of sacrifice, which are invoked with the combined letters a-u-m. Thus the fire was considered the son of King Purūravā.

Text 47
तेनायजत यज्ञेशं भगवन्तमधोक्षजम् ।
उर्वशीलोकमन् विच्छन्सर्वदेवमयं हरिम् ॥ ४७ ॥
tenāyajata yajñeśaṁ
bhagavantam adhokṣajam
urvaśī-lokam anvicchan
sarva-devamayaṁ harim
Synonyms
tena — by generating such a fire; ayajata — he worshiped; yajña-īśam — the master or enjoyer of the yajña; bhagavantam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhokṣajam — beyond the perception of the senses; urvaśī-lokam — to the planet where Urvaśī was staying; anvicchan — although desiring to go; sarva-deva-mayam — the reservoir of all demigods; harim — the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
By means of that fire, Purūravā, who desired to go to the planet where Urvaśī resided, performed a sacrifice, by which he satisfied the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, the enjoyer of the results of sacrifice. Thus he worshiped the Lord, who is beyond the perception of the senses and is the reservoir of all the demigods.

Text 48
एक एव पुरा वेद: प्रणव: सर्ववाङ्‌मय: ।
देवो नारायणो नान्य एकोऽग्निर्वर्ण एव च ॥ ४८ ॥
eka eva purā vedaḥ
praṇavaḥ sarva-vāṅmayaḥ
devo nārāyaṇo nānya
eko ’gnir varṇa eva ca
Synonyms
ekaḥ — only one; eva — indeed; purā — formerly; vedaḥ — book of transcendental knowledge; praṇavaḥ — oṁkāra; sarva-vāk-mayaḥ — consisting of all Vedic mantras; devaḥ — the Lord, God; nārāyaṇaḥ — only Nārāyaṇa (was worshipable in the Satya-yuga); na anyaḥ — no other; ekaḥ agniḥ — one division only for agni; varṇaḥ — order of life; eva ca — and certainly.

Translation
In the Satya-yuga, the first millennium, all the Vedic mantras were included in one mantra — praṇava, the root of all Vedic mantras. In other words, the Atharva Veda alone was the source of all Vedic knowledge. The Supreme Personality of Godhead Nārāyaṇa was the only worshipable Deity; there was no recommendation for worship of the demigods. Fire was one only, and the only order of life in human society was known as haṁsa.

Text 49
पुरूरवस एवासीत् त्रयी त्रेतामुखे नृप ।
अग्निना प्रजया राजा लोकं गान्धर्वमेयिवान् ॥ ४९ ॥
purūravasa evāsīt
trayī tretā-mukhe nṛpa
agninā prajayā rājā
lokaṁ gāndharvam eyivān
Synonyms
purūravasaḥ — from King Purūravā; eva — thus; āsīt — there was; trayī — the Vedic principles of karma, jñāna and upāsanā; tretā-mukhe — in the beginning of the Tretā-yuga; nṛpa — O King Parīkṣit; agninā — simply by generating the fire of sacrifice; prajayā — by his son; rājā — King Purūravā; lokam — to the planet; gāndharvam — of the Gandharvas; eyivān — achieved.

Translation
O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, at the beginning of Tretā-yuga, King Purūravā inaugurated a karma-kāṇḍa sacrifice. Thus Purūravā, who considered the yajñic fire his son, was able to go to Gandharvaloka as he desired.