Text 1
श्रीबादरायणिरुवाच
ऐलस्य चोर्वशीगर्भात् षडासन्नात्मजा नृप ।
आयु: श्रुतायु: सत्यायू रयोऽथ विजयो जय: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca
ailasya corvaśī-garbhāt
ṣaḍ āsann ātmajā nṛpa
āyuḥ śrutāyuḥ satyāyū
rayo ’tha vijayo jayaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ailasya — of Purūravā; ca — also; urvaśī-garbhāt — from the womb of Urvaśī; ṣaṭ — six; āsan — there were; ātmajāḥ — sons; nṛpa — O King Parīkṣit; āyuḥ — Āyu; śrutāyuḥ — Śrutāyu; satyāyuḥ — Satyāyu; rayaḥ — Raya; atha — as well as; vijayaḥ — Vijaya; jayaḥ — Jaya.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O King Parīkṣit, from the womb of Urvaśī, six sons were generated by Purūravā. Their names were Āyu, Śrutāyu, Satyāyu, Raya, Vijaya and Jaya.

Texts 2-3
श्रुतायोर्वसुमान् पुत्र: सत्यायोश्च श्रुतञ्जय: ।
रयस्य सुत एकश्च जयस्य तनयोऽमित: ॥ २ ॥
भीमस्तु विजयस्याथ काञ्चनो होत्रकस्तत: ।
तस्य जह्नु: सुतो गङ्गां गण्डूषीकृत्य योऽपिबत् ॥ ३ ॥
śrutāyor vasumān putraḥ
satyāyoś ca śrutañjayaḥ
rayasya suta ekaś ca
jayasya tanayo ’mitaḥ
bhīmas tu vijayasyātha
kāñcano hotrakas tataḥ
tasya jahnuḥ suto gaṅgāṁ
gaṇḍūṣī-kṛtya yo ’pibat
Synonyms
śrutāyoḥ — of Śrutāyu; vasumān — Vasumān; putraḥ — a son; satyāyoḥ — of Satyāyu; ca — also; śrutañjayaḥ — a son named Śrutañjaya; rayasya — of Raya; sutaḥ — a son; ekaḥ — by the name Eka; ca — and; jayasya — of Jaya; tanayaḥ — the son; amitaḥ — by the name Amita; bhīmaḥ — by the name Bhīma; tu — indeed; vijayasya — of Vijaya; atha — thereafter; kāñcanaḥ — Kāñcana, the son of Bhīma; hotrakaḥ — Hotraka, the son of Kāñcana; tataḥ — then; tasya — of Hotraka; jahnuḥ — by the name Jahnu; sutaḥ — a son; gaṅgām — all the water of the Ganges; gaṇḍūṣī-kṛtya — by one sip; yaḥ — he who (Jahnu); apibat — drank.

Translation
The son of Śrutāyu was Vasumān; the son of Satyāyu, Śrutañjaya; the son of Raya, Eka; the son of Jaya, Amita; and the son of Vijaya, Bhīma. The son of Bhīma was Kāñcana; the son of Kāñcana was Hotraka; and the son of Hotraka was Jahnu, who drank all the water of the Ganges in one sip.

Text 4
जह्नोस्तु पुरुस्तस्याथ बलाकश्चात्मजोऽजक: ।
तत: कुश: कुशस्यापि कुशाम्बुस्तनयो वसु: ।
कुशनाभश्च चत्वारो गाधिरासीत् कुशाम्बुज: ॥ ४ ॥
jahnos tu purus tasyātha
balākaś cātmajo ’jakaḥ
tataḥ kuśaḥ kuśasyāpi
kuśāmbus tanayo vasuḥ
kuśanābhaś ca catvāro
gādhir āsīt kuśāmbujaḥ
Synonyms
jahnoḥ — of Jahnu; tu — indeed; puruḥ — a son named Puru; tasya — of Puru; atha — thereafter; balākaḥ — a son named Balāka; ca — and; ātmajaḥ — Balāka’s son; ajakaḥ — of the name Ajaka; tataḥ — thereafter; kuśaḥ — Kuśa; kuśasya — of Kuśa; api — then; kuśāmbuḥ — Kuśāmbu; tanayaḥ — Tanaya; vasuḥ — Vasu; kuśanābhaḥ — Kuśanābha; ca — and; catvāraḥ — four (sons); gādhiḥ — Gādhi; āsīt — there was; kuśāmbujaḥ — the son of Kuśāmbu.

Translation
The son of Jahnu was Puru, the son of Puru was Balāka, the son of Balāka was Ajaka, and the son of Ajaka was Kuśa. Kuśa had four sons, named Kuśāmbu, Tanaya, Vasu and Kuśanābha. The son of Kuśāmbu was Gādhi.

Texts 5-6
तस्य सत्यवतीं कन्यामृचीकोऽयाचत द्विज: ।
वरं विसद‍ृशं मत्वा गाधिर्भार्गवमब्रवीत् ॥ ५ ॥
एकत: श्यामकर्णानां हयानां चन्द्रवर्चसाम् ।
सहस्रं दीयतां शुल्कं कन्याया: कुशिका वयम् ॥ ६ ॥
tasya satyavatīṁ kanyām
ṛcīko ’yācata dvijaḥ
varaṁ visadṛśaṁ matvā
gādhir bhārgavam abravīt
ekataḥ śyāma-karṇānāṁ
hayānāṁ candra-varcasām
sahasraṁ dīyatāṁ śulkaṁ
kanyāyāḥ kuśikā vayam
Synonyms
tasya — of Gādhi; satyavatīm — Satyavatī; kanyām — the daughter; ṛcīkaḥ — the great sage Ṛcīka; ayācata — requested; dvijaḥ — the brāhmaṇa; varam — as her husband; visadṛśam — not equal or fit; matvā — thinking like that; gādhiḥ — King Gādhi; bhārgavam — unto Ṛcīka; abravīt — replied; ekataḥ — by one; śyāma-karṇānām — whose ear is black; hayānām — horses; candra-varcasām — as brilliant as the moonshine; sahasram — one thousand; dīyatām — please deliver; śulkam — as a dowry; kanyāyāḥ — to my daughter; kuśikāḥ — in the family of Kuśa; vayam — we (are).

Translation
King Gādhi had a daughter named Satyavatī, whom a brāhmaṇa sage named Ṛcīka requested from the King to be his wife. King Gādhi, however, regarded Ṛcīka as an unfit husband for his daughter, and therefore he told the brāhmaṇa, “My dear sir, I belong to the dynasty of Kuśa. Because we are aristocratic kṣatriyas, you have to give some dowry for my daughter. Therefore, bring at least one thousand horses, each as brilliant as moonshine and each having one black ear, whether right or left.”

Text 7
इत्युक्तस्तन्मतं ज्ञात्वा गत: स वरुणान्तिकम् ।
आनीय दत्त्वा तानश्वानुपयेमे वराननाम् ॥ ७ ॥
ity uktas tan-mataṁ jñātvā
gataḥ sa varuṇāntikam
ānīya dattvā tān aśvān
upayeme varānanām
Synonyms
iti — thus; uktaḥ — having been requested; tat-matam — his mind; jñātvā — (the sage) could understand; gataḥ — went; saḥ — he; varuṇa-antikam — to the place of Varuṇa; ānīya — having brought; dattvā — and after delivering; tān — those; aśvān — horses; upayeme — married; vara-ānanām — the beautiful daughter of King Gādhi.

Translation
When King Gādhi made this demand, the great sage Ṛcīka could understand the King’s mind. Therefore he went to the demigod Varuṇa and brought from him the one thousand horses that Gādhi had demanded. After delivering these horses, the sage married the King’s beautiful daughter.

Text 8
स ऋषि: प्रार्थित: पत्‍न्या श्वश्र्वा चापत्यकाम्यया ।
श्रपयित्वोभयैर्मन्त्रैश्चरुं स्‍नातुं गतो मुनि: ॥ ८ ॥
sa ṛṣiḥ prārthitaḥ patnyā
śvaśrvā cāpatya-kāmyayā
śrapayitvobhayair mantraiś
caruṁ snātuṁ gato muniḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Ṛcīka); ṛṣiḥ — the great saint; prārthitaḥ — being requested; patnyā — by his wife; śvaśrvā — by his mother-in-law; ca — also; apatya-kāmyayā — desiring a son; śrapayitvā — after cooking; ubhayaiḥ — both; mantraiḥ — by chanting particular mantras; carum — a preparation for offering in a sacrifice; snātum — to bathe; gataḥ — went out; muniḥ — the great sage.

Translation
Thereafter, Ṛcīka Muni’s wife and mother-in-law, each desiring a son, requested the Muni to prepare an oblation. Thus Ṛcīka Muni prepared one oblation for his wife with a brāhmaṇa mantra and another for his mother-in-law with a kṣatriya mantra. Then he went out to bathe.

Text 9
तावत् सत्यवती मात्रा स्वचरुं याचिता सती ।
श्रेष्ठं मत्वा तयायच्छन्मात्रे मातुरदत् स्वयम् ॥ ९ ॥
tāvat satyavatī mātrā
sva-caruṁ yācitā satī
śreṣṭhaṁ matvā tayāyacchan
mātre mātur adat svayam
Synonyms
tāvat — in the meantime; satyavatī — Satyavatī, the wife of Ṛcīka; mātrā — by her mother; sva-carum — the oblation meant for herself (Satyavatī); yācitā — asked to give; satī — being; śreṣṭham — better; matvā — thinking; tayā — by her; ayacchat — delivered; mātre — to her mother; mātuḥ — of the mother; adat — ate; svayam — personally.

Translation
Meanwhile, because Satyavatī’s mother thought that the oblation prepared for her daughter, Ṛcīka’s wife, must be better, she asked her daughter for that oblation. Satyavatī therefore gave her own oblation to her mother and ate her mother’s oblation herself.

Text 10
तद् विदित्वा मुनि: प्राह पत्नीं कष्टमकारषी: ।
घोरो दण्डधर: पुत्रो भ्राता ते ब्रह्मवित्तम: ॥ १० ॥
tad viditvā muniḥ prāha
patnīṁ kaṣṭam akāraṣīḥ
ghoro daṇḍa-dharaḥ putro
bhrātā te brahma-vittamaḥ
Synonyms
tat — this fact; viditvā — having learned; muniḥ — the great sage; prāha — said; patnīm — unto his wife; kaṣṭam — very regrettable; akāraṣīḥ — you have done; ghoraḥ — fierce; daṇḍa-dharaḥ — a great personality who can punish others; putraḥ — such a son; bhrātā — brother; te — your; brahma-vittamaḥ — a learned scholar in spiritual science.

Translation
When the great sage Ṛcīka returned home after bathing and understood what had happened in his absence, he said to his wife, Satyavatī, “You have done a great wrong. Your son will be a fierce kṣatriya, able to punish everyone, and your brother will be a learned scholar in spiritual science.”

Text 11
प्रसादित: सत्यवत्या मैवं भूरिति भार्गव: ।
अथ तर्हि भवेत् पौत्रो जमदग्निस्ततोऽभवत् ॥ ११ ॥
prasāditaḥ satyavatyā
maivaṁ bhūr iti bhārgavaḥ
atha tarhi bhavet pautro
jamadagnis tato ’bhavat
Synonyms
prasāditaḥ — pacified; satyavatyā — by Satyavatī; mā — not; evam — thus; bhūḥ — let it be; iti — thus; bhārgavaḥ — the great sage; atha — if your son should not become like that; tarhi — then; bhavet — should become like that; pautraḥ — the grandson; jamadagniḥ — Jamadagni; tataḥ — thereafter; abhavat — was born.

Translation
Satyavatī, however, pacified Ṛcīka Muni with peaceful words and requested that her son not be like a fierce kṣatriya. Ṛcīka Muni replied, “Then your grandson will be of a kṣatriya spirit.” Thus Jamadagni was born as the son of Satyavatī.

Texts 12-13
सा चाभूत् सुमहत्पुण्या कौशिकी लोकपावनी ।
रेणो: सुतां रेणुकां वै जमदग्निरुवाह याम् ॥ १२ ॥
तस्यां वै भार्गवऋषे: सुता वसुमदादय: ।
यवीयाञ्जज्ञ एतेषां राम इत्यभिविश्रुत: ॥ १३ ॥
sā cābhūt sumahat-puṇyā
kauśikī loka-pāvanī
reṇoḥ sutāṁ reṇukāṁ vai
jamadagnir uvāha yām
tasyāṁ vai bhārgava-ṛṣeḥ
sutā vasumad-ādayaḥ
yavīyāñ jajña eteṣāṁ
rāma ity abhiviśrutaḥ
Synonyms
sā — she (Satyavatī); ca — also; abhūt — became; sumahat-puṇyā — very great and sacred; kauśikī — the river by the name Kauśikī; loka-pāvanī — purifying the whole world; reṇoḥ — of Reṇu; sutām — the daughter; reṇukām — by the name Reṇukā; vai — indeed; jamadagniḥ — Satyavatī’s son, Jamadagni; uvāha — married; yām — whom; tasyām — in the womb of Reṇukā; vai — indeed; bhārgava-ṛṣeḥ — by the semen of Jamadagni; sutāḥ — sons; vasumat-ādayaḥ — many, headed by Vasumān; yavīyān — the youngest; jajñe — was born; eteṣām — among them; rāmaḥ — Paraśurāma; iti — thus; abhiviśrutaḥ — was known everywhere.

Translation
Satyavatī later became the sacred river Kauśikī to purify the entire world, and her son, Jamadagni, married Reṇukā, the daughter of Reṇu. By the semen of Jamadagni, many sons, headed by Vasumān, were born from the womb of Reṇukā. The youngest of them was named Rāma, or Paraśurāma.

Text 14
यमाहुर्वासुदेवांशं हैहयानां कुलान्तकम् ।
त्रि:सप्तकृत्वो य इमां चक्रे नि:क्षत्रियां महीम् ॥ १४ ॥
yam āhur vāsudevāṁśaṁ
haihayānāṁ kulāntakam
triḥ-sapta-kṛtvo ya imāṁ
cakre niḥkṣatriyāṁ mahīm
Synonyms
yam — whom (Paraśurāma); āhuḥ — all the learned scholars say; vāsudeva-aṁśam — an incarnation of Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; haihayānām — of the Haihayas; kula-antakam — the annihilator of the dynasty; triḥ-sapta-kṛtvaḥ — twenty-one times; yaḥ — who (Paraśurāma); imām — this; cakre — made; niḥkṣatriyām — devoid of kṣatriyas; mahīm — the earth.

Translation
Learned scholars accept this Paraśurāma as the celebrated incarnation of Vāsudeva who annihilated the dynasty of Kārtavīrya. Paraśurāma killed all the kṣatriyas on earth twenty-one times.

Text 15
द‍ृप्तं क्षत्रं भुवो भारमब्रह्मण्यमनीनशत् ।
रजस्तमोवृतमहन् फल्गुन्यपि कृतेꣷहसि ॥ १५ ॥
dṛptaṁ kṣatraṁ bhuvo bhāram
abrahmaṇyam anīnaśat
rajas-tamo-vṛtam ahan
phalguny api kṛte ’ṁhasi
Synonyms
dṛptam — very proud; kṣatram — the kṣatriyas, the ruling class; bhuvaḥ — of the earth; bhāram — burden; abrahmaṇyam — sinful, not caring for the religious principles enunciated by the brāhmaṇas; anīnaśat — drove away or annihilated; rajaḥ-tamaḥ — by the qualities of passion and ignorance; vṛtam — covered; ahan — he killed; phalguni — not very great; api — although; kṛte — had been committed; aṁhasi — an offense.

Translation
When the royal dynasty, being excessively proud because of the material modes of passion and ignorance, became irreligious and ceased to care for the laws enacted by the brāhmaṇas, Paraśurāma killed them. Although their offense was not very severe, he killed them to lessen the burden of the world.

Text 16
श्रीराजोवाच
किं तदंहो भगवतो राजन्यैरजितात्मभि: ।
कृतं येन कुलं नष्टं क्षत्रियाणामभीक्ष्णश: ॥ १६ ॥
śrī-rājovāca
kiṁ tad aṁho bhagavato
rājanyair ajitātmabhiḥ
kṛtaṁ yena kulaṁ naṣṭaṁ
kṣatriyāṇām abhīkṣṇaśaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-rājā uvāca — Mahārāja Parīkṣit inquired; kim — what; tat aṁhaḥ — that offense; bhagavataḥ — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rājanyaiḥ — by the royal family; ajita-ātmabhiḥ — who could not control their senses and thus were degraded; kṛtam — which had been done; yena — by which; kulam — the dynasty; naṣṭam — was annihilated; kṣatriyāṇām — of the royal family; abhīkṣṇaśaḥ — again and again.

Translation
King Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī: What was the offense that the kṣatriyas who could not control their senses committed before Lord Paraśurāma, the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for which the Lord annihilated the kṣatriya dynasty again and again?

Texts 17-19
श्रीबादरायणिरुवाच
हैहयानामधिपतिरर्जुन: क्षत्रियर्षभ: ।
दत्तं नारायणांशांशमाराध्य परिकर्मभि: ॥ १७ ॥
बाहून् दशशतं लेभे दुर्धर्षत्वमरातिषु ।
अव्याहतेन्द्रियौज:श्रीतेजोवीर्ययशोबलम् ॥ १८ ॥
योगेश्वरत्वमैश्वर्यं गुणा यत्राणिमादय: ।
चचाराव्याहतगतिर्लोकेषु पवनो यथा ॥ १९ ॥
śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca
haihayānām adhipatir
arjunaḥ kṣatriyarṣabhaḥ
dattaṁ nārāyaṇāṁśāṁśam
ārādhya parikarmabhiḥ
bāhūn daśa-śataṁ lebhe
durdharṣatvam arātiṣu
avyāhatendriyaujaḥ śrī-
tejo-vīrya-yaśo-balam
yogeśvaratvam aiśvaryaṁ
guṇā yatrāṇimādayaḥ
cacārāvyāhata-gatir
lokeṣu pavano yathā
Synonyms
śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied; haihayānām adhipatiḥ — the King of the Haihayas; arjunaḥ — by the name Kārtavīryārjuna; kṣatriya-ṛṣabhaḥ — the best of the kṣatriyas; dattam — unto Dattātreya; nārāyaṇa-aṁśa-aṁśam — the plenary portion of the plenary portion of Nārāyaṇa; ārādhya — after worshiping; parikarmabhiḥ — by worship according to the regulative principles; bāhūn — arms; daśa-śatam — one thousand (ten times one hundred); lebhe — achieved; durdharṣatvam — the quality of being very difficult to conquer; arātiṣu — in the midst of enemies; avyāhata — undefeatable; indriya-ojaḥ — strength of the senses; śrī — beauty; tejaḥ — influence; vīrya — power; yaśaḥ — fame; balam — bodily strength; yoga-īśvaratvam — controlling power gained by the practice of mystic yoga; aiśvaryam — opulence; guṇāḥ — qualities; yatra — wherein; aṇimā-ādayaḥ — eight kinds of yogic perfection (aṇimā, laghimā, etc.); cacāra — he went; avyāhata-gatiḥ — whose progress was indefatigable; lokeṣu — all over the world or universe; pavanaḥ — the wind; yathā — like.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: The best of the kṣatriyas, Kārtavīryārjuna, the King of the Haihayas, received one thousand arms by worshiping Dattātreya, the plenary expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa. He also became undefeatable by enemies and received unobstructed sensory power, beauty, influence, strength, fame and the mystic power by which to achieve all the perfections of yoga, such as aṇimā and laghimā. Thus having become fully opulent, he roamed all over the universe without opposition, just like the wind.

Text 20
स्त्रीरत्नैरावृत: क्रीडन् रेवाम्भसि मदोत्कट: ।
वैजयन्तीं स्रजं बिभ्रद् रुरोध सरितं भुजै: ॥ २० ॥
strī-ratnair āvṛtaḥ krīḍan
revāmbhasi madotkaṭaḥ
vaijayantīṁ srajaṁ bibhrad
rurodha saritaṁ bhujaiḥ
Synonyms
strī-ratnaiḥ — by beautiful women; āvṛtaḥ — surrounded; krīḍan — enjoying; revā-ambhasi — in the water of the river Revā, or Narmadā; mada-utkaṭaḥ — too puffed up because of opulence; vaijayantīm srajam — the garland of victory; bibhrat — being decorated with; rurodha — stopped the flow; saritam — of the river; bhujaiḥ — with his arms.

Translation
Once while enjoying in the water of the river Narmadā, the puffed-up Kārtavīryārjuna, surrounded by beautiful women and garlanded with a garland of victory, stopped the flow of the water with his arms.

Text 21
विप्लावितं स्वशिबिरं प्रतिस्रोत:सरिज्जलै: ।
नामृष्यत् तस्य तद् वीर्यं वीरमानी दशानन: ॥ २१ ॥
viplāvitaṁ sva-śibiraṁ
pratisrotaḥ-sarij-jalaiḥ
nāmṛṣyat tasya tad vīryaṁ
vīramānī daśānanaḥ
Synonyms
viplāvitam — having been inundated; sva-śibiram — his own camp; pratisrotaḥ — which was flowing in the opposite direction; sarit-jalaiḥ — by the water of the river; na — not; amṛṣyat — could tolerate; tasya — of Kārtavīryārjuna; tat vīryam — that influence; vīramānī — considering himself very heroic; daśa-ānanaḥ — the ten-headed Rāvaṇa.

Translation
Because Kārtavīryārjuna made the water flow in the opposite direction, the camp of Rāvaṇa, which was set up on the bank of the Narmadā near the city of Māhiṣmatī, was inundated. This was unbearable to the ten-headed Rāvaṇa, who considered himself a great hero and could not tolerate Kārtavīryārjuna’s power.

Text 22
गृहीतो लीलया स्त्रीणां समक्षं कृतकिल्बिष: ।
माहिष्मत्यां सन्निरुद्धो मुक्तो येन कपिर्यथा ॥ २२ ॥
gṛhīto līlayā strīṇāṁ
samakṣaṁ kṛta-kilbiṣaḥ
māhiṣmatyāṁ sanniruddho
mukto yena kapir yathā
Synonyms
gṛhītaḥ — was arrested by force; līlayā — very easily; strīṇām — of the women; samakṣam — in the presence; kṛta-kilbiṣaḥ — thus becoming an offender; māhiṣmatyām — in the city known as Māhiṣmatī; sanniruddhaḥ — was arrested; muktaḥ — released; yena — by whom (Kārtavīryārjuna); kapiḥ yathā — exactly as done to a monkey.

Translation
When Rāvaṇa attempted to insult Kārtavīryārjuna in the presence of the women and thus offended him, Kārtavīryārjuna easily arrested Rāvaṇa and put him in custody in the city of Māhiṣmatī, just as one captures a monkey, and then released him neglectfully.

Text 23
स एकदा तु मृगयां विचरन् विजने वने ।
यद‍ृच्छयाश्रमपदं जमदग्नेरुपाविशत् ॥ २३ ॥
sa ekadā tu mṛgayāṁ
vicaran vijane vane
yadṛcchayāśrama-padaṁ
jamadagner upāviśat
Synonyms
saḥ — he, Kārtavīryārjuna; ekadā — once upon a time; tu — but; mṛgayām — while hunting; vicaran — wandering; vijane — solitary; vane — in a forest; yadṛcchayā — without any program; āśrama-padam — the residential place; jamadagneḥ — of Jamadagni Muni; upāviśat — he entered.

Translation
Once while Kārtavīryārjuna was wandering unengaged in a solitary forest and hunting, he approached the residence of Jamadagni.

Text 24
तस्मै स नरदेवाय मुनिरर्हणमाहरत् ।
ससैन्यामात्यवाहाय हविष्मत्या तपोधन: ॥ २४ ॥
tasmai sa naradevāya
munir arhaṇam āharat
sasainyāmātya-vāhāya
haviṣmatyā tapo-dhanaḥ
Synonyms
tasmai — unto him; saḥ — he (Jamadagni); naradevāya — unto King Kārtavīryārjuna; muniḥ — the great sage; arhaṇam — paraphernalia for worship; āharat — offered; sa-sainya — with his soldiers; amātya — his ministers; vāhāya — and the chariots, the elephants, the horses or the men who carried the palanquins; haviṣmatyā — because of possessing a kāmadhenu, a cow that could supply everything; tapaḥ-dhanaḥ — the great sage, whose only power was his austerity, or who was engaged in austerity.

Translation
The sage Jamadagni, who was engaged in great austerities in the forest, received the King very well, along with the King’s soldiers, ministers and carriers. He supplied all the necessities to worship these guests, for he possessed a kāmadhenu cow that was able to supply everything.

Text 25
स वै रत्नं तु तद् दृष्ट्वा आत्मैश्वर्यातिशायनम् ।
तन्नाद्रियताग्निहोत्र्यां साभिलाष: सहैहय: ॥ २५ ॥
sa vai ratnaṁ tu tad dṛṣṭvā
ātmaiśvaryātiśāyanam
tan nādriyatāgnihotryāṁ
sābhilāṣaḥ sahaihayaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Kārtavīryārjuna); vai — indeed; ratnam — a great source of wealth; tu — indeed; tat — the kāmadhenu in the possession of Jamadagni; dṛṣṭvā — by observing; ātma-aiśvarya — his own personal opulence; ati-śāyanam — which was exceeding; tat — that; na — not; ādriyata — appreciated very much; agnihotryām — in that cow, which was useful for executing the agnihotra sacrifice; sa-abhilāṣaḥ — became desirous; sa-haihayaḥ — with his own men, the Haihayas.

Translation
Kārtavīryārjuna thought that Jamadagni was more powerful and wealthy than himself because of possessing a jewel in the form of the kāmadhenu. Therefore he and his own men, the Haihayas, were not very much appreciative of Jamadagni’s reception. On the contrary, they wanted to possess that kāmadhenu, which was useful for the execution of the agnihotra sacrifice.

Text 26
हविर्धानीमृषेर्दर्पान्नरान् हर्तुमचोदयत् ।
ते च माहिष्मतीं निन्यु: सवत्सां क्रन्दतीं बलात् ॥ २६ ॥
havirdhānīm ṛṣer darpān
narān hartum acodayat
te ca māhiṣmatīṁ ninyuḥ
sa-vatsāṁ krandatīṁ balāt
Synonyms
haviḥ-dhānīm — the kāmadhenu; ṛṣeḥ — of the great sage Jamadagni; darpāt — because of his being puffed up with material power; narān — all his men (soldiers); hartum — to steal or take away; acodayat — encouraged; te — the men of Kārtavīryārjuna; ca — also; māhiṣmatīm — to the capital of Kārtavīryārjuna; ninyuḥ — brought; sa-vatsām — with the calf; krandatīm — crying; balāt — because of being taken away by force.

Translation
Being puffed up by material power, Kārtavīryārjuna encouraged his men to steal Jamadagni’s kāmadhenu. Thus the men forcibly took away the crying kāmadhenu, along with her calf, to Māhiṣmatī, Kārtavīryārjuna’s capital.

Text 27
अथ राजनि निर्याते राम आश्रम आगत: ।
श्रुत्वा तत् तस्य दौरात्म्यं चुक्रोधाहिरिवाहत: ॥ २७ ॥
atha rājani niryāte
rāma āśrama āgataḥ
śrutvā tat tasya daurātmyaṁ
cukrodhāhir ivāhataḥ
Synonyms
atha — thereafter; rājani — when the King; niryāte — had gone away; rāmaḥ — Paraśurāma, the youngest son of Jamadagni; āśrame — in the cottage; āgataḥ — returned; śrutvā — when he heard; tat — that; tasya — of Kārtavīryārjuna; daurātmyam — nefarious act; cukrodha — became extremely angry; ahiḥ — a snake; iva — like; āhataḥ — trampled or injured.

Translation
Thereafter, Kārtavīryārjuna having left with the kāmadhenu, Paraśurāma returned to the āśrama. When Paraśurāma, the youngest son of Jamadagni, heard about Kārtavīryārjuna’s nefarious deed, he became as angry as a trampled snake.

Text 28
घोरमादाय परशुं सतूणं वर्म कार्मुकम् ।
अन्वधावत दुर्मर्षो मृगेन्द्र इव यूथपम् ॥ २८ ॥
ghoram ādāya paraśuṁ
satūṇaṁ varma kārmukam
anvadhāvata durmarṣo
mṛgendra iva yūthapam
Synonyms
ghoram — extremely fierce; ādāya — taking in hand; paraśum — a chopper; sa-tūṇam — along with a quiver; varma — a shield; kārmukam — a bow; anvadhāvata — followed; durmarṣaḥ — Lord Paraśurāma, being exceedingly angry; mṛgendraḥ — a lion; iva — like; yūthapam — (goes to attack) an elephant.

Translation
Taking up his fierce chopper, his shield, his bow and a quiver of arrows, Lord Paraśurāma, exceedingly angry, chased Kārtavīryārjuna just as a lion chases an elephant.

Text 29
तमापतन्तं भृगुवर्यमोजसा
धनुर्धरं बाणपरश्वधायुधम् ।
ऐणेयचर्माम्बरमर्कधामभि-
र्युतं जटाभिर्दद‍ृशे पुरीं विशन् ॥ २९ ॥
tam āpatantaṁ bhṛgu-varyam ojasā
dhanur-dharaṁ bāṇa-paraśvadhāyudham
aiṇeya-carmāmbaram arka-dhāmabhir
yutaṁ jaṭābhir dadṛśe purīṁ viśan
Synonyms
tam — that Lord Paraśurāma; āpatantam — coming after him; bhṛgu-varyam — the best of the Bhṛgu dynasty, Lord Paraśurāma; ojasā — very fiercely; dhanuḥ-dharam — carrying a bow; bāṇa — arrows; paraśvadha — chopper; āyudham — having all these weapons; aiṇeya-carma — blackish deerskin; ambaram — the covering of his body; arka-dhāmabhiḥ — appearing like the sunshine; yutam jaṭābhiḥ — with locks of hair; dadṛśe — he saw; purīm — into the capital; viśan — entering.

Translation
As King Kārtavīryārjuna entered his capital, Māhiṣmatī Purī, he saw Lord Paraśurāma, the best of the Bhṛgu dynasty, coming after him, holding a chopper, shield, bow and arrows. Lord Paraśurāma was covered with a black deerskin, and his matted locks of hair appeared like the sunshine.

Text 30
अचोदयद्धस्तिरथाश्वपत्तिभि-
र्गदासिबाणर्ष्टिशतघ्निशक्तिभि: ।
अक्षौहिणी: सप्तदशातिभीषणा-
स्ता राम एको भगवानसूदयत् ॥ ३० ॥
acodayad dhasti-rathāśva-pattibhir
gadāsi-bāṇarṣṭi-śataghni-śaktibhiḥ
akṣauhiṇīḥ sapta-daśātibhīṣaṇās
tā rāma eko bhagavān asūdayat
Synonyms
acodayat — he sent for fighting; hasti — with elephants; ratha — with chariots; aśva — with horses; pattibhiḥ — and with infantry; gadā — with clubs; asi — with swords; bāṇa — with arrows; ṛṣṭi — with the weapons called ṛṣṭis; śataghni — with weapons called śataghnis; śaktibhiḥ — with weapons called śaktis; akṣauhiṇīḥ — whole groups of akṣauhiṇīs; sapta-daśa — seventeen; ati-bhīṣaṇāḥ — very fierce; tāḥ — all of them; rāmaḥ — Lord Paraśurāma; ekaḥ — alone; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; asūdayat — killed.

Translation
Upon seeing Paraśurāma, Kārtavīryārjuna immediately feared him and sent many elephants, chariots, horses and infantry soldiers equipped with clubs, swords, arrows, ṛṣṭis, śataghnis, śaktis, and many similar weapons to fight against him. Kārtavīryārjuna sent seventeen full akṣauhiṇīs of soldiers to check Paraśurāma. But Lord Paraśurāma alone killed all of them.

Text 31
यतो यतोऽसौ प्रहरत्परश्वधो
मनोऽनिलौजा: परचक्रसूदन: ।
ततस्ततश्छिन्नभुजोरुकन्धरा
निपेतुरुर्व्यां हतसूतवाहना: ॥ ३१ ॥
yato yato ’sau praharat-paraśvadho
mano-’nilaujāḥ para-cakra-sūdanaḥ
tatas tataś chinna-bhujoru-kandharā
nipetur urvyāṁ hata-sūta-vāhanāḥ
Synonyms
yataḥ — wherever; yataḥ — wherever; asau — Lord Paraśurāma; praharat — slashing; paraśvadhaḥ — being expert in using his weapon, the paraśu, or chopper; manaḥ — like the mind; anila — like the wind; ojāḥ — being forceful; para-cakra — of the enemies’ military strength; sūdanaḥ — killer; tataḥ — there; tataḥ — and there; chinna — scattered and cut off; bhuja — arms; ūru — legs; kandharāḥ — shoulders; nipetuḥ — fell down; urvyām — on the ground; hata — killed; sūta — chariot drivers; vāhanāḥ — carrier horses and elephants.

Translation
Lord Paraśurāma, being expert in killing the military strength of the enemy, worked with the speed of the mind and the wind, slicing his enemies with his chopper [paraśu]. Wherever he went, the enemies fell, their legs, arms and shoulders being severed, their chariot drivers killed, and their carriers, the elephants and horses, all annihilated.

Text 32
द‍ृष्ट्वा स्वसैन्यं रुधिरौघकर्दमे
रणाजिरे रामकुठारसायकै: ।
विवृक्णवर्मध्वजचापविग्रहं
निपातितं हैहय आपतद् रुषा ॥ ३२ ॥
dṛṣṭvā sva-sainyaṁ rudhiraugha-kardame
raṇājire rāma-kuṭhāra-sāyakaiḥ
vivṛkṇa-varma-dhvaja-cāpa-vigrahaṁ
nipātitaṁ haihaya āpatad ruṣā
Synonyms
dṛṣṭvā — by seeing; sva-sainyam — his own soldiers; rudhira-ogha-kardame — which had become muddy due to the flow of blood; raṇa-ajire — on the battlefield; rāma-kuṭhāra — by the axe of Lord Paraśurāma; sāyakaiḥ — and by the arrows; vivṛkṇa — scattered; varma — the shields; dhvaja — the flags; cāpa — bows; vigraham — the bodies; nipātitam — fallen; haihayaḥ — Kārtavīryārjuna; āpatat — forcefully came there; ruṣā — being very angry.

Translation
By manipulating his axe and arrows, Lord Paraśurāma cut to pieces the shields, flags, bows and bodies of Kārtavīryārjuna’s soldiers, who fell on the battlefield, muddying the ground with their blood. Seeing these reverses, Kārtavīryārjuna, infuriated, rushed to the battlefield.

Text 33
अथार्जुन: पञ्चशतेषु बाहुभि-
र्धनु:षु बाणान् युगपत् स सन्दधे ।
रामाय रामोऽस्त्रभृतां समग्रणी-
स्तान्येकधन्वेषुभिराच्छिनत् समम् ॥ ३३ ॥
athārjunaḥ pañca-śateṣu bāhubhir
dhanuḥṣu bāṇān yugapat sa sandadhe
rāmāya rāmo ’stra-bhṛtāṁ samagraṇīs
tāny eka-dhanveṣubhir ācchinat samam
Synonyms
atha — thereafter; arjunaḥ — Kārtavīryārjuna; pañca-śateṣu — five hundred; bāhubhiḥ — with his arms; dhanuḥṣu — on the bows; bāṇān — arrows; yugapat — simultaneously; saḥ — he; sandadhe — fixed; rāmāya — just to kill Lord Paraśurāma; rāmaḥ — Lord Paraśurāma; astra-bhṛtām — of all the soldiers who could use weapons; samagraṇīḥ — the very best; tāni — all the bows of Kārtavīryārjuna; eka-dhanvā — possessing one bow; iṣubhiḥ — the arrows; ācchinat — cut to pieces; samam — with.

Translation
Then Kārtavīryārjuna, with his one thousand arms, simultaneously fixed arrows on five hundred bows to kill Lord Paraśurāma. But Lord Paraśurāma, the best of fighters, released enough arrows with only one bow to cut to pieces immediately all the arrows and bows in the hands of Kārtavīryārjuna.

Text 34
पुन: स्वहस्तैरचलान् मृधेऽङ्‌घ्रिपा-
नुत्क्षिप्य वेगादभिधावतो युधि ।
भुजान् कुठारेण कठोरनेमिना
चिच्छेद राम: प्रसभं त्वहेरिव ॥ ३४ ॥
punaḥ sva-hastair acalān mṛdhe ’ṅghripān
utkṣipya vegād abhidhāvato yudhi
bhujān kuṭhāreṇa kaṭhora-neminā
ciccheda rāmaḥ prasabhaṁ tv aher iva
Synonyms
punaḥ — again; sva-hastaiḥ — by his own hands; acalān — hills; mṛdhe — in the battlefield; aṅghripān — trees; utkṣipya — after uprooting; vegāt — with great force; abhidhāvataḥ — of he who was running very forcefully; yudhi — in the battlefield; bhujān — all the arms; kuṭhāreṇa — by his axe; kaṭhora-neminā — which was very sharp; ciccheda — cut to pieces; rāmaḥ — Lord Paraśurāma; prasabham — with great force; tu — but; aheḥ iva — just like the hoods of a serpent.

Translation
When his arrows were cut to pieces, Kārtavīryārjuna uprooted many trees and hills with his own hands and again rushed strongly toward Lord Paraśurāma to kill him. But Paraśurāma then used his axe with great force to cut off Kārtavīryārjuna’s arms, just as one might lop off the hoods of a serpent.

Texts 35-36
कृत्तबाहो: शिरस्तस्य गिरे: श‍ृङ्गमिवाहरत् ।
हते पितरि तत्पुत्रा अयुतं दुद्रुवुर्भयात् ॥ ३५ ॥
अग्निहोत्रीमुपावर्त्य सवत्सां परवीरहा ।
समुपेत्याश्रमं पित्रे परिक्लिष्टां समर्पयत् ॥ ३६ ॥
kṛtta-bāhoḥ śiras tasya
gireḥ śṛṅgam ivāharat
hate pitari tat-putrā
ayutaṁ dudruvur bhayāt
agnihotrīm upāvartya
savatsāṁ para-vīra-hā
samupetyāśramaṁ pitre
parikliṣṭāṁ samarpayat
Synonyms
kṛtta-bāhoḥ — of Kārtavīryārjuna, whose arms were cut off; śiraḥ — the head; tasya — of him (Kārtavīryārjuna); gireḥ — of a mountain; śṛṅgam — the peak; iva — like; āharat — (Paraśurāma) cut from his body; hate pitari — when their father was killed; tat-putrāḥ — his sons; ayutam — ten thousand; dudruvuḥ — fled; bhayāt — out of fear; agnihotrīm — the kāmadhenu; upāvartya — bringing near; sa-vatsām — with her calf; para-vīra-hā — Paraśurāma, who could kill the heroes of the enemies; samupetya — after returning; āśramam — to the residence of his father; pitre — unto his father; parikliṣṭām — which had undergone extreme suffering; samarpayat — delivered.

Translation
Thereafter, Paraśurāma cut off like a mountain peak the head of Kārtavīryārjuna, who had already lost his arms. When Kārtavīryārjuna’s ten thousand sons saw their father killed, they all fled in fear. Then Paraśurāma, having killed the enemy, released the kāmadhenu, which had undergone great suffering, and brought it back with its calf to his residence, where he gave it to his father, Jamadagni.

Text 37
स्वकर्म तत्कृतं राम: पित्रे भ्रातृभ्य एव च ।
वर्णयामास तच्छ्रुत्वा जमदग्निरभाषत ॥ ३७ ॥
sva-karma tat kṛtaṁ rāmaḥ
pitre bhrātṛbhya eva ca
varṇayām āsa tac chrutvā
jamadagnir abhāṣata
Synonyms
sva-karma — his own activities; tat — all those deeds; kṛtam — which had been performed; rāmaḥ — Paraśurāma; pitre — unto his father; bhrātṛbhyaḥ — unto his brothers; eva ca — as well as; varṇayām āsa — described; tat — that; śrutvā — after hearing; jamadagniḥ — the father of Paraśurāma; abhāṣata — said as follows.

Translation
Paraśurāma described to his father and brothers his activities in killing Kārtavīryārjuna. Upon hearing of these deeds, Jamadagni spoke to his son as follows.

Text 38
राम राम महाबाहो भवान् पापमकारषीत् ।
अवधीन्नरदेवं यत्सर्वदेवमयं वृथा ॥ ३८ ॥
rāma rāma mahābāho
bhavān pāpam akāraṣīt
avadhīn naradevaṁ yat
sarva-devamayaṁ vṛthā
Synonyms
rāma rāma — my dear son Paraśurāma; mahābāho — O great hero; bhavān — you; pāpam — sinful activities; akāraṣīt — have executed; avadhīt — have killed; naradevam — the king; yat — who is; sarva-deva-mayam — the embodiment of all the demigods; vṛthā — unnecessarily.

Translation
O great hero, my dear son Paraśurāma, you have unnecessarily killed the king, who is supposed to be the embodiment of all the demigods. Thus you have committed a sin.

Text 39
वयं हि ब्राह्मणास्तात क्षमयार्हणतां गता: ।
यया लोकगुरुर्देव: पारमेष्ठ्यमगात् पदम् ॥ ३९ ॥
vayaṁ hi brāhmaṇās tāta
kṣamayārhaṇatāṁ gatāḥ
yayā loka-gurur devaḥ
pārameṣṭhyam agāt padam
Synonyms
vayam — we; hi — indeed; brāhmaṇāḥ — are qualified brāhmaṇas; tāta — O my dear son; kṣamayā — with the quality of forgiveness; arhaṇatām — the position of being worshiped; gatāḥ — we have achieved; yayā — by this qualification; loka-guruḥ — the spiritual master of this universe; devaḥ — Lord Brahmā; pārameṣṭhyam — the supreme person within this universe; agāt — achieved; padam — the position.

Translation
My dear son, we are all brāhmaṇas and have become worshipable for the people in general because of our quality of forgiveness. It is because of this quality that Lord Brahmā, the supreme spiritual master of this universe, has achieved his post.

Text 40
क्षमया रोचते लक्ष्मीर्ब्राह्मी सौरी यथा प्रभा ।
क्षमिणामाशु भगवांस्तुष्यते हरिरीश्वर: ॥ ४० ॥
kṣamayā rocate lakṣmīr
brāhmī saurī yathā prabhā
kṣamiṇām āśu bhagavāṁs
tuṣyate harir īśvaraḥ
Synonyms
kṣamayā — simply by forgiving; rocate — becomes pleasing; lakṣmīḥ — the goddess of fortune; brāhmī — in connection with brahminical qualifications; saurī — the sun-god; yathā — as; prabhā — the sunshine; kṣamiṇām — unto the brāhmaṇas, who are so forgiving; āśu — very soon; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tuṣyate — becomes pleased; hariḥ — the Lord; īśvaraḥ — the supreme controller.

Translation
The duty of a brāhmaṇa is to culture the quality of forgiveness, which is illuminating like the sun. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, is pleased with those who are forgiving.

Text 41
राज्ञो मूर्धाभिषिक्तस्य वधो ब्रह्मवधाद् गुरु: ।
तीर्थसंसेवया चांहो जह्यङ्गाच्युतचेतन: ॥ ४१ ॥
rājño mūrdhābhiṣiktasya
vadho brahma-vadhād guruḥ
tīrtha-saṁsevayā cāṁho
jahy aṅgācyuta-cetanaḥ
Synonyms
rājñaḥ — of the king; mūrdha-abhiṣiktasya — who is noted as the emperor; vadhaḥ — the killing; brahma-vadhāt — than killing a brāhmaṇa; guruḥ — more severe; tīrtha-saṁsevayā — by worshiping the holy places; ca — also; aṁhaḥ — the sinful act; jahi — wash out; aṅga — O my dear son; acyuta-cetanaḥ — being fully Kṛṣṇa conscious.

Translation
My dear son, killing a king who is an emperor is more severely sinful than killing a brāhmaṇa. But now, if you become Kṛṣṇa conscious and worship the holy places, you can atone for this great sin.