Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
यतिर्ययाति: संयातिरायतिर्वियति: कृति: ।
षडिमे नहुषस्यासन्निन्द्रियाणीव देहिन: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
yatir yayātiḥ saṁyātir
āyatir viyatiḥ kṛtiḥ
ṣaḍ ime nahuṣasyāsann
indriyāṇīva dehinaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; yatiḥ — Yati; yayātiḥ — Yayāti; saṁyātiḥ — Saṁyāti; āyatiḥ — Āyati; viyatiḥ — Viyati; kṛtiḥ — Kṛti; ṣaṭ — six; ime — all of them; nahuṣasya — of King Nahuṣa; āsan — were; indriyāṇi — the (six) senses; iva — like; dehinaḥ — of an embodied soul.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King Parīkṣit, as the embodied soul has six senses, King Nahuṣa had six sons, named Yati, Yayāti, Saṁyāti, Āyati, Viyati and Kṛti.

Text 2
राज्यं नैच्छद् यति: पित्रा दत्तं तत्परिणामवित् ।
यत्र प्रविष्ट: पुरुष आत्मानं नावबुध्यते ॥ २ ॥
rājyaṁ naicchad yatiḥ pitrā
dattaṁ tat-pariṇāmavit
yatra praviṣṭaḥ puruṣa
ātmānaṁ nāvabudhyate
Synonyms
rājyam — the kingdom; na aicchat — did not accept; yatiḥ — the eldest son, Yati; pitrā — by his father; dattam — offered; tat-pariṇāma-vit — knowing the result of becoming powerful as a king; yatra — wherein; praviṣṭaḥ — having entered; puruṣaḥ — such a person; ātmānam — self-realization; na — not; avabudhyate — will take seriously and understand.

Translation
When one enters the post of king or head of the government, one cannot understand the meaning of self-realization. Knowing this, Yati, the eldest son of Nahuṣa, did not accept the power to rule, although it was offered by his father.

Text 3
पितरि भ्रंशिते स्थानादिन्द्राण्या धर्षणाद्द्विजै: ।
प्रापितेऽजगरत्वं वै ययातिरभवन्नृप: ॥ ३ ॥
pitari bhraṁśite sthānād
indrāṇyā dharṣaṇād dvijaiḥ
prāpite ’jagaratvaṁ vai
yayātir abhavan nṛpaḥ
Synonyms
pitari — when his father; bhraṁśite — was caused to fall down; sthānāt — from the heavenly planets; indrāṇyāḥ — of Śacī, the wife of Indra; dharṣaṇāt — from offending; dvijaiḥ — by them (upon her lodging a complaint with the brāhmaṇas); prāpite — being degraded to; ajagaratvam — the life of a snake; vai — indeed; yayātiḥ — the son named Yayāti; abhavat — became; nṛpaḥ — the king.

Translation
Because Nahuṣa, the father of Yayāti, molested Indra’s wife, Śacī, who then complained to Agastya and other brāhmaṇas, these saintly brāhmaṇas cursed Nahuṣa to fall from the heavenly planets and be degraded to the status of a python. Consequently, Yayāti became the king.

Text 4
चतसृष्वादिशद् दिक्षु भ्रातृन् भ्राता यवीयस: ।
कृतदारो जुगोपोर्वीं काव्यस्य वृषपर्वण: ॥ ४ ॥
catasṛṣv ādiśad dikṣu
bhrātṝn bhrātā yavīyasaḥ
kṛta-dāro jugoporvīṁ
kāvyasya vṛṣaparvaṇaḥ
Synonyms
catasṛṣu — over the four; ādiśat — allowed to rule; dikṣu — directions; bhrātṝn — four brothers; bhrātā — Yayāti; yavīyasaḥ — young; kṛta-dāraḥ — married; jugopa — ruled; ūrvīm — the world; kāvyasya — the daughter of Śukrācārya; vṛṣaparvaṇaḥ — the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā.

Translation
King Yayāti had four younger brothers, whom he allowed to rule the four directions. Yayāti himself married Devayānī, the daughter of Śukrācārya, and Śarmiṣṭhā, the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā, and ruled the entire earth.

Text 5
श्रीराजोवाच
ब्रह्मर्षिर्भगवान् काव्य: क्षत्रबन्धुश्च नाहुष: ।
राजन्यविप्रयो: कस्माद् विवाह: प्रतिलोमक: ॥ ५ ॥
śrī-rājovāca
brahmarṣir bhagavān kāvyaḥ
kṣatra-bandhuś ca nāhuṣaḥ
rājanya-viprayoḥ kasmād
vivāhaḥ pratilomakaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-rājā uvāca — Mahārāja Parīkṣit inquired; brahma-ṛṣiḥ — the best of the brāhmaṇas; bhagavān — very powerful; kāvyaḥ — Śukrācārya; kṣatra-bandhuḥ — belonged to the kṣatriya class; ca — also; nāhuṣaḥ — King Yayāti; rājanya-viprayoḥ — of a brāhmaṇa and a kṣatriya; kasmāt — how; vivāhaḥ — a marital relationship; pratilomakaḥ — against the customary regulative principles.

Translation
Mahārāja Parīkṣit said: Śukrācārya was a very powerful brāhmaṇa, and Mahārāja Yayāti was a kṣatriya. Therefore I am curious to know how there occurred this pratiloma marriage between a kṣatriya and a brāhmaṇa.

Texts 6-7
श्रीशुक उवाच
एकदा दानवेन्द्रस्य शर्मिष्ठा नाम कन्यका ।
सखीसहस्रसंयुक्ता गुरुपुत्र्या च भामिनी ॥ ६ ॥
देवयान्या पुरोद्याने पुष्पितद्रुमसङ्कुले ।
व्यचरत्कलगीतालिनलिनीपुलिनेऽबला ॥ ७ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
ekadā dānavendrasya
śarmiṣṭhā nāma kanyakā
sakhī-sahasra-saṁyuktā
guru-putryā ca bhāminī
devayānyā purodyāne
puṣpita-druma-saṅkule
vyacarat kala-gītāli-
nalinī-puline ’balā
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ekadā — once upon a time; dānava-indrasya — of Vṛṣaparvā; śarmiṣṭhā — Śarmiṣṭhā; nāma — by name; kanyakā — a daughter; sakhī-sahasra-saṁyuktā — accompanied by thousands of friends; guru-putryā — with the daughter of the guru, Śukrācārya; ca — also; bhāminī — very easily irritated; devayānyā — with Devayānī; pura-udyāne — within the palace garden; puṣpita — full of flowers; druma — with nice trees; saṅkule — congested; vyacarat — was walking; kala-gīta — with very sweet sounds; ali — with bumblebees; nalinī — with lotuses; puline — in such a garden; abalā — innocent.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: One day Vṛṣaparvā’s daughter Śarmiṣṭhā, who was innocent but angry by nature, was walking with Devayānī, the daughter of Śukrācārya, and with thousands of friends, in the palace garden. The garden was full of lotuses and trees of flowers and fruits and was inhabited by sweetly singing birds and bumblebees.

Text 8
ता जलाशयमासाद्य कन्या: कमललोचना: ।
तीरे न्यस्य दुकूलानि विजह्रु: सिञ्चतीर्मिथ: ॥ ८ ॥
tā jalāśayam āsādya
kanyāḥ kamala-locanāḥ
tīre nyasya dukūlāni
vijahruḥ siñcatīr mithaḥ
Synonyms
tāḥ — they; jala-āśayam — to the lakeside; āsādya — coming; kanyāḥ — all the girls; kamala-locanāḥ — with eyes like lotus petals; tīre — on the bank; nyasya — giving up; dukūlāni — their dresses; vijahruḥ — began to sport; siñcatīḥ — throwing water; mithaḥ — on one another.

Translation
When the young, lotus-eyed girls came to the bank of a reservoir of water, they wanted to enjoy by bathing. Thus they left their clothing on the bank and began sporting, throwing water on one another.

Text 9
वीक्ष्य व्रजन्तं गिरिशं सह देव्या वृषस्थितम् ।
सहसोत्तीर्य वासांसि पर्यधुर्व्रीडिता: स्त्रिय: ॥ ९ ॥
vīkṣya vrajantaṁ giriśaṁ
saha devyā vṛṣa-sthitam
sahasottīrya vāsāṁsi
paryadhur vrīḍitāḥ striyaḥ
Synonyms
vīkṣya — seeing; vrajantam — passing by; giriśam — Lord Śiva; saha — with; devyā — Pārvatī, the wife of Lord Śiva; vṛṣa-sthitam — seated upon his bull; sahasā — quickly; uttīrya — getting out of the water; vāsāṁsi — garments; paryadhuḥ — put on the body; vrīḍitāḥ — being ashamed; striyaḥ — the young girls.

Translation
While sporting in the water, the girls suddenly saw Lord Śiva passing by, seated on the back of his bull with his wife, Pārvatī. Ashamed because they were naked, the girls quickly got out of the water and covered themselves with their garments.

Text 10
शर्मिष्ठाजानती वासो गुरुपुत्र्या: समव्ययत् ।
स्वीयं मत्वा प्रकुपिता देवयानीदमब्रवीत् ॥ १० ॥
śarmiṣṭhājānatī vāso
guru-putryāḥ samavyayat
svīyaṁ matvā prakupitā
devayānīdam abravīt
Synonyms
śarmiṣṭhā — the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā; ajānatī — without knowledge; vāsaḥ — the dress; guru-putryāḥ — of Devayānī, the daughter of the guru; samavyayat — put on the body; svīyam — her own; matvā — thinking; prakupitā — irritated and angry; devayānī — the daughter of Śukrācārya; idam — this; abravīt — said.

Translation
Śarmiṣṭhā unknowingly put Devayānī’s dress on her own body, thus angering Devayānī, who then spoke as follows.

Text 11
अहो निरीक्ष्यतामस्या दास्या: कर्म ह्यसाम्प्रतम् ।
अस्मद्धार्यं धृतवती शुनीव हविरध्वरे ॥ ११ ॥
aho nirīkṣyatām asyā
dāsyāḥ karma hy asāmpratam
asmad-dhāryaṁ dhṛtavatī
śunīva havir adhvare
Synonyms
aho — alas; nirīkṣyatām — just see; asyāḥ — of her (Śarmiṣṭhā); dāsyāḥ — just like our servant; karma — activities; hi — indeed; asāmpratam — without any etiquette; asmat-dhāryam — the garment meant for me; dhṛtavatī — she has put on; śunī iva — like a dog; haviḥ — clarified butter; adhvare — meant for offering in the sacrifice.

Translation
Oh, just see the activities of this servant-maid Śarmiṣṭhā! Disregarding all etiquette, she has put on my dress, just like a dog snatching clarified butter meant for use in a sacrifice.

Texts 12-14
यैरिदं तपसा सृष्टं मुखं पुंस: परस्य ये ।
धार्यते यैरिह ज्योति: शिव: पन्था: प्रदर्शित: ॥ १२ ॥
यान् वन्दन्त्युपतिष्ठन्ते लोकनाथा: सुरेश्वरा: ।
भगवानपि विश्वात्मा पावन: श्रीनिकेतन: ॥ १३ ॥
वयं तत्रापि भृगव: शिष्योऽस्या न: पितासुर: ।
अस्मद्धार्यं धृतवती शूद्रो वेदमिवासती ॥ १४ ॥
yair idaṁ tapasā sṛṣṭaṁ
mukhaṁ puṁsaḥ parasya ye
dhāryate yair iha jyotiḥ
śivaḥ panthāḥ pradarśitaḥ
yān vandanty upatiṣṭhante
loka-nāthāḥ sureśvarāḥ
bhagavān api viśvātmā
pāvanaḥ śrī-niketanaḥ
vayaṁ tatrāpi bhṛgavaḥ
śiṣyo ’syā naḥ pitāsuraḥ
asmad-dhāryaṁ dhṛtavatī
śūdro vedam ivāsatī
Synonyms
yaiḥ — by which persons; idam — this entire universe; tapasā — by austerity; sṛṣṭam — was created; mukham — the face; puṁsaḥ — of the Supreme Person; parasya — transcendental; ye — those who (are); dhāryate — is always born; yaiḥ — by which persons; iha — here; jyotiḥ — the brahmajyoti, the effulgence of the Supreme Lord; śivaḥ — auspicious; panthāḥ — way; pradarśitaḥ — is directed; yān — to whom; vandanti — offer prayers; upatiṣṭhante — honor and follow; loka-nāthāḥ — the directors of the various planets; sura-īśvarāḥ — the demigods; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api — even; viśva-ātmā — the Supersoul; pāvanaḥ — the purifier; śrī-niketanaḥ — the husband of the goddess of fortune; vayam — we (are); tatra api — even greater than other brāhmaṇas; bhṛgavaḥ — descendants of Bhṛgu; śiṣyaḥ — disciple; asyāḥ — of her; naḥ — our; pitā — father; asuraḥ — belong to the demoniac group; asmat-dhāryam — meant to be worn by us; dhṛtavatī — she has put on; śūdraḥ — a non-brāhmaṇa worker; vedam — the Vedas; iva — like; asatī — unchaste.

Translation
We are among the qualified brāhmaṇas, who are accepted as the face of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The brāhmaṇas have created the entire universe by their austerity, and they always keep the Absolute Truth within the core of their hearts. They have directed the path of good fortune, the path of Vedic civilization, and because they are the only worshipable objects within this world, they are offered prayers and worshiped even by the great demigods, the directors of the various planets, and even by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul, the supreme purifier, the husband of the goddess of fortune. And we are even more respectable because we are in the dynasty of Bhṛgu. Yet although this woman’s father, being among the demons, is our disciple, she has put on my dress, exactly like a śūdra taking charge of Vedic knowledge.

Text 15
एवं क्षिपन्तीं शर्मिष्ठा गुरुपुत्रीमभाषत ।
रुषा श्वसन्त्युरङ्गीव धर्षिता दष्टदच्छदा ॥ १५ ॥
evaṁ kṣipantīṁ śarmiṣṭhā
guru-putrīm abhāṣata
ruṣā śvasanty uraṅgīva
dharṣitā daṣṭa-dacchadā
Synonyms
evam — thus; kṣipantīm — chastising; śarmiṣṭhā — the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā; guru-putrīm — unto the daughter of the guru, Śukrācārya; abhāṣata — said; ruṣā — being very angry; śvasantī — breathing very heavily; uraṅgī iva — like a serpent; dharṣitā — offended, trampled; daṣṭa-dat-chadā — biting her lip with her teeth.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When thus rebuked in cruel words, Śarmiṣṭhā was very angry. Breathing heavily like a serpent and biting her lower lip with her teeth, she spoke to the daughter of Śukrācārya as follows.

Text 16
आत्मवृत्तमविज्ञाय कत्थसे बहु भिक्षुकि ।
किं न प्रतीक्षसेऽस्माकं गृहान् बलिभुजो यथा ॥ १६ ॥
ātma-vṛttam avijñāya
katthase bahu bhikṣuki
kiṁ na pratīkṣase ’smākaṁ
gṛhān balibhujo yathā
Synonyms
ātma-vṛttam — one’s own position; avijñāya — without understanding; katthase — you are talking madly; bahu — so much; bhikṣuki — beggar; kim — whether; na — not; pratīkṣase — you wait; asmākam — our; gṛhān — at the house; balibhujaḥ — crows; yathā — like.

Translation
You beggar, since you don’t understand your position, why should you unnecessarily talk so much? Don’t all of you wait at our house, depending on us for your livelihood like crows?

Text 17
एवंविधै: सुपरुषै: क्षिप्‍त्वाचार्यसुतां सतीम् ।
शर्मिष्ठा प्राक्षिपत् कूपे वासश्चादाय मन्युना ॥ १७ ॥
evaṁ-vidhaiḥ suparuṣaiḥ
kṣiptvācārya-sutāṁ satīm
śarmiṣṭhā prākṣipat kūpe
vāsaś cādāya manyunā
Synonyms
evam-vidhaiḥ — such; su-paruṣaiḥ — by unkind words; kṣiptvā — after chastising; ācārya-sutām — the daughter of Śukrācārya; satīm — Devayānī; śarmiṣṭhā — Śarmiṣṭhā; prākṣipat — threw (her); kūpe — into a well; vāsaḥ — the garments; ca — and; ādāya — taking away; manyunā — because of anger.

Translation
Using such unkind words, Śarmiṣṭhā rebuked Devayānī, the daughter of Śukrācārya. In anger, she took away Devayānī’s garments and threw Devayānī into a well.

Text 18
तस्यां गतायां स्वगृहं ययातिर्मृगयां चरन् ।
प्राप्तो यद‍ृच्छया कूपे जलार्थी तां ददर्श ह ॥ १८ ॥
tasyāṁ gatāyāṁ sva-gṛhaṁ
yayātir mṛgayāṁ caran
prāpto yadṛcchayā kūpe
jalārthī tāṁ dadarśa ha
Synonyms
tasyām — when she; gatāyām — went; sva-gṛham — to her home; yayātiḥ — King Yayāti; mṛgayām — hunting; caran — wandering; prāptaḥ — arrived; yadṛcchayā — by chance; kūpe — in the well; jala-arthī — desiring to drink water; tām — her (Devayānī); dadarśa — saw; ha — indeed.

Translation
After throwing Devayānī into the well, Śarmiṣṭhā went home. Meanwhile, King Yayāti, while engaged in a hunting excursion, went to the well to drink water and by chance saw Devayānī.

Text 19
दत्त्वा स्वमुत्तरं वासस्तस्यै राजा विवाससे ।
गृहीत्वा पाणिना पाणिमुज्जहार दयापर: ॥ १९ ॥
dattvā svam uttaraṁ vāsas
tasyai rājā vivāsase
gṛhītvā pāṇinā pāṇim
ujjahāra dayā-paraḥ
Synonyms
dattvā — giving; svam — his own; uttaram — upper; vāsaḥ — cloth; tasyai — unto her (Devayānī); rājā — the King; vivāsase — because she was naked; gṛhītvā — catching; pāṇinā — with his hand; pāṇim — her hand; ujjahāra — delivered; dayā-paraḥ — being very kind.

Translation
Seeing Devayānī naked in the well, King Yayāti immediately gave her his upper cloth. Being very kind to her, he caught her hand with his own and lifted her out.

Texts 20-21
तं वीरमाहौशनसी प्रेमनिर्भरया गिरा ।
राजंस्त्वया गृहीतो मे पाणि: परपुरञ्जय ॥ २० ॥
हस्तग्राहोऽपरो मा भूद् गृहीतायास्त्वया हि मे ।
एष ईशकृतो वीर सम्बन्धो नौ न पौरुष: ॥ २१ ॥
taṁ vīram āhauśanasī
prema-nirbharayā girā
rājaṁs tvayā gṛhīto me
pāṇiḥ para-purañjaya
hasta-grāho ’paro mā bhūd
gṛhītāyās tvayā hi me
eṣa īśa-kṛto vīra
sambandho nau na pauruṣaḥ
Synonyms
tam — unto him; vīram — Yayāti; āha — said; auśanasī — the daughter of Uśanā Kavi, Śukrācārya; prema-nirbharayā — saturated with love and kindness; girā — by such words; rājan — O King; tvayā — by you; gṛhītaḥ — accepted; me — my; pāṇiḥ — hand; para-purañjaya — the conqueror of the kingdoms of others; hasta-grāhaḥ — he who accepted my hand; aparaḥ — another; mā — may not; bhūt — become; gṛhītāyāḥ — accepted; tvayā — by you; hi — indeed; me — of me; eṣaḥ — this; īśa-kṛtaḥ — arranged by providence; vīra — O great hero; sambandhaḥ — relationship; nau — our; na — not; pauruṣaḥ — anything man-made.

Translation
With words saturated with love and affection, Devayānī said to King Yayāti: O great hero, O King, conqueror of the cities of your enemies, by accepting my hand you have accepted me as your married wife. Let me not be touched by others, for our relationship as husband and wife has been made possible by providence, not by any human being.

Text 22
यदिदं कूपमग्नाया भवतो दर्शनं मम ।
न ब्राह्मणो मे भविता हस्तग्राहो महाभुज ।
कचस्य बार्हस्पत्यस्य शापाद् यमशपं पुरा ॥ २२ ॥
yad idaṁ kūpa-magnāyā
bhavato darśanaṁ mama
na brāhmaṇo me bhavitā
hasta-grāho mahā-bhuja
kacasya bārhaspatyasya
śāpād yam aśapaṁ purā
Synonyms
yat — because of; idam — this; kūpa-magnāyāḥ — fallen in the well; bhavataḥ — of your good self; darśanam — meeting; mama — with me; na — not; brāhmaṇaḥ — a qualified brāhmaṇa; me — my; bhavitā — will become; hasta-grāhaḥ — husband; mahā-bhuja — O great mighty-armed one; kacasya — of Kaca; bārhaspatyasya — the son of the learned brāhmaṇa and celestial priest Bṛhaspati; śāpāt — because of the curse; yam — whom; aśapam — I cursed; purā — in the past.

Translation
Because of falling in the well, I met you. Indeed, this has been arranged by providence. After I cursed Kaca, the son of the learned scholar Bṛhaspati, he cursed me by saying that I would not have a brāhmaṇa for a husband. Therefore, O mighty-armed one, there is no possibility of my becoming the wife of a brāhmaṇa.

Text 23
ययातिरनभिप्रेतं दैवोपहृतमात्मन: ।
मनस्तु तद्गतं बुद्ध्वा प्रतिजग्राह तद्वच: ॥ २३ ॥
yayātir anabhipretaṁ
daivopahṛtam ātmanaḥ
manas tu tad-gataṁ buddhvā
pratijagrāha tad-vacaḥ
Synonyms
yayātiḥ — King Yayāti; anabhipretam — not liked; daiva-upahṛtam — brought about by providential arrangements; ātmanaḥ — his personal interest; manaḥ — mind; tu — however; tat-gatam — being attracted to her; buddhvā — by such intelligence; pratijagrāha — accepted; tat-vacaḥ — the words of Devayānī.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Because such a marriage is not sanctioned by regular scriptures, King Yayāti did not like it, but because it was arranged by providence and because he was attracted by Devayānī’s beauty, he accepted her request.

Text 24
गते राजनि सा धीरे तत्र स्म रुदती पितु: ।
न्यवेदयत्तत: सर्वमुक्तं शर्मिष्ठया कृतम् ॥ २४ ॥
gate rājani sā dhīre
tatra sma rudatī pituḥ
nyavedayat tataḥ sarvam
uktaṁ śarmiṣṭhayā kṛtam
Synonyms
gate rājani — after the departure of the King; sā — she (Devayānī); dhīre — learned; tatra sma — returning to her home; rudatī — crying; pituḥ — before her father; nyavedayat — submitted; tataḥ — thereafter; sarvam — all; uktam — mentioned; śarmiṣṭhayā — by Śarmiṣṭhā; kṛtam — done.

Translation
Thereafter, when the learned King returned to his palace, Devayānī returned home crying and told her father, Śukrācārya, about all that had happened because of Śarmiṣṭhā. She told how she had been thrown into the well but was saved by the King.

Text 25
दुर्मना भगवान् काव्य: पौरोहित्यं विगर्हयन् ।
स्तुवन् वृत्तिं च कापोतीं दुहित्रा स ययौ पुरात् ॥ २५ ॥
durmanā bhagavān kāvyaḥ
paurohityaṁ vigarhayan
stuvan vṛttiṁ ca kāpotīṁ
duhitrā sa yayau purāt
Synonyms
durmanāḥ — being very unhappy; bhagavān — the most powerful; kāvyaḥ — Śukrācārya; paurohityam — the business of priesthood; vigarhayan — condemning; stuvan — praising; vṛttim — the profession; ca — and; kāpotīm — of collecting grains from the field; duhitrā — with his daughter; saḥ — he (Śukrācārya); yayau — went; purāt — from his own residence.

Translation
As Śukrācārya listened to what had happened to Devayānī, his mind was very much aggrieved. Condemning the profession of priesthood and praising the profession of uñcha-vṛtti [collecting grains from the fields], he left home with his daughter.

Text 26
वृषपर्वा तमाज्ञाय प्रत्यनीकविवक्षितम् ।
गुरुं प्रसादयन् मूर्ध्ना पादयो: पतित: पथि ॥ २६ ॥
vṛṣaparvā tam ājñāya
pratyanīka-vivakṣitam
guruṁ prasādayan mūrdhnā
pādayoḥ patitaḥ pathi
Synonyms
vṛṣaparvā — the King of the demons; tam ājñāya — understanding the motive of Śukrācārya; pratyanīka — some curse; vivakṣitam — desiring to speak; gurum — his spiritual master, Śukrācārya; prasādayat — he satisfied immediately; mūrdhnā — with his head; pādayoḥ — at the feet; patitaḥ — fell down; pathi — on the road.

Translation
King Vṛṣaparvā understood that Śukrācārya was coming to chastise or curse him. Consequently, before Śukrācārya came to his house, Vṛṣaparvā went out and fell down in the street at the feet of his guru and satisfied him, checking his wrath.

Text 27
क्षणार्धमन्युर्भगवान् शिष्यं व्याचष्ट भार्गव: ।
कामोऽस्या: क्रियतां राजन् नैनां त्यक्तुमिहोत्सहे ॥ २७ ॥
kṣaṇārdha-manyur bhagavān
śiṣyaṁ vyācaṣṭa bhārgavaḥ
kāmo ’syāḥ kriyatāṁ rājan
naināṁ tyaktum ihotsahe
Synonyms
kṣaṇa-ardha — lasting only a few moments; manyuḥ — whose anger; bhagavān — the most powerful; śiṣyam — unto his disciple, Vṛṣaparvā; vyācaṣṭa — said; bhārgavaḥ — Śukrācārya, the descendant of Bhṛgu; kāmaḥ — the desire; asyāḥ — of this Devayānī; kriyatām — please fulfill; rājan — O King; na — not; enām — this girl; tyaktum — to give up; iha — in this world; utsahe — I am able.

Translation
The powerful Śukrācārya was angry for a few moments, but upon being satisfied he said to Vṛṣaparvā: My dear King, kindly fulfill the desire of Devayānī, for she is my daughter and in this world I cannot give her up or neglect her.

Text 28
तथेत्यवस्थिते प्राह देवयानी मनोगतम् ।
पित्रा दत्ता यतो यास्ये सानुगा यातु मामनु ॥ २८ ॥
tathety avasthite prāha
devayānī manogatam
pitrā dattā yato yāsye
sānugā yātu mām anu
Synonyms
tathā iti — when King Vṛṣaparvā agreed to Śukrācārya’s proposal; avasthite — the situation being settled in this way; prāha — said; devayānī — the daughter of Śukrācārya; manogatam — her desire; pitrā — by the father; dattā — given; yataḥ — to whomever; yāsye — I shall go; sa-anugā — with her friends; yātu — shall go; mām anu — as my follower or servant.

Translation
After hearing Śukrācārya’s request, Vṛṣaparvā agreed to fulfill Devayānī’s desire, and he awaited her words. Devayānī then expressed her desire as follows: “Whenever I marry by the order of my father, my friend Śarmiṣṭhā must go with me as my maidservant, along with her friends.”

Text 29
पित्रादत्तादेवयान्यै शर्मिष्ठासानुगातदा ।
स्वानां तत् सङ्कटं वीक्ष्य तदर्थस्य च गौरवम् ।
देवयानीं पर्यचरत् स्त्रीसहस्रेण दासवत् ॥ २९ ॥
pitrā dattā devayānyai
śarmiṣṭhā sānugā tadā
svānāṁ tat saṅkaṭaṁ vīkṣya
tad-arthasya ca gauravam
devayānīṁ paryacarat
strī-sahasreṇa dāsavat
Synonyms
pitrā — by the father; dattā — given; devayānyai — unto Devayānī, the daughter of Śukrācārya; śarmiṣṭhā — the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā; sa-anugā — with her friends; tadā — at that time; svānām — of his own; tat — that; saṅkaṭam — dangerous position; vīkṣya — observing; tat — from him; arthasya — of the benefit; ca — also; gauravam — the greatness; devayānīm — unto Devayānī; paryacarat — served; strī-sahasreṇa — with thousands of other women; dāsa-vat — acting as a slave.

Translation
Vṛṣaparvā wisely thought that Śukrācārya’s displeasure would bring danger and that his pleasure would bring material gain. Therefore he carried out Śukrācārya’s order and served him like a slave. He gave his daughter Śarmiṣṭhā to Devayānī, and Śarmiṣṭhā served Devayānī like a slave, along with thousands of other women.

Text 30
नाहुषाय सुतां दत्त्वा सह शर्मिष्ठयोशना ।
तमाह राजञ्छर्मिष्ठामाधास्तल्पे न कर्हिचित् ॥ ३० ॥
nāhuṣāya sutāṁ dattvā
saha śarmiṣṭhayośanā
tam āha rājañ charmiṣṭhām
ādhās talpe na karhicit
Synonyms
nāhuṣāya — unto King Yayāti, the descendant of Nahuṣa; sutām — his daughter; dattvā — giving in marriage; saha — with; śarmiṣṭhayā — Śarmiṣṭhā, the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā and servant of Devayānī; uśanā — Śukrācārya; tam — unto him (King Yayāti); āha — said; rājan — my dear King; śarmiṣṭhām — Śarmiṣṭhā, the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā; ādhāḥ — allow; talpe — on your bed; na — not; karhicit — at any time.

Translation
When Śukrācārya gave Devayānī in marriage to Yayāti, he had Śarmiṣṭhā go with her, but he warned the King, “My dear King, never allow this girl Śarmiṣṭhā to lie with you in your bed.”

Text 31
विलोक्यौशनसीं राजञ्छर्मिष्ठा सुप्रजां क्‍वचित् ।
तमेव वव्रे रहसि सख्या: पतिमृतौ सती ॥ ३१ ॥
vilokyauśanasīṁ rājañ
charmiṣṭhā suprajāṁ kvacit
tam eva vavre rahasi
sakhyāḥ patim ṛtau satī
Synonyms
vilokya — by seeing; auśanasīm — Devayānī, the daughter of Śukrācārya; rājan — O King Parīkṣit; śarmiṣṭhā — the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā; su-prajām — possessing nice children; kvacit — at some time; tam — him (King Yayāti); eva — indeed; vavre — requested; rahasi — in a secluded place; sakhyāḥ — of her friend; patim — the husband; ṛtau — at the appropriate time; satī — being in that position.

Translation
O King Parīkṣit, upon seeing Devayānī with a nice son, Śarmiṣṭhā once approached King Yayāti at the appropriate time for conception. In a secluded place, she requested the King, the husband of her friend Devayānī, to enable her to have a son also.

Text 32
राजपुत्र्यार्थितोऽपत्ये धर्मं चावेक्ष्य धर्मवित् ।
स्मरञ्छुक्रवच: काले दिष्टमेवाभ्यपद्यत ॥ ३२ ॥
rāja-putryārthito ’patye
dharmaṁ cāvekṣya dharmavit
smarañ chukra-vacaḥ kāle
diṣṭam evābhyapadyata
Synonyms
rāja-putryā — by Śarmiṣṭhā, who was the daughter of a king; arthitaḥ — being requested; apatye — for a son; dharmam — religious principles; ca — as well as; avekṣya — considering; dharma-vit — aware of all religious principles; smaran — remembering; śukra-vacaḥ — the warning of Śukrācārya; kāle — at the time; diṣṭam — circumstantially; eva — indeed; abhyapadyata — accepted (to fulfill the desire of Śarmiṣṭhā).

Translation
When Princess Śarmiṣṭhā begged King Yayāti for a son, the King was certainly aware of the principles of religion, and therefore he agreed to fulfill her desire. Although he remembered the warning of Śukrācārya, he thought of this union as the desire of the Supreme, and thus he had sex with Śarmiṣṭhā.

Text 33
यदुं च तुर्वसुं चैव देवयानी व्यजायत ।
द्रुह्युं चानुं च पूरुं च शर्मिष्ठा वार्षपर्वणी ॥ ३३ ॥
yaduṁ ca turvasuṁ caiva
devayānī vyajāyata
druhyuṁ cānuṁ ca pūruṁ ca
śarmiṣṭhā vārṣaparvaṇī
Synonyms
yadum — Yadu; ca — and; turvasum — Turvasu; ca eva — as well as; devayānī — the daughter of Śukrācārya; vyajāyata — gave birth to; druhyum — Druhyu; ca — and; anum — Anu; ca — also; pūrum — Pūru; ca — also; śarmiṣṭhā — Śarmiṣṭhā; vārṣaparvaṇī — the daughter of Vṛṣaparvā.

Translation
Devayānī gave birth to Yadu and Turvasu, and Śarmiṣṭhā gave birth to Druhyu, Anu and Pūru.

Text 34
गर्भसम्भवमासुर्या भर्तुर्विज्ञाय मानिनी ।
देवयानी पितुर्गेहं ययौ क्रोधविमूर्छिता ॥ ३४ ॥
garbha-sambhavam āsuryā
bhartur vijñāya māninī
devayānī pitur gehaṁ
yayau krodha-vimūrchitā
Synonyms
garbha-sambhavam — pregnancy; āsuryāḥ — of Śarmiṣṭhā; bhartuḥ — made possible by her husband; vijñāya — knowing (from the brāhmaṇa astrologers); māninī — being very proud; devayānī — the daughter of Śukrācārya; pituḥ — of her father; geham — to the house; yayau — departed; krodha-vimūrchitā — frenzied because of anger.

Translation
When the proud Devayānī understood from outside sources that Śarmiṣṭhā was pregnant by her husband, she was frenzied with anger. Thus she departed for her father’s house.

Text 35
प्रियामनुगत: कामी वचोभिरुपमन्त्रयन् ।
न प्रसादयितुं शेके पादसंवाहनादिभि: ॥ ३५ ॥
priyām anugataḥ kāmī
vacobhir upamantrayan
na prasādayituṁ śeke
pāda-saṁvāhanādibhiḥ
Synonyms
priyām — his beloved wife; anugataḥ — following; kāmī — very, very lusty; vacobhiḥ — by great words; upamantrayan — appeasing; na — not; prasādayitum — to appease; śeke — was able; pāda-saṁvāhana-ādibhiḥ — even by massaging her feet.

Translation
King Yayāti, who was very lusty, followed his wife, caught her and tried to appease her by speaking pleasing words and massaging her feet, but he could not satisfy her by any means.

Text 36
शुक्रस्तमाह कुपित: स्त्रीकामानृतपूरुष ।
त्वां जरा विशतां मन्द विरूपकरणी नृणाम् ॥ ३६ ॥
śukras tam āha kupitaḥ
strī-kāmānṛta-pūruṣa
tvāṁ jarā viśatāṁ manda
virūpa-karaṇī nṛṇām
Synonyms
śukraḥ — Śukrācārya; tam — unto him (King Yayāti); āha — said; kupitaḥ — being very angry at him; strī-kāma — O you who have lusty desires for women; anṛta-pūruṣa — O untruthful person; tvām — unto you; jarā — old age, invalidity; viśatām — may enter; manda — you fool; virūpa-karaṇī — which disfigures; nṛṇām — the bodies of human beings.

Translation
Śukrācārya was extremely angry. “You untruthful fool, lusting after women! You have done a great wrong,” he said. “I therefore curse you to be attacked and disfigured by old age and invalidity.”

Text 37
श्रीययातिरुवाच
अतृप्तोऽस्म्यद्य कामानां ब्रह्मन् दुहितरि स्म ते ।
व्यत्यस्यतां यथाकामं वयसा योऽभिधास्यति ॥ ३७ ॥
śrī-yayātir uvāca
atṛpto ’smy adya kāmānāṁ
brahman duhitari sma te
vyatyasyatāṁ yathā-kāmaṁ
vayasā yo ’bhidhāsyati
Synonyms
śrī-yayātiḥ uvāca — King Yayāti said; atṛptaḥ — unsatisfied; asmi — I am; adya — till now; kāmānām — to satisfy my lusty desires; brahman — O learned brāhmaṇa; duhitari — in connection with the daughter; sma — in the past; te — your; vyatyasyatām — just exchange; yathā-kāmam — as long as you are lusty; vayasā — with youth; yaḥ abhidhāsyati — of one who agrees to exchange your old age for his youth.

Translation
King Yayāti said, “O learned, worshipable brāhmaṇa, I have not yet satisfied my lusty desires with your daughter.” Śukrācārya then replied, “You may exchange your old age with someone who will agree to transfer his youth to you.”

Text 38
इति लब्धव्यवस्थान: पुत्रं ज्येष्ठमवोचत ।
यदो तात प्रतीच्छेमां जरां देहि निजं वय: ॥ ३८ ॥
iti labdha-vyavasthānaḥ
putraṁ jyeṣṭham avocata
yado tāta pratīcchemāṁ
jarāṁ dehi nijaṁ vayaḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus; labdha-vyavasthānaḥ — getting the opportunity to exchange his old age; putram — unto his son; jyeṣṭham — the eldest; avocata — he requested; yado — O Yadu; tāta — you are my beloved son; pratīccha — kindly exchange; imām — this; jarām — invalidity; dehi — and give; nijam — your own; vayaḥ — youth.

Translation
When Yayāti received this benediction from Śukrācārya, he requested his eldest son: My dear son Yadu, please give me your youth in exchange for my old age and invalidity.

Text 39
मातामहकृतां वत्स न तृप्तो विषयेष्वहम् ।
वयसा भवदीयेन रंस्ये कतिपया: समा: ॥ ३९ ॥
mātāmaha-kṛtāṁ vatsa
na tṛpto viṣayeṣv aham
vayasā bhavadīyena
raṁsye katipayāḥ samāḥ
Synonyms
mātāmaha-kṛtām — given by your maternal grandfather, Śukrācārya; vatsa — my dear son; na — not; tṛptaḥ — satisfied; viṣayeṣu — in sex life, sense gratification; aham — I (am); vayasā — by age; bhavadīyena — of your good self; raṁsye — I shall enjoy sex life; katipayāḥ — for a few; samāḥ — years.

Translation
My dear son, I am not yet satisfied in my sexual desires. But if you are kind to me, you can take the old age given by your maternal grandfather, and I may take your youth so that I may enjoy life for a few years more.

Text 40
श्रीयदुरुवाच
नोत्सहे जरसा स्थातुमन्तरा प्राप्तया तव ।
अविदित्वा सुखं ग्राम्यं वैतृष्ण्यं नैति पूरुष: ॥ ४० ॥
śrī-yadur uvāca
notsahe jarasā sthātum
antarā prāptayā tava
aviditvā sukhaṁ grāmyaṁ
vaitṛṣṇyaṁ naiti pūruṣaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-yaduḥ uvāca — Yadu, the eldest son to Yayāti, replied; na utsahe — I am not enthusiastic; jarasā — with your old age and invalidity; sthātum — to remain; antarā — while in youth; prāptayā — accepted; tava — your; aviditvā — without experiencing; sukham — happiness; grāmyam — material or bodily; vaitṛṣṇyam — indifference to material enjoyment; na — does not; eti — attain; pūruṣaḥ — a person.

Translation
Yadu replied: My dear father, you have already achieved old age, although you also were a young man. But I do not welcome your old age and invalidity, for unless one enjoys material happiness, one cannot attain renunciation.

Text 41
तुर्वसुश्चोदित: पित्रा द्रुह्युश्चानुश्च भारत ।
प्रत्याचख्युरधर्मज्ञा ह्यनित्ये नित्यबुद्धय: ॥ ४१ ॥
turvasuś coditaḥ pitrā
druhyuś cānuś ca bhārata
pratyācakhyur adharmajñā
hy anitye nitya-buddhayaḥ
Synonyms
turvasuḥ — Turvasu, another son; coditaḥ — requested; pitrā — by the father (to exchange old age and invalidity for his youth); druhyuḥ — Druhyu, another son; ca — and; anuḥ — Anu, another son; ca — also; bhārata — O King Parīkṣit; pratyācakhyuḥ — refused to accept; adharma-jñāḥ — because they did not know religious principles; hi — indeed; a-nitye — temporary youth; nitya-buddhayaḥ — thinking to be permanent.

Translation
O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, Yayāti similarly requested his sons Turvasu, Druhyu and Anu to exchange their youth for his old age, but because they were unaware of religious principles, they thought that their flickering youth was eternal, and therefore they refused to carry out their father’s order.

Text 42
अपृच्छत् तनयं पूरुं वयसोनं गुणाधिकम् ।
न त्वमग्रजवद् वत्स मां प्रत्याख्यातुमर्हसि ॥ ४२ ॥
apṛcchat tanayaṁ pūruṁ
vayasonaṁ guṇādhikam
na tvam agrajavad vatsa
māṁ pratyākhyātum arhasi
Synonyms
apṛcchat — requested; tanayam — the son; pūrum — Pūru; vayasā — by age; ūnam — although younger; guṇa-adhikam — better than the others by quality; na — not; tvam — you; agraja-vat — like your older brothers; vatsa — my dear son; mām — me; pratyākhyātum — to refuse; arhasi — ought.

Translation
King Yayāti then requested Pūru, who was younger than these three brothers but more qualified, “My dear son, do not be disobedient like your elder brothers, for that is not your duty.”

Text 43
श्रीपूरुरुवाच
को नु लोके मनुष्येन्द्र पितुरात्मकृत: पुमान् ।
प्रतिकर्तुं क्षमो यस्य प्रसादाद् विन्दते परम् ॥ ४३ ॥
śrī-pūrur uvāca
ko nu loke manuṣyendra
pitur ātma-kṛtaḥ pumān
pratikartuṁ kṣamo yasya
prasādād vindate param
Synonyms
śrī-pūruḥ uvāca — Pūru said; kaḥ — what; nu — indeed; loke — in this world; manuṣya-indra — O Your Majesty, best of human beings; pituḥ — the father; ātma-kṛtaḥ — who has given this body; pumān — a person; pratikartum — to repay; kṣamaḥ — is able; yasya — of whom; prasādāt — by the mercy; vindate — one enjoys; param — superior life.

Translation
Pūru replied: O Your Majesty, who in this world can repay his debt to his father? By the mercy of one’s father, one gets the human form of life, which can enable one to become an associate of the Supreme Lord.

Text 44
उत्तमश्चिन्तितं कुर्यात् प्रोक्तकारी तु मध्यम: ।
अधमोऽश्रद्धया कुर्यादकर्तोच्चरितं पितु: ॥ ४४ ॥
uttamaś cintitaṁ kuryāt
prokta-kārī tu madhyamaḥ
adhamo ’śraddhayā kuryād
akartoccaritaṁ pituḥ
Synonyms
uttamaḥ — the best; cintitam — considering the father’s idea; kuryāt — acts accordingly; prokta-kārī — one who acts on the order of the father; tu — indeed; madhyamaḥ — mediocre; adhamaḥ — lower class; aśraddhayā — without any faith; kuryāt — acts; akartā — unwilling to do; uccaritam — like stool; pituḥ — of the father.

Translation
A son who acts by anticipating what his father wants him to do is first class, one who acts upon receiving his father’s order is second class, and one who executes his father’s order irreverently is third class. But a son who refuses his father’s order is like his father’s stool.

Text 45
इति प्रमुदित: पूरु: प्रत्यगृह्णाज्जरां पितु: ।
सोऽपि तद्वयसा कामान् यथावज्जुजुषे नृप ॥ ४५ ॥
iti pramuditaḥ pūruḥ
pratyagṛhṇāj jarāṁ pituḥ
so ’pi tad-vayasā kāmān
yathāvaj jujuṣe nṛpa
Synonyms
iti — in this way; pramuditaḥ — very pleased; pūruḥ — Pūru; pratyagṛhṇāt — accepted; jarām — the old age and invalidity; pituḥ — of his father; saḥ — that father (Yayāti); api — also; tat-vayasā — by the youth of his son; kāmān — all desires; yathā-vat — as required; jujuṣe — satisfied; nṛpa — O Mahārāja Parīkṣit.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: In this way, O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the son named Pūru was very pleased to accept the old age of his father, Yayāti, who took the youth of his son and enjoyed this material world as he required.

Text 46
सप्तद्वीपपति: सम्यक् पितृवत् पालयन् प्रजा: ।
यथोपजोषं विषयाञ्जुजुषेऽव्याहतेन्द्रिय: ॥ ४६ ॥
sapta-dvīpa-patiḥ saṁyak
pitṛvat pālayan prajāḥ
yathopajoṣaṁ viṣayāñ
jujuṣe ’vyāhatendriyaḥ
Synonyms
sapta-dvīpa-patiḥ — the master of the entire world, consisting of seven islands; saṁyak — completely; pitṛ-vat — exactly like a father; pālayan — ruling; prajāḥ — the subjects; yathā-upajoṣam — as much as he wanted; viṣayān — material happiness; jujuṣe — enjoyed; avyāhata — without being disturbed; indriyaḥ — his senses.

Translation
Thereafter, King Yayāti became the ruler of the entire world, consisting of seven islands, and ruled the citizens exactly like a father. Because he had taken the youth of his son, his senses were unimpaired, and he enjoyed as much material happiness as he desired.

Text 47
देवयान्यप्यनुदिनं मनोवाग्देहवस्तुभि: ।
प्रेयस: परमां प्रीतिमुवाह प्रेयसी रह: ॥ ४७ ॥
devayāny apy anudinaṁ
mano-vāg-deha-vastubhiḥ
preyasaḥ paramāṁ prītim
uvāha preyasī rahaḥ
Synonyms
devayānī — Mahārāja Yayāti’s wife, the daughter of Śukrācārya; api — also; anudinam — twenty-four hours, day after day; manaḥ-vāk — by her mind and words; deha — body; vastubhiḥ — with all requisite things; preyasaḥ — of her beloved husband; paramām — transcendental; prītim — bliss; uvāha — executed; preyasī — very dear to her husband; rahaḥ — in seclusion, without any disturbance.

Translation
In secluded places, engaging her mind, words, body and various paraphernalia, Devayānī, the dear wife of Mahārāja Yayāti, always brought her husband the greatest possible transcendental bliss.

Text 48
अयजद् यज्ञपुरुषं क्रतुभिर्भूरिदक्षिणै: ।
सर्वदेवमयं देवं सर्ववेदमयं हरिम् ॥ ४८ ॥
ayajad yajña-puruṣaṁ
kratubhir bhūri-dakṣiṇaiḥ
sarva-devamayaṁ devaṁ
sarva-vedamayaṁ harim
Synonyms
ayajat — worshiped; yajña-puruṣam — the yajña-puruṣa, the Lord; kratubhiḥ — by performing various sacrifices; bhūri-dakṣiṇaiḥ — giving abundant gifts to the brāhmaṇas; sarva-deva-mayam — the reservoir of all the demigods; devam — the Supreme Lord; sarva-veda-mayam — the ultimate object of all Vedic knowledge; harim — the Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
King Yayāti performed various sacrifices, in which he offered abundant gifts to the brāhmaṇas to satisfy the Supreme Lord, Hari, who is the reservoir of all the demigods and the object of all Vedic knowledge.

Text 49
यस्मिन्निदं विरचितं व्योम्नीव जलदावलि: ।
नानेव भाति नाभाति स्वप्नमायामनोरथ: ॥ ४९ ॥
yasminn idaṁ viracitaṁ
vyomnīva jaladāvaliḥ
nāneva bhāti nābhāti
svapna-māyā-manorathaḥ
Synonyms
yasmin — in whom; idam — this entire cosmic manifestation; viracitam — created; vyomni — in the sky; iva — just like; jalada-āvaliḥ — clouds; nānā iva — as if in different varieties; bhāti — is manifested; na ābhāti — is unmanifested; svapna-māyā — illusion, like a dream; manaḥ-rathaḥ — created to be traversed by the chariot of the mind.

Translation
The Supreme Lord, Vāsudeva, who created the cosmic manifestation, exhibits Himself as all-pervading, like the sky that holds clouds. And when the creation is annihilated, everything enters into the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu, and varieties are no longer manifested.

Text 50
तमेव हृदि विन्यस्य वासुदेवं गुहाशयम् ।
नारायणमणीयांसं निराशीरयजत् प्रभुम् ॥ ५० ॥
tam eva hṛdi vinyasya
vāsudevaṁ guhāśayam
nārāyaṇam aṇīyāṁsaṁ
nirāśīr ayajat prabhum
Synonyms
tam eva — Him only; hṛdi — within the heart; vinyasya — placing; vāsudevam — Lord Vāsudeva; guha-āśayam — who exists in everyone’s heart; nārāyaṇam — who is Nārāyaṇa, or an expansion of Nārāyaṇa; aṇīyāṁsam — invisible to material eyes, although existing everywhere; nirāśīḥ — Yayāti, without any material desires; ayajat — worshiped; prabhum — the Supreme Lord.

Translation
Without material desires, Mahārāja Yayāti worshiped the Supreme Lord, who is situated in everyone’s heart as Nārāyaṇa and is invisible to material eyes, although existing everywhere.

Text 51
एवं वर्षसहस्राणि मन:षष्ठैर्मन:सुखम् ।
विदधानोऽपि नातृप्यत् सार्वभौम: कदिन्द्रियै: ॥ ५१ ॥
evaṁ varṣa-sahasrāṇi
manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhair manaḥ-sukham
vidadhāno ’pi nātṛpyat
sārva-bhaumaḥ kad-indriyaiḥ
Synonyms
evam — in this way; varṣa-sahasrāṇi — for one thousand years; manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhaiḥ — by the mind and five knowledge-acquiring senses; manaḥ-sukham — temporary happiness created by the mind; vidadhānaḥ — executing; api — although; na atṛpyat — could not be satisfied; sārva-bhaumaḥ — although he was the king of the entire world; kat-indriyaiḥ — because of possessing impure senses.

Translation
Although Mahārāja Yayāti was the king of the entire world and he engaged his mind and five senses in enjoying material possessions for one thousand years, he was unable to be satisfied.