Text 1
श्रीबादरायणिरुवाच
पूरोर्वंशं प्रवक्ष्यामि यत्र जातोऽसि भारत ।
यत्र राजर्षयो वंश्या ब्रह्मवंश्याश्च जज्ञिरे ॥ १ ॥
śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca
pūror vaṁśaṁ pravakṣyāmi
yatra jāto ’si bhārata
yatra rājarṣayo vaṁśyā
brahma-vaṁśyāś ca jajñire
Synonyms
śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; pūroḥ vaṁśam — the dynasty of Mahārāja Pūru; pravakṣyāmi — now I shall narrate; yatra — in which dynasty; jātaḥ asi — you were born; bhārata — O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, descendant of Mahārāja Bharata; yatra — in which dynasty; rāja-ṛṣayaḥ — all the kings were saintly; vaṁśyāḥ — one after another; brahma-vaṁśyāḥ — many brāhmaṇa dynasties; ca — also; jajñire — grew up.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, descendant of Mahārāja Bharata, I shall now describe the dynasty of Pūru, in which you were born, in which many saintly kings appeared, and from which many dynasties of brāhmaṇas began.

Text 2
जनमेजयो ह्यभूत् पूरो: प्रचिन्वांस्तत्सुतस्तत: ।
प्रवीरोऽथ मनुस्युर्वै तस्माच्चारुपदोऽभवत् ॥ २ ॥
janamejayo hy abhūt pūroḥ
pracinvāṁs tat-sutas tataḥ
pravīro ’tha manusyur vai
tasmāc cārupado ’bhavat
Synonyms
janamejayaḥ — King Janamejaya; hi — indeed; abhūt — appeared; pūroḥ — from Pūru; pracinvān — Pracinvān; tat — his (Janamejaya’s); sutaḥ — son; tataḥ — from him (Pracinvān); pravīraḥ — Pravīra; atha — thereafter; manusyuḥ — Pravīra’s son Manusyu; vai — indeed; tasmāt — from him (Manusyu); cārupadaḥ — King Cārupada; abhavat — appeared.

Translation
King Janamejaya was born of this dynasty of Pūru. Janamejaya’s son was Pracinvān, and his son was Pravīra. Thereafter, Pravīra’s son was Manusyu, and from Manusyu came the son named Cārupada.

Text 3
तस्य सुद्युरभूत् पुत्रस्तस्माद् बहुगवस्तत: ।
संयातिस्तस्याहंयाती रौद्राश्वस्तत्सुत: स्मृत: ॥ ३ ॥
tasya sudyur abhūt putras
tasmād bahugavas tataḥ
saṁyātis tasyāhaṁyātī
raudrāśvas tat-sutaḥ smṛtaḥ
Synonyms
tasya — of him (Cārupada); sudyuḥ — by the name Sudyu; abhūt — appeared; putraḥ — a son; tasmāt — from him (Sudyu); bahugavaḥ — a son named Bahugava; tataḥ — from him; saṁyātiḥ — a son named Saṁyāti; tasya — and from him; ahaṁyātiḥ — a son named Ahaṁyāti; raudrāśvaḥ — Raudrāśva; tat-sutaḥ — his son; smṛtaḥ — well known.

Translation
The son of Cārupada was Sudyu, and the son of Sudyu was Bahugava. Bahugava’s son was Saṁyāti. From Saṁyāti came a son named Ahaṁyāti, from whom Raudrāśva was born.

Texts 4-5
ऋतेयुस्तस्य कक्षेयु: स्थण्डिलेयु: कृतेयुक: ।
जलेयु: सन्नतेयुश्च धर्मसत्यव्रतेयव: ॥ ४ ॥
दशैतेऽप्सरस: पुत्रा वनेयुश्चावम: स्मृत: ।
घृताच्यामिन्द्रियाणीव मुख्यस्य जगदात्मन: ॥ ५ ॥
ṛteyus tasya kakṣeyuḥ
sthaṇḍileyuḥ kṛteyukaḥ
jaleyuḥ sannateyuś ca
dharma-satya-vrateyavaḥ
daśaite ’psarasaḥ putrā
vaneyuś cāvamaḥ smṛtaḥ
ghṛtācyām indriyāṇīva
mukhyasya jagad-ātmanaḥ
Synonyms
ṛteyuḥ — Ṛteyu; tasya — of him (Raudrāśva); kakṣeyuḥ — Kakṣeyu; sthaṇḍileyuḥ — Sthaṇḍileyu; kṛteyukaḥ — Kṛteyuka; jaleyuḥ — Jaleyu; sannateyuḥ — Sannateyu; ca — also; dharma — Dharmeyu; satya — Satyeyu; vrateyavaḥ — and Vrateyu; daśa — ten; ete — all of them; apsarasaḥ — born of an Apsarā; putrāḥ — sons; vaneyuḥ — the son named Vaneyu; ca — and; avamaḥ — the youngest; smṛtaḥ — known; ghṛtācyām — Ghṛtācī; indriyāṇi iva — exactly like the ten senses; mukhyasya — of the living force; jagat-ātmanaḥ — the living force of the entire universe.

Translation
Raudrāśva had ten sons, named Ṛteyu, Kakṣeyu, Sthaṇḍileyu, Kṛteyuka, Jaleyu, Sannateyu, Dharmeyu, Satyeyu, Vrateyu and Vaneyu. Of these ten sons, Vaneyu was the youngest. As the ten senses, which are products of the universal life, act under the control of life, these ten sons of Raudrāśva acted under Raudrāśva’s full control. All of them were born of the Apsarā named Ghṛtācī.

Text 6
ऋतेयो रन्तिनावोऽभूत् त्रयस्तस्यात्मजा नृप ।
सुमतिर्ध्रुवोऽप्रतिरथ: कण्वोऽप्रतिरथात्मज: ॥ ६ ॥
ṛteyo rantināvo ’bhūt
trayas tasyātmajā nṛpa
sumatir dhruvo ’pratirathaḥ
kaṇvo ’pratirathātmajaḥ
Synonyms
ṛteyoḥ — from the son named Ṛteyu; rantināvaḥ — the son named Rantināva; abhūt — appeared; trayaḥ — three; tasya — his (Rantināva’s); ātmajāḥ — sons; nṛpa — O King; sumatiḥ — Sumati; dhruvaḥ — Dhruva; apratirathaḥ — Apratiratha; kaṇvaḥ — Kaṇva; apratiratha-ātmajaḥ — the son of Apratiratha.

Translation
Ṛteyu had a son named Rantināva, who had three sons, named Sumati, Dhruva and Apratiratha. Apratiratha had only one son, whose name was Kaṇva.

Text 7
तस्य मेधातिथिस्तस्मात् प्रस्कन्नाद्या द्विजातय: ।
पुत्रोऽभूत् सुमते रेभिर्दुष्मन्तस्तत्सुतो मत: ॥ ७ ॥
tasya medhātithis tasmāt
praskannādyā dvijātayaḥ
putro ’bhūt sumate rebhir
duṣmantas tat-suto mataḥ
Synonyms
tasya — of him (Kaṇva); medhātithiḥ — a son named Medhātithi; tasmāt — from him (Medhātithi); praskanna-ādyāḥ — sons headed by Praskanna; dvijātayaḥ — all brāhmaṇas; putraḥ — a son; abhūt — there was; sumateḥ — from Sumati; rebhiḥ — Rebhi; duṣmantaḥ — Mahārāja Duṣmanta; tat-sutaḥ — the son of Rebhi; mataḥ — is well-known.

Translation
The son of Kaṇva was Medhātithi, whose sons, all brāhmaṇas, were headed by Praskanna. The son of Rantināva named Sumati had a son named Rebhi. Mahārāja Duṣmanta is well known as the son of Rebhi.

Texts 8-9
दुष्मन्तो मृगयां यात: कण्वाश्रमपदं गत: ।
तत्रासीनां स्वप्रभया मण्डयन्तीं रमामिव ॥ ८ ॥
विलोक्य सद्यो मुमुहे देवमायामिव स्त्रियम् ।
बभाषे तां वरारोहां भटै: कतिपयैर्वृत: ॥ ९ ॥
duṣmanto mṛgayāṁ yātaḥ
kaṇvāśrama-padaṁ gataḥ
tatrāsīnāṁ sva-prabhayā
maṇḍayantīṁ ramām iva
vilokya sadyo mumuhe
deva-māyām iva striyam
babhāṣe tāṁ varārohāṁ
bhaṭaiḥ katipayair vṛtaḥ
Synonyms
duṣmantaḥ — Mahārāja Duṣmanta; mṛgayām yātaḥ — when he went hunting; kaṇva-āśrama-padam — to the residence of Kaṇva; gataḥ — he came; tatra — there; āsīnām — a woman sitting; sva-prabhayā — by her own beauty; maṇḍayantīm — illuminating; ramām iva — exactly like the goddess of fortune; vilokya — by observing; sadyaḥ — immediately; mumuhe — he became enchanted; deva-māyām iva — exactly like the illusory energy of the Lord; striyam — a beautiful woman; babhāṣe — he addressed; tām — her (the woman); vara-ārohām — who was the best of beautiful women; bhaṭaiḥ — by soldiers; katipayaiḥ — a few; vṛtaḥ — surrounded.

Translation
Once when King Duṣmanta went to the forest to hunt and was very much fatigued, he approached the residence of Kaṇva Muni. There he saw a most beautiful woman who looked exactly like the goddess of fortune and who sat there illuminating the entire āśrama by her effulgence. The King was naturally attracted by her beauty, and therefore he approached her, accompanied by some of his soldiers, and spoke to her.

Text 10
तद्दर्शनप्रमुदित: सन्निवृत्तपरिश्रम: ।
पप्रच्छ कामसन्तप्त: प्रहसञ्श्लक्ष्णया गिरा ॥ १० ॥
tad-darśana-pramuditaḥ
sannivṛtta-pariśramaḥ
papraccha kāma-santaptaḥ
prahasañ ślakṣṇayā girā
Synonyms
tat-darśana-pramuditaḥ — being very much enlivened by seeing the beautiful woman; sannivṛtta-pariśramaḥ — being relieved of the fatigue of the hunting excursion; papraccha — he inquired from her; kāma-santaptaḥ — being agitated by lusty desires; prahasan — in a joking mood; ślakṣṇayā — very beautiful and pleasing; girā — with words.

Translation
Seeing the beautiful woman, the King was very much enlivened, and the fatigue of his hunting excursion was relieved. He was of course very much attracted because of lusty desires, and thus he inquired from her as follows, in a joking mood.

Text 11
का त्वं कमलपत्राक्षि कस्यासि हृदयङ्गमे ।
किंस्विच्चिकीर्षितं तत्र भवत्या निर्जने वने ॥ ११ ॥
kā tvaṁ kamala-patrākṣi
kasyāsi hṛdayaṅ-game
kiṁ svic cikīrṣitaṁ tatra
bhavatyā nirjane vane
Synonyms
kā — who; tvam — are you; kamala-patra-akṣi — O beautiful woman with eyes like the petals of a lotus; kasya asi — with whom are you related; hṛdayam-game — O most beautiful one, pleasing to the heart; kim svit — what kind of business; cikīrṣitam — is being thought of; tatra — there; bhavatyāḥ — by you; nirjane — solitary; vane — in the forest.

Translation
O beautiful lotus-eyed woman, who are you? Whose daughter are you? What purpose do you have in this solitary forest? Why are you staying here?

Text 12
व्यक्तं राजन्यतनयां वेद्‍म्यहं त्वां सुमध्यमे ।
न हि चेत: पौरवाणामधर्मे रमते क्‍वचित् ॥ १२ ॥
vyaktaṁ rājanya-tanayāṁ
vedmy ahaṁ tvāṁ sumadhyame
na hi cetaḥ pauravāṇām
adharme ramate kvacit
Synonyms
vyaktam — it appears; rājanya-tanayām — the daughter of a kṣatriya; vedmi — can realize; aham — I; tvām — your good self; su-madhyame — O most beautiful; na — not; hi — indeed; cetaḥ — the mind; pauravāṇām — of persons who have taken birth in the Pūru dynasty; adharme — in irreligion; ramate — enjoys; kvacit — at any time.

Translation
O most beautiful one, it appears to my mind that you must be the daughter of a kṣatriya. Because I belong to the Pūru dynasty, my mind never endeavors to enjoy anything irreligiously.

Text 13
श्रीशकुन्तलोवाच
विश्वामित्रात्मजैवाहं त्यक्ता मेनकया वने ।
वेदैतद् भगवान् कण्वो वीर किं करवाम ते ॥ १३ ॥
śrī-śakuntalovāca
viśvāmitrātmajaivāhaṁ
tyaktā menakayā vane
vedaitad bhagavān kaṇvo
vīra kiṁ karavāma te
Synonyms
śrī-śakuntalā uvāca — Śrī Śakuntalā replied; viśvāmitra-ātmajā — the daughter of Viśvāmitra; eva — indeed; aham — I (am); tyaktā — left; menakayā — by Menakā; vane — in the forest; veda — knows; etat — all these incidents; bhagavān — the most powerful saintly person; kaṇvaḥ — Kaṇva Muni; vīra — O hero; kim — what; karavāma — can I do; te — for you.

Translation
Śakuntalā said: I am the daughter of Viśvāmitra. My mother, Menakā, left me in the forest. O hero, the most powerful saint Kaṇva Muni knows all about this. Now let me know, how may I serve you?

Text 14
आस्यतां ह्यरविन्दाक्ष गृह्यतामर्हणं च न: ।
भुज्यतां सन्ति नीवारा उष्यतां यदि रोचते ॥ १४ ॥
āsyatāṁ hy aravindākṣa
gṛhyatām arhaṇaṁ ca naḥ
bhujyatāṁ santi nīvārā
uṣyatāṁ yadi rocate
Synonyms
āsyatām — please come sit here; hi — indeed; aravinda-akṣa — O great hero with eyes like the petals of a lotus; gṛhyatām — please accept; arhaṇam — humble reception; ca — and; naḥ — our; bhujyatām — please eat; santi — what there is in stock; nīvārāḥ — nīvārā rice; uṣyatām — stay here; yadi — if; rocate — you so desire.

Translation
O King with eyes like the petals of a lotus, kindly come sit down and accept whatever reception we can offer. We have a supply of nīvārā rice that you may kindly take. And if you so desire, stay here without hesitation.

Text 15
श्रीदुष्मन्त उवाच
उपपन्नमिदं सुभ्रु जाताया: कुशिकान्वये ।
स्वयं हि वृणुते राज्ञां कन्यका: सद‍ृशं वरम् ॥ १५ ॥
śrī-duṣmanta uvāca
upapannam idaṁ subhru
jātāyāḥ kuśikānvaye
svayaṁ hi vṛṇute rājñāṁ
kanyakāḥ sadṛśaṁ varam
Synonyms
śrī-duṣmantaḥ uvāca — King Duṣmanta replied; upapannam — just befitting your position; idam — this; su-bhru — O Śakuntalā, with beautiful eyebrows; jātāyāḥ — because of your birth; kuśika-anvaye — in the family of Viśvāmitra; svayam — personally; hi — indeed; vṛṇute — select; rājñām — of a royal family; kanyakāḥ — daughters; sadṛśam — on an equal level; varam — husbands.

Translation
King Duṣmanta replied: O Śakuntalā, with beautiful eyebrows, you have taken your birth in the family of the great saint Viśvāmitra, and your reception is quite worthy of your family. Aside from this, the daughters of a king generally select their own husbands.

Text 16
ओमित्युक्ते यथाधर्ममुपयेमे शकुन्तलाम् ।
गान्धर्वविधिना राजा देशकालविधानवित् ॥ १६ ॥
om ity ukte yathā-dharmam
upayeme śakuntalām
gāndharva-vidhinā rājā
deśa-kāla-vidhānavit
Synonyms
om iti ukte — by reciting the Vedic praṇava, invoking the Supreme Personality of Godhead to witness the marriage; yathā-dharmam — exactly according to the principles of religion (because Nārāyaṇa becomes the witness in an ordinary religious marriage also); upayeme — he married; śakuntalām — the girl Śakuntalā; gāndharva-vidhinā — by the regulative principle of the Gandharvas, without deviation from religious principles; rājā — Mahārāja Duṣmanta; deśa-kāla-vidhāna-vit — completely aware of duties according to time, position and objective.

Translation
When Śakuntalā responded to Mahārāja Duṣmanta’s proposal with silence, the agreement was complete. Then the King, who knew the laws of marriage, immediately married her by chanting the Vedic praṇava [oṁkāra], in accordance with the marriage ceremony as performed among the Gandharvas.

Text 17
अमोघवीर्यो राजर्षिर्महिष्यां वीर्यमादधे ।
श्वोभूते स्वपुरं यात: कालेनासूत सा सुतम् ॥ १७ ॥
amogha-vīryo rājarṣir
mahiṣyāṁ vīryam ādadhe
śvo-bhūte sva-puraṁ yātaḥ
kālenāsūta sā sutam
Synonyms
amogha-vīryaḥ — a person who discharges semen without being baffled, or, in other words, who must beget a child; rāja-ṛṣiḥ — the saintly King Duṣmanta; mahiṣyām — into the Queen, Śakuntalā (after her marriage, Śakuntalā became the Queen); vīryam — semen; ādadhe — placed; śvaḥ-bhūte — in the morning; sva-puram — to his own place; yātaḥ — returned; kālena — in due course of time; asūta — gave birth; sā — she (Śakuntalā); sutam — to a son.

Translation
King Duṣmanta, who never discharged semen without a result, placed his semen at night in the womb of his Queen, Śakuntalā, and in the morning he returned to his palace. Thereafter, in due course of time, Śakuntalā gave birth to a son.

Text 18
कण्व: कुमारस्य वने चक्रे समुचिता: क्रिया: ।
बद्ध्वा मृगेन्द्रंतरसा क्रीडति स्म स बालक: ॥ १८ ॥
kaṇvaḥ kumārasya vane
cakre samucitāḥ kriyāḥ
baddhvā mṛgendraṁ tarasā
krīḍati sma sa bālakaḥ
Synonyms
kaṇvaḥ — Kaṇva Muni; kumārasya — of the son born of Śakuntalā; vane — in the forest; cakre — executed; samucitāḥ — prescribed; kriyāḥ — ritualistic ceremonies; baddhvā — capturing; mṛga-indram — a lion; tarasā — by force; krīḍati — playing; sma — in the past; saḥ — he; bālakaḥ — the child.

Translation
In the forest, Kaṇva Muni performed all the ritualistic ceremonies concerning the newborn child. Later, the boy became so powerful that he would capture a lion and play with it.

Text 19
तं दुरत्ययविक्रान्तमादाय प्रमदोत्तमा ।
हरेरंशांशसम्भूतं भर्तुरन्तिकमागमत् ॥ १९ ॥
taṁ duratyaya-vikrāntam
ādāya pramadottamā
harer aṁśāṁśa-sambhūtaṁ
bhartur antikam āgamat
Synonyms
tam — him; duratyaya-vikrāntam — whose strength was insurmountable; ādāya — taking with her; pramadā-uttamā — the best of women, Śakuntalā; hareḥ — of God; aṁśa-aṁśa-sambhūtam — a partial plenary incarnation; bhartuḥ antikam — unto her husband; āgamat — approached.

Translation
Śakuntalā, the best of beautiful women, along with her son, whose strength was insurmountable and who was a partial expansion of the Supreme Godhead, approached her husband, Duṣmanta.

Text 20
यदा न जगृहे राजा भार्यापुत्रावनिन्दितौ ।
श‍ृण्वतां सर्वभूतानां खे वागाहाशरीरिणी ॥ २० ॥
yadā na jagṛhe rājā
bhāryā-putrāv aninditau
śṛṇvatāṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
khe vāg āhāśarīriṇī
Synonyms
yadā — when; na — not; jagṛhe — accepted; rājā — the King (Duṣmanta); bhāryā-putrau — his real son and real wife; aninditau — not abominable, not accused by anyone; śṛṇvatām — while hearing; sarva-bhūtānām — all the people; khe — in the sky; vāk — a sound vibration; āha — declared; aśarīriṇī — without a body.

Translation
When the King refused to accept his wife and son, who were both irreproachable, an unembodied voice spoke from the sky as an omen and was heard by everyone present.

Text 21
माता भस्त्रा पितु: पुत्रो येन जात: स एव स: ।
भरस्व पुत्रं दुष्मन्त मावमंस्था: शकुन्तलाम् ॥ २१ ॥
mātā bhastrā pituḥ putro
yena jātaḥ sa eva saḥ
bharasva putraṁ duṣmanta
māvamaṁsthāḥ śakuntalām
Synonyms
mātā — the mother; bhastrā — just like the skin of a bellows containing air; pituḥ — of the father; putraḥ — the son; yena — by whom; jātaḥ — one is born; saḥ — the father; eva — indeed; saḥ — the son; bharasva — just maintain; putram — your son; duṣmanta — O Mahārāja Duṣmanta; mā — do not; avamaṁsthāḥ — insult; śakuntalām — Śakuntalā.

Translation
The voice said: O Mahārāja Duṣmanta, a son actually belongs to his father, whereas the mother is only a container, like the skin of a bellows. According to Vedic injunctions, the father is born as the son. Therefore, maintain your own son and do not insult Śakuntalā.

Text 22
रेतोधा: पुत्रो नयति नरदेव यमक्षयात् ।
त्वं चास्य धाता गर्भस्य सत्यमाह शकुन्तला ॥ २२ ॥
reto-dhāḥ putro nayati
naradeva yama-kṣayāt
tvaṁ cāsya dhātā garbhasya
satyam āha śakuntalā
Synonyms
retaḥ-dhāḥ — a person who discharges semen; putraḥ — the son; nayati — saves; nara-deva — O King (Mahārāja Duṣmanta); yama-kṣayāt — from punishment by Yamarāja, or from the custody of Yamarāja; tvam — your good self; ca — and; asya — of this child; dhātā — the creator; garbhasya — of the embryo; satyam — truthfully; āha — said; śakuntalā — your wife, Śakuntalā.

Translation
O King Duṣmanta, he who discharges semen is the actual father, and his son saves him from the custody of Yamarāja. You are the actual procreator of this child. Indeed, Śakuntalā is speaking the truth.

Text 23
पितर्युपरते सोऽपि चक्रवर्ती
महायशा: ।
महिमा
गीयते तस्य हरेरंशभुवो भुवि ॥ २३ ॥
pitary uparate so ’pi
cakravartī mahā-yaśāḥ
mahimā gīyate tasya
harer aṁśa-bhuvo bhuvi
Synonyms
pitari — after his father; uparate — passed away; saḥ — the King’s son; api — also; cakravartī — the emperor; mahā-yaśāḥ — very famous; mahimā — glories; gīyate — are glorified; tasya — his; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aṁśa-bhuvaḥ — a partial representation; bhuvi — upon this earth.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When Mahārāja Duṣmanta passed away from this earth, his son became the emperor of the world, the proprietor of the seven islands. He is referred to as a partial representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in this world.

Texts 24-26
चक्रं दक्षिणहस्तेऽस्य पद्मकोशोऽस्य पादयो: ।
ईजे महाभिषेकेण सोऽभिषिक्तोऽधिराड् विभु: ॥ २४ ॥
पञ्चपञ्चाशता मेध्यैर्गङ्गायामनु वाजिभि: ।
मामतेयं पुरोधाय यमुनामनु च प्रभु: ॥ २५ ॥
अष्टसप्ततिमेध्याश्वान् बबन्ध प्रददद् वसु ।
भरतस्य हि दौष्मन्तेरग्नि: साचीगुणे चित: ।
सहस्रं बद्वशो यस्मिन् ब्राह्मणा गा विभेजिरे ॥ २६ ॥
cakraṁ dakṣiṇa-haste ’sya
padma-kośo ’sya pādayoḥ
īje mahābhiṣekeṇa
so ’bhiṣikto ’dhirāḍ vibhuḥ
pañca-pañcāśatā medhyair
gaṅgāyām anu vājibhiḥ
māmateyaṁ purodhāya
yamunām anu ca prabhuḥ
aṣṭa-saptati-medhyāśvān
babandha pradadad vasu
bharatasya hi dauṣmanter
agniḥ sācī-guṇe citaḥ
sahasraṁ badvaśo yasmin
brāhmaṇā gā vibhejire
Synonyms
cakram — the mark of Kṛṣṇa’s disc; dakṣiṇa-haste — on the palm of the right hand; asya — of him (Bharata); padma-kośaḥ — the mark of the whorl of a lotus; asya — of him; pādayoḥ — on the soles of the feet; īje — worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahā-abhiṣekeṇa — by a grand Vedic ritualistic ceremony; saḥ — he (Mahārāja Bharata); abhiṣiktaḥ — being promoted; adhirāṭ — to the topmost position of a ruler; vibhuḥ — the master of everything; pañca-pañcāśatā — fifty-five; medhyaiḥ — fit for sacrifices; gaṅgāyām anu — from the mouth of the Ganges to the source; vājibhiḥ — with horses; māmateyam — the great sage Bhṛgu; purodhāya — making him the great priest; yamunām — on the bank of the Yamunā; anu — in regular order; ca — also; prabhuḥ — the supreme master, Mahārāja Bharata; aṣṭa-saptati — seventy-eight; medhya-aśvān — horses fit for sacrifice; babandha — he bound; pradadat — gave in charity; vasu — riches; bharatasya — of Mahārāja Bharata; hi — indeed; dauṣmanteḥ — the son of Mahārāja Duṣmanta; agniḥ — the sacrificial fire; sācī-guṇe — on an excellent site; citaḥ — established; sahasram — thousands; badvaśaḥ — by the number of one badva (one badva equals 13,084); yasmin — in which sacrifices; brāhmaṇāḥ — all the brāhmaṇas present; gāḥ — the cows; vibhejire — received their respective share.

Translation
Mahārāja Bharata, the son of Duṣmanta, had the mark of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s disc on the palm of his right hand, and he had the mark of a lotus whorl on the soles of his feet. By worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead with a grand ritualistic ceremony, he became the emperor and master of the entire world. Then, under the priesthood of Māmateya, Bhṛgu Muni, he performed fifty-five horse sacrifices on the bank of the Ganges, beginning from its mouth and ending at its source, and seventy-eight horse sacrifices on the bank of the Yamunā, beginning from the confluence at Prayāga and ending at the source. He established the sacrificial fire on an excellent site, and he distributed great wealth to the brāhmaṇas. Indeed, he distributed so many cows that each of thousands of brāhmaṇas had one badva [13,084] as his share.

Text 27
त्रयस्त्रिंशच्छतं ह्यश्वान्बद्ध्वा विस्मापयन् नृपान् ।
दौष्मन्तिरत्यगान्मायां देवानां गुरुमाययौ ॥ २७ ॥
trayas-triṁśac-chataṁ hy aśvān
baddhvā vismāpayan nṛpān
dauṣmantir atyagān māyāṁ
devānāṁ gurum āyayau
Synonyms
trayaḥ — three; triṁśat — thirty; śatam — hundred; hi — indeed; aśvān — horses; baddhvā — arresting in the yajña; vismāpayan — astonishing; nṛpān — all other kings; dauṣmantiḥ — the son of Mahārāja Duṣmanta; atyagāt — surpassed; māyām — material opulences; devānām — of the demigods; gurum — the supreme spiritual master; āyayau — achieved.

Translation
Bharata, the son of Mahārāja Duṣmanta, bound thirty-three hundred horses for those sacrifices, and thus he astonished all other kings. He surpassed even the opulence of the demigods, for he achieved the supreme spiritual master, Hari.

Text 28
मृगाञ्छुक्लदत: कृष्णान् हिरण्येन परीवृतान् ।
अदात् कर्मणि मष्णारे नियुतानि चतुर्दश ॥ २८ ॥
mṛgāñ chukla-dataḥ kṛṣṇān
hiraṇyena parīvṛtān
adāt karmaṇi maṣṇāre
niyutāni caturdaśa
Synonyms
mṛgān — first-class elephants; śukla-dataḥ — with very white tusks; kṛṣṇān — with black bodies; hiraṇyena — with gold ornaments; parīvṛtān — completely covered; adāt — give in charity; karmaṇi — in the sacrifice; maṣṇāre — by the name Maṣṇāra, or in the place known as Maṣṇāra; niyutāni — lakhs (one lakh equals one hundred thousand); caturdaśa — fourteen.

Translation
When Mahārāja Bharata performed the sacrifice known as Maṣṇāra [or a sacrifice in the place known as Maṣṇāra], he gave in charity fourteen lakhs of excellent elephants with white tusks and black bodies, completely covered with golden ornaments.

Text 29
भरतस्य महत् कर्म न पूर्वे नापरे नृपा: ।
नैवापुर्नैव प्राप्स्यन्ति बाहुभ्यां त्रिदिवं यथा ॥ २९ ॥
bharatasya mahat karma
na pūrve nāpare nṛpāḥ
naivāpur naiva prāpsyanti
bāhubhyāṁ tridivaṁ yathā
Synonyms
bharatasya — of Mahārāja Bharata, the son of Mahārāja Duṣmanta; mahat — very great, exalted; karma — activities; na — neither; pūrve — previously; na — nor; apare — after his time; nṛpāḥ — kings as a class; na — neither; eva — certainly; āpuḥ — attained; na — nor; eva — certainly; prāpsyanti — will get; bāhubhyām — by the strength of his arms; tri-divam — the heavenly planets; yathā — as.

Translation
As one cannot approach the heavenly planets simply by the strength of his arms (for who can touch the heavenly planets with his hands?), one cannot imitate the wonderful activities of Mahārāja Bharata. No one could perform such activities in the past, nor will anyone be able to do so in the future.

Text 30
किरातहूणान् यवनान् पौण्ड्रान् कङ्कान् खशाञ्छकान् ।
अब्रह्मण्यनृपांश्चाहन् म्‍लेच्छान् दिग्विजयेऽखिलान् ॥ ३० ॥
kirāta-hūṇān yavanān
pauṇḍrān kaṅkān khaśāñ chakān
abrahmaṇya-nṛpāṁś cāhan
mlecchān dig-vijaye ’khilān
Synonyms
kirāta — the black people called Kirātas (mostly the Africans); hūṇān — the Huns, the tribes from the far north; yavanān — the meat-eaters; pauṇḍrān — the Pauṇḍras; kaṅkān — the Kaṅkas; khaśān — the Mongolians; śakān — the Śakas; abrahmaṇya — against the brahminical culture; nṛpān — kings; ca — and; ahan — he killed; mlecchān — such atheists, who had no respect for Vedic civilization; dik-vijaye — while conquering all directions; akhilān — all of them.

Translation
When Mahārāja Bharata was on tour, he defeated or killed all the Kirātas, Hūṇas, Yavanas, Pauṇḍras, Kaṅkas, Khaśas, Śakas and the kings who were opposed to the Vedic principles of brahminical culture.

Text 31
जित्वा पुरासुरा देवान् ये रसौकांसि भेजिरे ।
देवस्त्रियो रसां नीता: प्राणिभि: पुनराहरत् ॥ ३१ ॥
jitvā purāsurā devān
ye rasaukāṁsi bhejire
deva-striyo rasāṁ nītāḥ
prāṇibhiḥ punar āharat
Synonyms
jitvā — conquering; purā — formerly; asurāḥ — the demons; devān — the demigods; ye — all who; rasa-okāṁsi — in the lower planetary system known as Rasātala; bhejire — took shelter; deva-striyaḥ — the wives and daughters of the demigods; rasām — in the lower planetary system; nītāḥ — were brought; prāṇibhiḥ — with their own dear associates; punaḥ — again; āharat — brought back to their original places.

Translation
Formerly, after conquering the demigods, all the demons had taken shelter in the lower planetary system known as Rasātala and had brought all the wives and daughters of the demigods there also. Mahārāja Bharata, however, rescued all those women, along with their associates, from the clutches of the demons, and he returned them to the demigods.

Text 32
सर्वान्कामान् दुदुहतु: प्रजानां तस्य रोदसी ।
समास्त्रिणवसाहस्रीर्दिक्षु चक्रमवर्तयत् ॥ ३२ ॥
sarvān kāmān duduhatuḥ
prajānāṁ tasya rodasī
samās tri-ṇava-sāhasrīr
dikṣu cakram avartayat
Synonyms
sarvān kāmān — all necessities or desirable things; duduhatuḥ — fulfilled; prajānām — of the subjects; tasya — his; rodasī — this earth and the heavenly planets; samāḥ — years; tri-nava-sāhasrīḥ — three times nine thousand (that is, twenty-seven thousand); dikṣu — in all directions; cakram — soldiers or orders; avartayat — circulated.

Translation
Mahārāja Bharata provided all necessities for his subjects, both on this earth and in the heavenly planets, for twenty-seven thousand years. He circulated his orders and distributed his soldiers in all directions.

Text 33
स संराड्‍लोकपालाख्यमैश्वर्यमधिराट् श्रियम् ।
चक्रं चास्खलितं प्राणान् मृषेत्युपरराम ह ॥ ३३ ॥
sa saṁrāḍ loka-pālākhyam
aiśvaryam adhirāṭ śriyam
cakraṁ cāskhalitaṁ prāṇān
mṛṣety upararāma ha
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Mahārāja Bharata); saṁrāṭ — the emperor; loka-pāla-ākhyam — known as the ruler of all the lokas, or planets; aiśvaryam — such opulences; adhirāṭ — thoroughly in power; śriyam — kingdom; cakram — soldiers or orders; ca — and; askhalitam — without failure; prāṇān — life or sons and family; mṛṣā — all false; iti — thus; upararāma — ceased to enjoy; ha — in the past.

Translation
As the ruler of the entire universe, Emperor Bharata had the opulences of a great kingdom and unconquerable soldiers. His sons and family had seemed to him to be his entire life. But finally he thought of all this as an impediment to spiritual advancement, and therefore he ceased from enjoying it.

Text 34
तस्यासन् नृप वैदर्भ्य: पत्‍न्यस्तिस्र: सुसम्मता: ।
जघ्नुस्त्यागभयात् पुत्रान् नानुरूपा इतीरिते ॥ ३४ ॥
tasyāsan nṛpa vaidarbhyaḥ
patnyas tisraḥ susammatāḥ
jaghnus tyāga-bhayāt putrān
nānurūpā itīrite
Synonyms
tasya — of him (Mahārāja Bharata); āsan — there were; nṛpa — O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); vaidarbhyaḥ — daughters of Vidarbha; patnyaḥ — wives; tisraḥ — three; su-sammatāḥ — very pleasing and suitable; jaghnuḥ — killed; tyāga-bhayāt — fearing rejection; putrān — their sons; na anurūpāḥ — not exactly like the father; iti — like this; īrite — considering.

Translation
O King Parīkṣit, Mahārāja Bharata had three pleasing wives, who were daughters of the King of Vidarbha. When all three of them bore children who did not resemble the King, these wives thought that he would consider them unfaithful queens and reject them, and therefore they killed their own sons.

Text 35
तस्यैवं वितथे वंशे तदर्थं यजत: सुतम् ।
मरुत्स्तोमेन मरुतो भरद्वाजमुपाददु: ॥ ३५ ॥
tasyaivaṁ vitathe vaṁśe
tad-arthaṁ yajataḥ sutam
marut-stomena maruto
bharadvājam upādaduḥ
Synonyms
tasya — his (Mahārāja Bharata’s); evam — thus; vitathe — being baffled; vaṁśe — in generating progeny; tat-artham — to get sons; yajataḥ — performing sacrifices; sutam — a son; marut-stomena — by performing a marut-stoma sacrifice; marutaḥ — the demigods named the Maruts; bharadvājam — Bharadvāja; upādaduḥ — presented.

Translation
The King, his attempt for progeny frustrated in this way, performed a sacrifice named marut-stoma to get a son. The demigods known as the Maruts, being fully satisfied with him, then presented him a son named Bharadvāja.

Text 36
अन्तर्वत्‍न्यां भ्रातृपत्‍न्यां मैथुनाय बृहस्पति: ।
प्रवृत्तो वारितो गर्भं शप्‍त्वा वीर्यमुपासृजत् ॥ ३६ ॥
antarvatnyāṁ bhrātṛ-patnyāṁ
maithunāya bṛhaspatiḥ
pravṛtto vārito garbhaṁ
śaptvā vīryam upāsṛjat
Synonyms
antaḥ-vatnyām — pregnant; bhrātṛ-patnyām — with the brother’s wife; maithunāya — desiring sexual enjoyment; bṛhaspatiḥ — the demigod named Bṛhaspati; pravṛttaḥ — so inclined; vāritaḥ — when forbidden to do so; garbham — the son within the abdomen; śaptvā — by cursing; vīryam — semen; upāsṛjat — discharged.

Translation
When the demigod named Bṛhaspati was attracted by his brother’s wife, Mamatā, who at that time was pregnant, he desired to have sexual relations with her. The son within her womb forbade this, but Bṛhaspati cursed him and forcibly discharged semen into the womb of Mamatā.

Text 37
तं त्यक्तुकामां ममतां भर्तुस्त्यागविशङ्किताम् ।
नामनिर्वाचनं तस्य श्लोकमेनं सुरा जगु: ॥ ३७ ॥
taṁ tyaktu-kāmāṁ mamatāṁ
bhartus tyāga-viśaṅkitām
nāma-nirvācanaṁ tasya
ślokam enaṁ surā jaguḥ
Synonyms
tam — that newly born baby; tyaktu-kāmām — who was trying to avoid; mamatām — unto Mamatā; bhartuḥ tyāga-viśaṅkitām — very much afraid of being forsaken by her husband because of giving birth to an illegitimate son; nāma-nirvācanam — a name-giving ceremony, or nāma-karaṇa; tasya — to the child; ślokam — verse; enam — this; surāḥ — the demigods; jaguḥ — enunciated.

Translation
Mamatā very much feared being forsaken by her husband for giving birth to an illegitimate son, and therefore she considered giving up the child. But then the demigods solved the problem by enunciating a name for the child.

Text 38
मूढे भर द्वाजमिमं भर द्वाजं बृहस्पते ।
यातौ यदुक्त्वा पितरौ भरद्वाजस्ततस्त्वयम् ॥ ३८ ॥
mūḍhe bhara dvājam imaṁ
bhara dvājaṁ bṛhaspate
yātau yad uktvā pitarau
bharadvājas tatas tv ayam
Synonyms
mūḍhe — O foolish woman; bhara — just maintain; dvājam — although born by an illicit connection between two; imam — this child; bhara — maintain; dvājam — although born by an illicit connection between two; bṛhaspate — O Bṛhaspati; yātau — left; yat — because; uktvā — having said; pitarau — both the father and mother; bharadvājaḥ — by the name Bharadvāja; tataḥ — thereafter; tu — indeed; ayam — this child.

Translation
Bṛhaspati said to Mamatā, “You foolish woman, although this child was born from the wife of one man through the semen discharged by another, you should maintain him.” Upon hearing this, Mamatā replied, “O Bṛhaspati, you maintain him!” After speaking in this way, Bṛhaspati and Mamatā both left. Thus the child was known as Bharadvāja.

Text 39
चोद्यमाना सुरैरेवं मत्वा वितथमात्मजम् ।
व्यसृजन् मरुतोऽबिभ्रन् दत्तोऽयं वितथेऽन्वये ॥ ३९ ॥
codyamānā surair evaṁ
matvā vitatham ātmajam
vyasṛjan maruto ’bibhran
datto ’yaṁ vitathe ’nvaye
Synonyms
codyamānā — although Mamatā was encouraged (to maintain the child); suraiḥ — by the demigods; evam — in this way; matvā — considering; vitatham — purposeless; ātmajam — her own child; vyasṛjat — rejected; marutaḥ — the demigods known as the Maruts; abibhran — maintained (the child); dattaḥ — the same child was given; ayam — this; vitathe — was disappointed; anvaye — when the dynasty of Mahārāja Bharata.

Translation
Although encouraged by the demigods to maintain the child, Mamatā considered him useless because of his illicit birth, and therefore she left him. Consequently, the demigods known as the Maruts maintained the child, and when Mahārāja Bharata was disappointed for want of a child, this child was given to him as his son.