Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
नाभागो नभगापत्यं यं ततं भ्रातर: कविम् ।
यविष्ठं व्यभजन् दायं ब्रह्मचारिणमागतम् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
nābhāgo nabhagāpatyaṁ
yaṁ tataṁ bhrātaraḥ kavim
yaviṣṭhaṁ vyabhajan dāyaṁ
brahmacāriṇam āgatam
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; nābhāgaḥ — Nābhāga; nabhaga-apatyam — was the son of Mahārāja Nabhaga; yam — unto whom; tatam — the father; bhrātaraḥ — the elder brothers; kavim — the learned; yaviṣṭham — the youngest; vyabhajan — divided; dāyam — the property; brahmacāriṇam — having accepted the life of a brahmacārī perpetually (naiṣṭhika); āgatam — returned.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: The son of Nabhaga named Nābhāga lived for a long time at the place of his spiritual master. Therefore, his brothers thought that he was not going to become a gṛhastha and would not return. Consequently, without providing a share for him, they divided the property of their father among themselves. When Nābhāga returned from the place of his spiritual master, they gave him their father as his share.

Text 2
भ्रातरोऽभाङ्क्त किं मह्यं भजाम पितरं तव ।
त्वां ममार्यास्तताभाङ्‍क्षुर्मा पुत्रक तदाद‍ृथा: ॥ २ ॥
bhrātaro ’bhāṅkta kiṁ mahyaṁ
bhajāma pitaraṁ tava
tvāṁ mamāryās tatābhāṅkṣur
mā putraka tad ādṛthāḥ
Synonyms
bhrātaraḥ — O my brothers; abhāṅkta — have you given as the share of our father’s property; kim — what; mahyam — unto me; bhajāma — we allot; pitaram — the father himself; tava — as your share; tvām — you; mama — unto me; āryāḥ — my elder brothers; tata — O my father; abhāṅkṣuḥ — have given the share; mā — do not; putraka — O my dear son; tat — to this statement; ādṛthāḥ — give any importance.

Translation
Nābhāga inquired, “My dear brothers, what have you given to me as my share of our father’s property?” His elder brothers answered, “We have kept our father as your share.” But when Nābhāga went to his father and said, “My dear father, my elder brothers have given you as my share of property,” the father replied, “My dear son, do not rely upon their cheating words. I am not your property.”

Text 3
इमे अङ्गिरस: सत्रमासतेऽद्य सुमेधस: ।
षष्ठं षष्ठमुपेत्याह: कवे मुह्यन्ति कर्मणि ॥ ३ ॥
ime aṅgirasaḥ satram
āsate ’dya sumedhasaḥ
ṣaṣṭhaṁ ṣaṣṭham upetyāhaḥ
kave muhyanti karmaṇi
Synonyms
ime — all these; aṅgirasaḥ — descendants of the dynasty of Aṅgirā; satram — sacrifice; āsate — are performing; adya — today; sumedhasaḥ — who are all very intelligent; ṣaṣṭham — sixth; ṣaṣṭham — sixth; upetya — after achieving; ahaḥ — day; kave — O best of learned men; muhyanti — become bewildered; karmaṇi — in discharging fruitive activities.

Translation
Nābhāga’s father said: All the descendants of Aṅgirā are now going to perform a great sacrifice, but although they are very intelligent, on every sixth day they will be bewildered in performing sacrifice and will make mistakes in their daily duties.

Texts 4-5
तांस्त्वं शंसय सूक्ते द्वे वैश्वदेवे महात्मन: ।
ते स्वर्यन्तो धनं सत्रपरिशेषितमात्मन: ॥ ४ ॥
दास्यन्ति तेऽथ तान्गच्छ तथा स कृतवान् यथा ।
तस्मै दत्त्वा ययु: स्वर्गं ते सत्रपरिशेषणम् ॥ ५ ॥
tāṁs tvaṁ śaṁsaya sūkte dve
vaiśvadeve mahātmanaḥ
te svar yanto dhanaṁ satra-
pariśeṣitam ātmanaḥ
dāsyanti te ’tha tān arccha
tathā sa kṛtavān yathā
tasmai dattvā yayuḥ svargaṁ
te satra-pariśeṣaṇam
Synonyms
tān — to all of them; tvam — yourself; śaṁsaya — describe; sūkte — Vedic hymns; dve — two; vaiśvadeve — in connection with Vaiśvadeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahātmanaḥ — to all of those great souls; te — they; svaḥ yantaḥ — while going to their respective destinations in the heavenly planets; dhanam — the wealth; satra-pariśeṣitam — which remains after the end of the yajña; ātmanaḥ — their own property; dāsyanti — will deliver; te — unto you; atha — therefore; tān — to them; arccha — go there; tathā — in that way (according to his father’s orders); saḥ — he (Nābhāga); kṛtavān — executed; yathā — as advised by his father; tasmai — unto him; dattvā — after giving; yayuḥ — went; svargam — to the heavenly planets; te — all of them; satra-pariśeṣaṇam — remnants of yajña.

Translation
Nābhāga’s father continued: “Go to those great souls and describe two Vedic hymns pertaining to Vaiśvadeva. When the great sages have completed the sacrifice and are going to the heavenly planets, they will give you the remnants of the money they have received from the sacrifice. Therefore, go there immediately.” Thus Nābhāga acted exactly according to the advice of his father, and the great sages of the Aṅgirā dynasty gave him all their wealth and then went to the heavenly planets.

Text 6
तं कश्चित् स्वीकरिष्यन्तं पुरुष: कृष्णदर्शन: ।
उवाचोत्तरतोऽभ्येत्य ममेदं वास्तुकं वसु ॥ ६ ॥
taṁ kaścit svīkariṣyantaṁ
puruṣaḥ kṛṣṇa-darśanaḥ
uvācottarato ’bhyetya
mamedaṁ vāstukaṁ vasu
Synonyms
tam — unto Nābhāga; kaścit — someone; svīkariṣyantam — while accepting the riches given by the great sages; puruṣaḥ — a person; kṛṣṇa-darśanaḥ — black-looking; uvāca — said; uttarataḥ — from the north; abhyetya — coming; mama — my; idam — these; vāstukam — remnants of the sacrifice; vasu — all the riches.

Translation
Thereafter, while Nābhāga was accepting the riches, a black-looking person from the north came to him and said, “All the wealth from this sacrificial arena belongs to me.”

Text 7
ममेदमृषिभिर्दत्तमिति तर्हि स्म मानव: ।
स्यान्नौ ते पितरि प्रश्न‍: पृष्टवान् पितरं यथा ॥ ७ ॥
mamedam ṛṣibhir dattam
iti tarhi sma mānavaḥ
syān nau te pitari praśnaḥ
pṛṣṭavān pitaraṁ yathā
Synonyms
mama — my; idam — all these; ṛṣibhiḥ — by the great saintly persons; dattam — have been delivered; iti — thus; tarhi — therefore; sma — indeed; mānavaḥ — Nābhāga; syāt — let there be; nau — of ourselves; te — your; pitari — unto the father; praśnaḥ — an inquiry; pṛṣṭavān — he also inquired; pitaram — from his father; yathā — as requested.

Translation
Nābhāga then said, “These riches belong to me. The great saintly persons have delivered them to me.” When Nābhāga said this, the black-looking person replied, “Let us go to your father and ask him to settle our disagreement.” In accordance with this, Nābhāga inquired from his father.

Text 8
यज्ञवास्तुगतं सर्वमुच्छिष्टमृषय: क्‍वचित् ।
चक्रुर्हि भागं रुद्राय स देव: सर्वमर्हति ॥ ८ ॥
yajña-vāstu-gataṁ sarvam
ucchiṣṭam ṛṣayaḥ kvacit
cakrur hi bhāgaṁ rudrāya
sa devaḥ sarvam arhati
Synonyms
yajña-vāstu-gatam — things belonging to the sacrificial arena; sarvam — everything; ucchiṣṭam — remnants; ṛṣayaḥ — the great sages; kvacit — sometimes, in the Dakṣa-yajña; cakruḥ — did so; hi — indeed; bhāgam — share; rudrāya — unto Lord Śiva; saḥ — that; devaḥ — demigod; sarvam — everything; arhati — deserves.

Translation
The father of Nābhāga said: Whatever the great sages sacrificed in the arena of the Dakṣa-yajña, they offered to Lord Śiva as his share. Therefore, everything in the sacrificial arena certainly belongs to Lord Śiva.

Text 9
नाभागस्तं प्रणम्याह तवेश किल वास्तुकम् ।
इत्याह मे पिता ब्रह्मञ्छिरसा त्वां प्रसादये ॥ ९ ॥
nābhāgas taṁ praṇamyāha
taveśa kila vāstukam
ity āha me pitā brahmañ
chirasā tvāṁ prasādaye
Synonyms
nābhāgaḥ — Nābhāga; tam — unto him (Lord Śiva); praṇamya — offering obeisances; āha — said; tava — yours; īśa — O lord; kila — certainly; vāstukam — everything in the arena of sacrifice; iti — thus; āha — said; me — my; pitā — father; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; śirasā — bowing my head; tvām — unto you; prasādaye — I am begging your mercy.

Translation
Thereupon, after offering obeisances to Lord Śiva, Nābhāga said: O worshipable lord, everything in this arena of sacrifice is yours. This is the assertion of my father. Now, with great respect, I bow my head before you, begging your mercy.

Text 10
यत् ते पितावदद् धर्मं त्वं च सत्यं प्रभाषसे ।
ददामि ते मन्त्रद‍ृशो ज्ञानं ब्रह्म सनातनम् ॥ १० ॥
yat te pitāvadad dharmaṁ
tvaṁ ca satyaṁ prabhāṣase
dadāmi te mantra-dṛśo
jñānaṁ brahma sanātanam
Synonyms
yat — whatever; te — your; pitā — father; avadat — explained; dharmam — truth; tvam ca — you also; satyam — truth; prabhāṣase — are speaking; dadāmi — I shall give; te — unto you; mantra-dṛśaḥ — who know the science of mantra; jñānam — knowledge; brahma — transcendental; sanātanam — eternal.

Translation
Lord Śiva said: Whatever your father has said is the truth, and you also are speaking the same truth. Therefore, I, who know the Vedic mantras, shall explain transcendental knowledge to you.

Text 11
गृहाण द्रविणं दत्तं मत्सत्रपरिशेषितम् ।
इत्युक्त्वान्तर्हितो रुद्रो भगवान् धर्मवत्सल: ॥ ११ ॥
gṛhāṇa draviṇaṁ dattaṁ
mat-satra-pariśeṣitam
ity uktvāntarhito rudro
bhagavān dharma-vatsalaḥ
Synonyms
gṛhāṇa — please take now; draviṇam — all the wealth; dattam — is given (to you by me); mat-satra-pariśeṣitam — the remnants of the sacrifice executed on my behalf; iti uktvā — after speaking like this; antarhitaḥ — disappeared; rudraḥ — Lord Śiva; bhagavān — the most powerful demigod; dharma-vatsalaḥ — adherent to the principles of religion.

Translation
Lord Śiva said, “Now you may take all the wealth remaining from the sacrifice, for I give it to you.” After saying this, Lord Śiva, who is most adherent to the religious principles, disappeared from that place.

Text 12
य एतत् संस्मरेत् प्रात: सायं च सुसमाहित: ।
कविर्भवति मन्त्रज्ञो गतिं चैव तथात्मन: ॥ १२ ॥
ya etat saṁsmaret prātaḥ
sāyaṁ ca susamāhitaḥ
kavir bhavati mantra-jño
gatiṁ caiva tathātmanaḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — anyone who; etat — about this incident; saṁsmaret — may remember; prātaḥ — in the morning; sāyam ca — and in the evening; susamāhitaḥ — with great attention; kaviḥ — learned; bhavati — becomes; mantra-jñaḥ — well aware of all Vedic mantras; gatim — the destination; ca — also; eva — indeed; tathā ātmanaḥ — like that of the self-realized soul.

Translation
If one hears and chants or remembers this narration in the morning and evening with great attention, he certainly becomes learned, experienced in understanding the Vedic hymns, and expert in self-realization.

Text 13
नाभागादम्बरीषोऽभून्महाभागवत: कृती ।
नास्पृशद् ब्रह्मशापोऽपि यं न प्रतिहत: क्‍वचित् ॥ १३ ॥
nābhāgād ambarīṣo ’bhūn
mahā-bhāgavataḥ kṛtī
nāspṛśad brahma-śāpo ’pi
yaṁ na pratihataḥ kvacit
Synonyms
nābhāgāt — from Nābhāga; ambarīṣaḥ — Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; abhūt — took birth; mahā-bhāgavataḥ — the most exalted devotee; kṛtī — very celebrated; na aspṛśat — could not touch; brahma-śāpaḥ api — even the curse of a brāhmaṇa; yam — unto whom (Ambarīṣa Mahārāja); na — neither; pratihataḥ — failed; kvacit — at any time.

Translation
From Nābhāga, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa took birth. Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was an exalted devotee, celebrated for his great merits. Although he was cursed by an infallible brāhmaṇa, the curse could not touch him.

Text 14
श्रीराजोवाच
भगवञ्छ्रोतुमिच्छामि राजर्षेस्तस्य धीमत: ।
न प्राभूद् यत्र निर्मुक्तो ब्रह्मदण्डो दुरत्यय: ॥ १४ ॥
śrī-rājovāca
bhagavañ chrotum icchāmi
rājarṣes tasya dhīmataḥ
na prābhūd yatra nirmukto
brahma-daṇḍo duratyayaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-rājā uvāca — King Parīkṣit inquired; bhagavan — O great brāhmaṇa; śrotum icchāmi — I wish to hear (from you); rājarṣeḥ — of the great King Ambarīṣa; tasya — of him; dhīmataḥ — who was such a greatly sober personality; na — not; prābhūt — could act; yatra — upon whom (Mahārāja Ambarīṣa); nirmuktaḥ — being released; brahma-daṇḍaḥ — the curse of a brāhmaṇa; duratyayaḥ — which is insurmountable.

Translation
King Parīkṣit inquired: O great personality, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was certainly most exalted and meritorious in character. I wish to hear about him. How surprising it is that the curse of a brāhmaṇa, which is insurmountable, could not act upon him.

Texts 15-16
श्रीशुक उवाच
अम्बरीषो महाभाग: सप्तद्वीपवतीं महीम् ।
अव्ययां च श्रियं लब्ध्वा विभवं चातुलं भुवि ॥ १५ ॥
मेनेऽतिदुर्लभं पुंसां सर्वं तत् स्वप्नसंस्तुतम् ।
विद्वान् विभवनिर्वाणं तमो विशति यत् पुमान् ॥ १६ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
ambarīṣo mahā-bhāgaḥ
sapta-dvīpavatīṁ mahīm
avyayāṁ ca śriyaṁ labdhvā
vibhavaṁ cātulaṁ bhuvi
mene ’tidurlabhaṁ puṁsāṁ
sarvaṁ tat svapna-saṁstutam
vidvān vibhava-nirvāṇaṁ
tamo viśati yat pumān
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ambarīṣaḥ — King Ambarīṣa; mahā-bhāgaḥ — the greatly fortunate king; sapta-dvīpavatīm — consisting of seven islands; mahīm — the whole world; avyayām ca — and inexhaustible; śriyam — beauty; labdhvā — after achieving; vibhavam ca — and opulences; atulam — unlimited; bhuvi — in this earth; mene — he decided; ati-durlabham — which is rarely obtained; puṁsām — of many persons; sarvam — everything (he had obtained); tat — that which; svapna-saṁstutam — as if imagined in a dream; vidvān — completely understanding; vibhava-nirvāṇam — the annihilation of that opulence; tamaḥ — ignorance; viśati — fallen into; yat — because of which; pumān — a person.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, the most fortunate personality, achieved the rule of the entire world, consisting of seven islands, and achieved inexhaustible, unlimited opulence and prosperity on earth. Although such a position is rarely obtained, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa did not care for it at all, for he knew very well that all such opulence is material. Like that which is imagined in a dream, such opulence will ultimately be destroyed. The King knew that any nondevotee who attains such opulence merges increasingly into material nature’s mode of darkness.

Text 17
वासुदेवे भगवति तद्भक्तेषु च साधुषु ।
प्राप्तो भावं परं विश्वं येनेदं लोष्ट्रवत् स्मृतम् ॥ १७ ॥
vāsudeve bhagavati
tad-bhakteṣu ca sādhuṣu
prāpto bhāvaṁ paraṁ viśvaṁ
yenedaṁ loṣṭravat smṛtam
Synonyms
vāsudeve — unto the all-pervading Supreme Personality; bhagavati — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat-bhakteṣu — unto His devotees; ca — also; sādhuṣu — unto the saintly persons; prāptaḥ — one who has achieved; bhāvam — reverence and devotion; param — transcendental; viśvam — the whole material universe; yena — by which (spiritual consciousness); idam — this; loṣṭra-vat — as insignificant as a piece of stone; smṛtam — is accepted (by such devotees).

Translation
Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was a great devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, and of the saintly persons who are the Lord’s devotees. Because of this devotion, he thought of the entire universe as being as insignificant as a piece of stone.

Texts 18-20
स वै मन: कृष्णपदारविन्दयो-
र्वचांसि वैकुण्ठगुणानुवर्णने ।
करौ हरेर्मन्दिरमार्जनादिषु
श्रुतिं चकाराच्युतसत्कथोदये ॥ १८ ॥
मुकुन्दलिङ्गालयदर्शने द‍ृशौ
तद्भृत्यगात्रस्पर्शेऽङ्गसङ्गमम् ।
घ्राणं च तत्पादसरोजसौरभे
श्रीमत्तुलस्या रसनां तदर्पिते ॥ १९ ॥
पादौ हरे: क्षेत्रपदानुसर्पणे
शिरो हृषीकेशपदाभिवन्दने ।
कामं च दास्ये न तु कामकाम्यया
यथोत्तमश्लोकजनाश्रया रति: ॥ २० ॥
sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor
vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane
karau harer mandira-mārjanādiṣu
śrutiṁ cakārācyuta-sat-kathodaye
mukunda-liṅgālaya-darśane dṛśau
tad-bhṛtya-gātra-sparśe ’ṅga-saṅgamam
ghrāṇaṁ ca tat-pāda-saroja-saurabhe
śrīmat-tulasyā rasanāṁ tad-arpite
pādau hareḥ kṣetra-padānusarpaṇe
śiro hṛṣīkeśa-padābhivandane
kāmaṁ ca dāsye na tu kāma-kāmyayā
yathottamaśloka-janāśrayā ratiḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Mahārāja Ambarīṣa); vai — indeed; manaḥ — his mind; kṛṣṇa-pada-aravindayoḥ — (fixed) upon the two lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa; vacāṁsi — his words; vaikuṇṭha-guṇa-anuvarṇane — describing the glories of Kṛṣṇa; karau — his two hands; hareḥ mandira-mārjana-ādiṣu — in activities like cleansing the temple of Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śrutim — his ear; cakāra — engaged; acyuta — of or about Kṛṣṇa, who never falls down; sat-kathā-udaye — in hearing the transcendental narrations; mukunda-liṅga-ālaya-darśane — in seeing the Deity and temples and holy dhāmas of Mukunda; dṛśau — his two eyes; tat-bhṛtya — of the servants of Kṛṣṇa; gātra-sparśe — in touching the bodies; aṅga-saṅgamam — contact of his body; ghrāṇam ca — and his sense of smell; tat-pāda — of His lotus feet; saroja — of the lotus flower; saurabhe — in (smelling) the fragrance; śrīmat-tulasyāḥ — of the tulasī leaves; rasanām — his tongue; tat-arpite — in the prasāda offered to the Lord; pādau — his two legs; hareḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; kṣetra — holy places like the temple or Vṛndāvana and Dvārakā; pada-anusarpaṇe — walking to those places; śiraḥ — the head; hṛṣīkeśa — of Kṛṣṇa, the master of the senses; pada-abhivandane — in offering obeisances to the lotus feet; kāmam ca — and his desires; dāsye — in being engaged as a servant; na — not; tu — indeed; kāma-kāmyayā — with a desire for sense gratification; yathā — as; uttamaśloka-jana-āśrayā — if one takes shelter of a devotee such as Prahlāda; ratiḥ — attachment.

Translation
Mahārāja Ambarīṣa always engaged his mind in meditating upon the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, his words in describing the glories of the Lord, his hands in cleansing the Lord’s temple, and his ears in hearing the words spoken by Kṛṣṇa or about Kṛṣṇa. He engaged his eyes in seeing the Deity of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa’s temples and Kṛṣṇa’s places like Mathurā and Vṛndāvana, he engaged his sense of touch in touching the bodies of the Lord’s devotees, he engaged his sense of smell in smelling the fragrance of tulasī offered to the Lord, and he engaged his tongue in tasting the Lord’s prasāda. He engaged his legs in walking to the holy places and temples of the Lord, his head in bowing down before the Lord, and all his desires in serving the Lord, twenty-four hours a day. Indeed, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa never desired anything for his own sense gratification. He engaged all his senses in devotional service, in various engagements related to the Lord. This is the way to increase attachment for the Lord and be completely free from all material desires.

Text 21
एवं सदा कर्मकलापमात्मन:
परेऽधियज्ञे भगवत्यधोक्षजे ।
सर्वात्मभावं विदधन्महीमिमां
तन्निष्ठविप्राभिहित: शशास ह ॥ २१ ॥
evaṁ sadā karma-kalāpam ātmanaḥ
pare ’dhiyajñe bhagavaty adhokṣaje
sarvātma-bhāvaṁ vidadhan mahīm imāṁ
tan-niṣṭha-viprābhihitaḥ śaśāsa ha
Synonyms
evam — thus (living a devotional life); sadā — always; karma-kalāpam — the prescribed occupational duties as a kṣatriya king; ātmanaḥ — of himself, personally (the head of the state); pare — unto the supreme transcendence; adhiyajñe — unto the supreme proprietor, the supreme enjoyer; bhagavati — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhokṣaje — unto He who is beyond material sense perception; sarva-ātma-bhāvam — all different varieties of devotional service; vidadhat — executing, offering; mahīm — the planet earth; imām — this; tat-niṣṭha — who are faithful devotees of the Lord; vipra — by such brāhmaṇas; abhihitaḥ — directed; śaśāsa — ruled; ha — in the past.

Translation
In performing his prescribed duties as king, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa always offered the results of his royal activities to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, who is the enjoyer of everything and is beyond the perception of material senses. He certainly took advice from brāhmaṇas who were faithful devotees of the Lord, and thus he ruled the planet earth without difficulty.

Text 22
ईजेऽश्वमेधैरधियज्ञमीश्वरं
महाविभूत्योपचिताङ्गदक्षिणै: ।
ततैर्वसिष्ठासितगौतमादिभि-
र्धन्वन्यभिस्रोतमसौ सरस्वतीम् ॥ २२ ॥
īje ’śvamedhair adhiyajñam īśvaraṁ
mahā-vibhūtyopacitāṅga-dakṣiṇaiḥ
tatair vasiṣṭhāsita-gautamādibhir
dhanvany abhisrotam asau sarasvatīm
Synonyms
īje — worshiped; aśvamedhaiḥ — by performing the horse sacrifice yajñas; adhiyajñam — to satisfy the master of all yajñas; īśvaram — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahā-vibhūtyā — with great opulence; upacita-aṅga-dakṣiṇaiḥ — with all prescribed paraphernalia and contributions of dakṣiṇā to the brāhmaṇas; tataiḥ — executed; vasiṣṭha-asita-gautama-ādibhiḥ — by such brāhmaṇas as Vasiṣṭha, Asita and Gautama; dhanvani — in the desert; abhisrotam — inundated by the water of the river; asau — Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; sarasvatīm — on the bank of the Sarasvatī.

Translation
In desert countries where there flowed the river Sarasvatī, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa performed great sacrifices like the aśvamedha-yajña and thus satisfied the master of all yajñas, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such sacrifices were performed with great opulence and suitable paraphernalia and with contributions of dakṣiṇā to the brāhmaṇas, who were supervised by great personalities like Vasiṣṭha, Asita and Gautama, representing the king, the performer of the sacrifices.

Text 23
यस्य क्रतुषु गीर्वाणै: सदस्या ऋत्विजो जना: ।
तुल्यरूपाश्चानिमिषा व्यद‍ृश्यन्त सुवासस: ॥ २३ ॥
yasya kratuṣu gīrvāṇaiḥ
sadasyā ṛtvijo janāḥ
tulya-rūpāś cānimiṣā
vyadṛśyanta suvāsasaḥ
Synonyms
yasya — of whom (Mahārāja Ambarīṣa); kratuṣu — in sacrifices (performed by him); gīrvāṇaiḥ — with the demigods; sadasyāḥ — members for executing the sacrifice; ṛtvijaḥ — the priests; janāḥ — and other expert men; tulya-rūpāḥ — appearing exactly like; ca — and; animiṣāḥ — with unblinking eyes like those of the demigods; vyadṛśyanta — being seen; su-vāsasaḥ — well dressed with valuable garments.

Translation
In the sacrifice arranged by Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, the members of the assembly and the priests [especially hotā, udgātā, brahmā and adhvaryu] were gorgeously dressed, and they all looked exactly like demigods. They eagerly saw to the proper performance of the yajña.

Text 24
स्वर्गो न प्रार्थितो यस्य मनुजैरमरप्रिय: ।
श‍ृण्वद्भिरुपगायद्भिरुत्तमश्लोकचेष्टितम् ॥ २४ ॥
svargo na prārthito yasya
manujair amara-priyaḥ
śṛṇvadbhir upagāyadbhir
uttamaśloka-ceṣṭitam
Synonyms
svargaḥ — life in the heavenly planets; na — not; prārthitaḥ — a subject for aspiration; yasya — of whom (Ambarīṣa Mahārāja); manujaiḥ — by the citizens; amara-priyaḥ — very dear even to the demigods; śṛṇvadbhiḥ — who were accustomed to hear; upagāyadbhiḥ — and accustomed to chant; uttamaśloka — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ceṣṭitam — about the glorious activities.

Translation
The citizens of the state of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa were accustomed to chanting and hearing about the glorious activities of the Personality of Godhead. Thus they never aspired to be elevated to the heavenly planets, which are extremely dear even to the demigods.

Text 25
संवर्धयन्ति यत् कामा: स्वाराज्यपरिभाविता: ।
दुर्लभा नापि सिद्धानां मुकुन्दं हृदि पश्यत: ॥ २५ ॥
saṁvardhayanti yat kāmāḥ
svārājya-paribhāvitāḥ
durlabhā nāpi siddhānāṁ
mukundaṁ hṛdi paśyataḥ
Synonyms
saṁvardhayanti — increase happiness; yat — because; kāmāḥ — such aspirations; svā-rājya — situated in his own constitutional position of rendering service to the Lord; paribhāvitāḥ — saturated with such aspirations; durlabhāḥ — very rarely obtained; na — not; api — also; siddhānām — of the great mystics; mukundam — Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hṛdi — within the core of the heart; paśyataḥ — persons always accustomed to seeing Him.

Translation
Those who are saturated with the transcendental happiness of rendering service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead are uninterested even in the achievements of great mystics, for such achievements do not enhance the transcendental bliss felt by a devotee who always thinks of Kṛṣṇa within the core of his heart.

Text 26
स इत्थं भक्तियोगेन तपोयुक्तेन पार्थिव: ।
स्वधर्मेण हरिं प्रीणन् सर्वान् कामान्शनैर्जहौ ॥ २६ ॥
sa itthaṁ bhakti-yogena
tapo-yuktena pārthivaḥ
sva-dharmeṇa hariṁ prīṇan
sarvān kāmān śanair jahau
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Ambarīṣa Mahārāja); ittham — in this way; bhakti-yogena — by performing transcendental loving service to the Lord; tapaḥ-yuktena — which is simultaneously the best process of austerity; pārthivaḥ — the King; sva-dharmeṇa — by his constitutional activities; harim — unto the Supreme Lord; prīṇan — satisfying; sarvān — all varieties of; kāmān — material desires; śanaiḥ — gradually; jahau — gave up.

Translation
The king of this planet, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, thus performed devotional service to the Lord and in this endeavor practiced severe austerity. Always satisfying the Supreme Personality of Godhead by his constitutional activities, he gradually gave up all material desires.

Text 27
गृहेषु दारेषु सुतेषु बन्धुषु
द्विपोत्तमस्यन्दनवाजिवस्तुषु ।
अक्षय्यरत्नाभरणाम्बरादि-
ष्वनन्तकोशेष्वकरोदसन्मतिम् ॥ २७ ॥
gṛheṣu dāreṣu suteṣu bandhuṣu
dvipottama-syandana-vāji-vastuṣu
akṣayya-ratnābharaṇāmbarādiṣv
ananta-kośeṣv akarod asan-matim
Synonyms
gṛheṣu — in the homes; dāreṣu — in wives; suteṣu — in children; bandhuṣu — in friends and relatives; dvipa-uttama — in the best of powerful elephants; syandana — in nice chariots; vāji — in first-class horses; vastuṣu — in all such things; akṣayya — whose value never decreases; ratna — in jewels; ābharaṇa — in ornaments; ambara-ādiṣu — in such dresses and ornaments; ananta-kośeṣu — in an inexhaustible treasury; akarot — accepted; asat-matim — no attachment.

Translation
Mahārāja Ambarīṣa gave up all attachment to household affairs, wives, children, friends and relatives, to the best of powerful elephants, to beautiful chariots, carts, horses and inexhaustible jewels, and to ornaments, garments and an inexhaustible treasury. He gave up attachment to all of them, regarding them as temporary and material.

Text 28
तस्मा अदाद्धरिश्चक्रं प्रत्यनीकभयावहम् ।
एकान्तभक्तिभावेन प्रीतो भक्ताभिरक्षणम् ॥ २८ ॥
tasmā adād dhariś cakraṁ
pratyanīka-bhayāvaham
ekānta-bhakti-bhāvena
prīto bhaktābhirakṣaṇam
Synonyms
tasmai — unto him (Ambarīṣa Mahārāja); adāt — gave; hariḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; cakram — His disc; pratyanīka-bhaya-āvaham — the Lord’s disc, which was extremely fearful to the enemies of the Lord and His devotees; ekānta-bhakti-bhāvena — because of his performing unalloyed devotional service; prītaḥ — the Lord being so pleased; bhakta-abhirakṣaṇam — for the protection of His devotees.

Translation
Being very pleased by the unalloyed devotion of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead gave the King His disc, which is fearful to enemies and which always protects the devotee from enemies and adversities.

Text 29
आरिराधयिषु: कृष्णं महिष्या तुल्यशीलया ।
युक्त: सांवत्सरं वीरो दधार द्वादशीव्रतम् ॥ २९ ॥
ārirādhayiṣuḥ kṛṣṇaṁ
mahiṣyā tulya-śīlayā
yuktaḥ sāṁvatsaraṁ vīro
dadhāra dvādaśī-vratam
Synonyms
ārirādhayiṣuḥ — aspiring to worship; kṛṣṇam — the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa; mahiṣyā — with his queen; tulya-śīlayā — who was equally as qualified as Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; yuktaḥ — together; sāṁvatsaram — for one year; vīraḥ — the King; dadhāra — accepted; dvādaśī-vratam — the vow for observing Ekādaśī and Dvādaśī.

Translation
To worship Lord Kṛṣṇa, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, along with his queen, who was equally qualified, observed the vow of Ekādaśī and Dvādaśī for one year.

Text 30
व्रतान्ते कार्तिके मासि त्रिरात्रं समुपोषित: ।
स्‍नात: कदाचित् कालिन्द्यां हरिं मधुवनेऽर्चयत् ॥ ३० ॥
vratānte kārtike māsi
tri-rātraṁ samupoṣitaḥ
snātaḥ kadācit kālindyāṁ
hariṁ madhuvane ’rcayat
Synonyms
vrata-ante — at the end of observing the vow; kārtike — in the month of Kārtika (October-November); māsi — in that month; tri-rātram — for three nights; samupoṣitaḥ — after completely observing the fast; snātaḥ — after bathing; kadācit — once upon a time; kālindyām — on the bank of the Yamunā; harim — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; madhuvane — in that part of the Vṛndāvana area known as Madhuvana; arcayat — worshiped the Lord.

Translation
In the month of Kārtika, after observing that vow for one year, after observing a fast for three nights and after bathing in the Yamunā, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, in Madhuvana.

Texts 31-32
महाभिषेकविधिना सर्वोपस्करसम्पदा ।
अभिषिच्याम्बराकल्पैर्गन्धमाल्यार्हणादिभि: ॥ ३१ ॥
तद्गतान्तरभावेन पूजयामास केशवम् ।
ब्राह्मणांश्च महाभागान् सिद्धार्थानपि भक्तित: ॥ ३२ ॥
mahābhiṣeka-vidhinā
sarvopaskara-sampadā
abhiṣicyāmbarākalpair
gandha-mālyārhaṇādibhiḥ
tad-gatāntara-bhāvena
pūjayām āsa keśavam
brāhmaṇāṁś ca mahā-bhāgān
siddhārthān api bhaktitaḥ
Synonyms
mahā-abhiṣeka-vidhinā — by the regulative principles for bathing the Deity; sarva-upaskara-sampadā — by all the paraphernalia for worshiping the Deity; abhiṣicya — after bathing; ambara-ākalpaiḥ — with nice clothing and ornaments; gandha-mālya — with fragrant flower garlands; arhaṇa-ādibhiḥ — and with other paraphernalia to worship the Deity; tat-gata-antara-bhāvena — his mind saturated with devotional service; pūjayām āsa — he worshiped; keśavam — unto Kṛṣṇa; brāhmaṇān ca — and the brāhmaṇas; mahā-bhāgān — who were greatly fortunate; siddha-arthān — self-satisfied, without waiting for any worship; api — even; bhaktitaḥ — with great devotion.

Translation
Following the regulative principles of mahābhiṣeka, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa performed the bathing ceremony for the Deity of Lord Kṛṣṇa with all paraphernalia, and then he dressed the Deity with fine clothing, ornaments, fragrant flower garlands and other paraphernalia for worship of the Lord. With attention and devotion, he worshiped Kṛṣṇa and all the greatly fortunate brāhmaṇas who were free from material desires.

Texts 33-35
गवां रुक्‍मविषाणीनां रूप्याङ्घ्रीणां सुवाससाम् ।
पय:शीलवयोरूपवत्सोपस्करसम्पदाम् ॥ ३३ ॥
प्राहिणोत् साधुविप्रेभ्यो गृहेषु न्यर्बुदानि षट् ।
भोजयित्वा द्विजानग्रे स्वाद्वन्नं गुणवत्तमम् ॥ ३४ ॥
लब्धकामैरनुज्ञात: पारणायोपचक्रमे ।
तस्य तर्ह्यतिथि: साक्षाद् दुर्वास भगवानभूत् ॥ ३५ ॥
gavāṁ rukma-viṣāṇīnāṁ
rūpyāṅghrīṇāṁ suvāsasām
payaḥśīla-vayo-rūpa-
vatsopaskara-sampadām
prāhiṇot sādhu-viprebhyo
gṛheṣu nyarbudāni ṣaṭ
bhojayitvā dvijān agre
svādv annaṁ guṇavattamam
labdha-kāmair anujñātaḥ
pāraṇāyopacakrame
tasya tarhy atithiḥ sākṣād
durvāsā bhagavān abhūt
Synonyms
gavām — cows; rukma-viṣāṇīnām — whose horns were covered with gold plate; rūpya-aṅghrīṇām — whose hooves were covered with silver plate; su-vāsasām — very nicely decorated with garments; payaḥ-śīla — with full milk bags; vayaḥ — young; rūpa — beautiful; vatsa-upaskara-sampadām — with nice calves; prāhiṇot — gave in charity; sādhu-viprebhyaḥ — unto the brāhmaṇas and saintly persons; gṛheṣu — (who arrived) in his house; nyarbudāni — ten crores (one hundred million); ṣaṭ — six times; bhojayitvā — feeding them; dvijān agre — first the brāhmaṇas; svādu annam — very tasteful eatables; guṇavat-tamam — highly delicious; labdha-kāmaiḥ — by those brāhmaṇas, being fully satisfied; anujñātaḥ — by their permission; pāraṇāya — for completing the Dvādaśī; upacakrame — was just about to observe the final ceremony; tasya — of him (Ambarīṣa); tarhi — immediately; atithiḥ — unwanted or uncalled-for guest; sākṣāt — directly; durvāsāḥ — the great mystic Durvāsā; bhagavān — very powerful; abhūt — appeared on the scene as a guest.

Translation
Thereafter, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa satisfied all the guests who arrived at his house, especially the brāhmaṇas. He gave in charity sixty crores of cows whose horns were covered with gold plate and whose hooves were covered with silver plate. All the cows were well decorated with garments and had full milk bags. They were mild-natured, young and beautiful and were accompanied by their calves. After giving these cows, the King first sumptuously fed all the brāhmaṇas, and when they were fully satisfied, he was about to observe the end of Ekādaśī, with their permission, by breaking the fast. Exactly at that time, however, Durvāsā Muni, the great and powerful mystic, appeared on the scene as an uninvited guest.

Text 36
तमानर्चातिथिं भूप: प्रत्युत्थानासनार्हणै: ।
ययाचेऽभ्यवहाराय पादमूलमुपागत: ॥ ३६ ॥
tam ānarcātithiṁ bhūpaḥ
pratyutthānāsanārhaṇaiḥ
yayāce ’bhyavahārāya
pāda-mūlam upāgataḥ
Synonyms
tam — unto him (Durvāsā); ānarca — worshiped; atithim — although an uninvited guest; bhūpaḥ — the King (Ambarīṣa); pratyutthāna — by standing up; āsana — by offering a seat; arhaṇaiḥ — and by paraphernalia for worship; yayāce — requested; abhyavahārāya — for eating; pāda-mūlam — at the root of his feet; upāgataḥ — fell down.

Translation
After standing up to receive Durvāsā Muni, King Ambarīṣa offered him a seat and paraphernalia of worship. Then, sitting at his feet, the King requested the great sage to eat.

Text 37
प्रतिनन्द्य स तां याञ्चां कर्तुमावश्यकं गत: ।
निममज्ज बृहद् ध्यायन् कालिन्दीसलिले शुभे ॥ ३७ ॥
pratinandya sa tāṁ yācñāṁ
kartum āvaśyakaṁ gataḥ
nimamajja bṛhad dhyāyan
kālindī-salile śubhe
Synonyms
pratinandya — gladly accepting; saḥ — Durvāsā Muni; tām — that; yācñām — request; kartum — to perform; āvaśyakam — the necessary ritualistic ceremonies; gataḥ — went; nimamajja — dipped his body in the water; bṛhat — the Supreme Brahman; dhyāyan — meditating on; kālindī — of the Yamunā; salile — in the water; śubhe — very auspicious.

Translation
Durvāsā Muni gladly accepted the request of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, but to perform the regulative ritualistic ceremonies he went to the river Yamunā. There he dipped into the water of the auspicious Yamunā and meditated upon the impersonal Brahman.

Text 38
मुहूर्तार्धावशिष्टायां द्वादश्यां पारणं प्रति ।
चिन्तयामास धर्मज्ञो द्विजैस्तद्धर्मसङ्कटे ॥ ३८ ॥
muhūrtārdhāvaśiṣṭāyāṁ
dvādaśyāṁ pāraṇaṁ prati
cintayām āsa dharma-jño
dvijais tad-dharma-saṅkaṭe
Synonyms
muhūrta-ardha-avaśiṣṭāyām — was remaining only for half a moment; dvādaśyām — when the Dvādaśī day; pāraṇam — the breaking of the fast; prati — to observe; cintayām āsa — began to think about; dharma-jñaḥ — one who knows the principles of religion; dvijaiḥ — by the brāhmaṇas; tat-dharma — concerning that religious principle; saṅkaṭe — in such a dangerous condition.

Translation
In the meantime, only a muhūrta of the Dvādaśī day was left on which to break the fast. Consequently, it was imperative that the fast be broken immediately. In this dangerous situation, the King consulted learned brāhmaṇas.

Texts 39-40
ब्राह्मणातिक्रमे दोषो द्वादश्यां यदपारणे ।
यत् कृत्वा साधु मे भूयादधर्मो वा न मां स्पृशेत् ॥ ३९ ॥
अम्भसा केवलेनाथ करिष्ये व्रतपारणम् ।
आहुरब्भक्षणं विप्रा ह्यशितं नाशितं च तत् ॥ ४० ॥
brāhmaṇātikrame doṣo
dvādaśyāṁ yad apāraṇe
yat kṛtvā sādhu me bhūyād
adharmo vā na māṁ spṛśet
ambhasā kevalenātha
kariṣye vrata-pāraṇam
āhur ab-bhakṣaṇaṁ viprā
hy aśitaṁ nāśitaṁ ca tat
Synonyms
brāhmaṇa-atikrame — in surpassing the rules of respect to the brāhmaṇas; doṣaḥ — there is a fault; dvādaśyām — on the Dvādaśī day; yat — because; apāraṇe — in not breaking the fast in due time; yat kṛtvā — after doing which action; sādhu — what is auspicious; me — unto me; bhūyāt — may so become; adharmaḥ — what is irreligious; vā — either; na — not; mām — unto me; spṛśet — may touch; ambhasā — by water; kevalena — only; atha — therefore; kariṣye — I shall execute; vrata-pāraṇam — the completion of the vow; āhuḥ — said; ap-bhakṣaṇam — drinking water; viprāḥ — O brāhmaṇas; hi — indeed; aśitam — eating; na aśitam ca — as well as not eating; tat — such an action.

Translation
The King said: “To transgress the laws of respectful behavior toward the brāhmaṇas is certainly a great offense. On the other hand, if one does not observe the breaking of the fast within the time of Dvādaśī, there is a flaw in one’s observance of the vow. Therefore, O brāhmaṇas, if you think that it will be auspicious and not irreligious, I shall break the fast by drinking water.” In this way, after consulting with the brāhmaṇas, the King reached this decision, for according to brahminical opinion, drinking water may be accepted as eating and also as not eating.

Text 41
इत्यप: प्राश्य राजर्षिश्चिन्तयन् मनसाच्युतम् ।
प्रत्यचष्ट कुरुश्रेष्ठ द्विजागमनमेव स: ॥ ४१ ॥
ity apaḥ prāśya rājarṣiś
cintayan manasācyutam
pratyacaṣṭa kuru-śreṣṭha
dvijāgamanam eva saḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus; apaḥ — water; prāśya — after drinking; rājarṣiḥ — the great King Ambarīṣa; cintayan — meditating upon; manasā — by the mind; acyutam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pratyacaṣṭa — began to wait; kuru-śreṣṭha — O best of the Kuru kings; dvija-āgamanam — the return of Durvāsā Muni, the great mystic brāhmaṇa; eva — indeed; saḥ — the King.

Translation
O best of the Kuru dynasty, after he drank some water, King Ambarīṣa, meditating upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead within his heart, waited for the return of the great mystic Durvāsā Muni.

Text 42
दुर्वास यमुनाकूलात् कृतावश्यक आगत: ।
राज्ञाभिनन्दितस्तस्य बुबुधे चेष्टितं धिया ॥ ४२ ॥
durvāsā yamunā-kūlāt
kṛtāvaśyaka āgataḥ
rājñābhinanditas tasya
bubudhe ceṣṭitaṁ dhiyā
Synonyms
durvāsāḥ — the great sage; yamunā-kūlāt — from the bank of the river Yamunā; kṛta — had been performed; āvaśyakaḥ — he by whom the necessary ritualistic ceremonies; āgataḥ — returned; rājñā — by the King; abhinanditaḥ — being well received; tasya — his; bubudhe — could understand; ceṣṭitam — performance; dhiyā — by intelligence.

Translation
After executing the ritualistic ceremonies to be performed at noon, Durvāsā returned from the bank of the Yamunā. The King received him well, offering all respects, but Durvāsā Muni, by his mystic power, could understand that King Ambarīṣa had drunk water without his permission.

Text 43
मन्युना प्रचलद्गात्रो भ्रुकुटीकुटिलानन: ।
बुभुक्षितश्च सुतरां कृताञ्जलिमभाषत ॥ ४३ ॥
manyunā pracalad-gātro
bhru-kuṭī-kuṭilānanaḥ
bubhukṣitaś ca sutarāṁ
kṛtāñjalim abhāṣata
Synonyms
manyunā — agitated by great anger; pracalat-gātraḥ — his body trembling; bhru-kuṭī — by the eyebrows; kuṭila — curved; ānanaḥ — face; bubhukṣitaḥ ca — and hungry at the same time; sutarām — very much; kṛta-añjalim — to Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, who stood there with folded hands; abhāṣata — he addressed.

Translation
Still hungry, Durvāsā Muni, his body trembling, his face curved and his eyebrows crooked in a frown, angrily spoke as follows to King Ambarīṣa, who stood before him with folded hands.

Text 44
अहो अस्य नृशंसस्य श्रियोन्मत्तस्य पश्यत ।
धर्मव्यतिक्रमं विष्णोरभक्तस्येशमानिन: ॥ ४४ ॥
aho asya nṛ-śaṁsasya
śriyonmattasya paśyata
dharma-vyatikramaṁ viṣṇor
abhaktasyeśa-māninaḥ
Synonyms
aho — alas; asya — of this man; nṛ-śaṁsasya — who is so cruel; śriyā unmattasya — puffed up because of great opulence; paśyata — everyone just see; dharma-vyatikramam — the transgression of the regulative principles of religion; viṣṇoḥ abhaktasya — who is not a devotee of Lord Viṣṇu; īśa-māninaḥ — considering himself the Supreme Lord, independent of everything.

Translation
Alas, just see the behavior of this cruel man! He is not a devotee of Lord Viṣṇu. Being proud of his material opulence and his position, he considers himself God. Just see how he has transgressed the laws of religion.

Text 45
यो मामतिथिमायातमातिथ्येन निमन्‍त्र्य च ।
अदत्त्वा भुक्तवांस्तस्य सद्यस्ते दर्शये फलम् ॥ ४५ ॥
yo mām atithim āyātam
ātithyena nimantrya ca
adattvā bhuktavāṁs tasya
sadyas te darśaye phalam
Synonyms
yaḥ — this man who; mām — unto me; atithim — who, being an uninvited guest; āyātam — had come here; ātithyena — with the reception of a guest; nimantrya — after inviting me; ca — also; adattvā — without giving (food); bhuktavān — has himself eaten; tasya — of him; sadyaḥ — immediately; te — of you; darśaye — I shall show; phalam — the result.

Translation
Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, you have invited me to eat as a guest, but instead of feeding me, you yourself have eaten first. Because of your misbehavior, I shall show you something to punish you.

Text 46
एवं ब्रुवाण उत्कृत्य जटां रोषप्रदीपित: ।
तया स निर्ममे तस्मै कृत्यां कालानलोपमाम् ॥ ४६ ॥
evaṁ bruvāṇa utkṛtya
jaṭāṁ roṣa-pradīpitaḥ
tayā sa nirmame tasmai
kṛtyāṁ kālānalopamām
Synonyms
evam — thus; bruvāṇaḥ — speaking (Durvāsā Muni); utkṛtya — uprooting; jaṭām — a bunch of hair; roṣa-pradīpitaḥ — being reddish because he was very angry; tayā — by that bunch of hair from his head; saḥ — Durvāsā Muni; nirmame — created; tasmai — to punish Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; kṛtyām — a demon; kāla-anala-upamām — appearing just like the blazing fire of devastation.

Translation
As Durvāsā Muni said this, his face became red with anger. Uprooting a bunch of hair from his head, he created a demon resembling the blazing fire of devastation to punish Mahārāja Ambarīṣa.

Text 47
तामापतन्तीं ज्वलतीमसिहस्तां पदा भुवम् ।
वेपयन्तीं समुद्वीक्ष्य न चचाल पदान्नृप: ॥ ४७ ॥
tām āpatantīṁ jvalatīm
asi-hastāṁ padā bhuvam
vepayantīṁ samudvīkṣya
na cacāla padān nṛpaḥ
Synonyms
tām — that (demon); āpatantīm — coming forward to attack him; jvalatīm — blazing like fire; asi-hastām — with a trident in his hand; padā — with his footstep; bhuvam — the surface of the earth; vepayantīm — causing to tremble; samudvīkṣya — seeing him perfectly; na — not; cacāla — moved; padāt — from his place; nṛpaḥ — the King.

Translation
Taking a trident in his hand and making the surface of the earth tremble with his footsteps, that blazing creature came before Mahārāja Ambarīṣa. But the King, upon seeing him, was not at all disturbed and did not move even slightly from his position.

Text 48
प्राग्दिष्टं भृत्यरक्षायां पुरुषेण महात्मना ।
ददाह कृत्यां तां चक्रं क्रुद्धाहिमिव पावक: ॥ ४८ ॥
prāg diṣṭaṁ bhṛtya-rakṣāyāṁ
puruṣeṇa mahātmanā
dadāha kṛtyāṁ tāṁ cakraṁ
kruddhāhim iva pāvakaḥ
Synonyms
prāk diṣṭam — as previously arranged; bhṛtya-rakṣāyām — for the protection of his servants; puruṣeṇa — by the Supreme Person; mahā-ātmanā — by the Supersoul; dadāha — burnt to ashes; kṛtyām — that created demon; tām — him; cakram — the disc; kruddha — angry; ahim — a serpent; iva — like; pāvakaḥ — fire.

Translation
As fire in the forest immediately burns to ashes an angry snake, so, by the previous order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, His disc, the Sudarśana cakra, immediately burnt to ashes the created demon to protect the Lord’s devotee.

Text 49
तदभिद्रवदुद्वीक्ष्य स्वप्रयासं च निष्फलम् ।
दुर्वास दुद्रुवे भीतो दिक्षु प्राणपरीप्सया ॥ ४९ ॥
tad-abhidravad udvīkṣya
sva-prayāsaṁ ca niṣphalam
durvāsā dudruve bhīto
dikṣu prāṇa-parīpsayā
Synonyms
tat — of that disc; abhidravat — moving toward him; udvīkṣya — after seeing; sva-prayāsam — his own attempt; ca — and; niṣphalam — having failed; durvāsāḥ — Durvāsā Muni; dudruve — began to run; bhītaḥ — full of fear; dikṣu — in every direction; prāṇa-parīpsayā — with a desire to save his life.

Translation
Upon seeing that his own attempt had failed and that the Sudarśana cakra was moving toward him, Durvāsā Muni became very frightened and began to run in all directions to save his life.

Text 50
तमन्वधावद् भगवद्रथाङ्गं
दावाग्निरुद्धूतशिखो यथाहिम् ।
तथानुषक्तं मुनिरीक्षमाणो
गुहां विविक्षु: प्रससार मेरो: ॥ ५० ॥
tam anvadhāvad bhagavad-rathāṅgaṁ
dāvāgnir uddhūta-śikho yathāhim
tathānuṣaktaṁ munir īkṣamāṇo
guhāṁ vivikṣuḥ prasasāra meroḥ
Synonyms
tam — unto Durvāsā; anvadhāvat — began to follow; bhagavat-ratha-aṅgam — the disc appearing from the wheel of the Lord’s chariot; dāva-agniḥ — like a forest fire; uddhūta — blazing high; śikhaḥ — having flames; yathā ahim — as it follows a snake; tathā — in the same way; anuṣaktam — as if touching Durvāsā Muni’s back; muniḥ — the sage; īkṣamāṇaḥ — seeing like that; guhām — a cave; vivikṣuḥ — wanted to enter; prasasāra — began to move quickly; meroḥ — of Meru Mountain.

Translation
As the blazing flames of a forest fire pursue a snake, the disc of the Supreme Personality of Godhead began following Durvāsā Muni. Durvāsā Muni saw that the disc was almost touching his back, and thus he ran very swiftly, desiring to enter a cave of Sumeru Mountain.

Text 51
दिशो नभ: क्ष्मां विवरान्समुद्रान्
लोकान् सपालांस्त्रिदिवं गत: स: ।
यतो यतो धावति तत्र तत्र
सुदर्शनं दुष्प्रसहं ददर्श ॥ ५१ ॥
diśo nabhaḥ kṣmāṁ vivarān samudrān
lokān sapālāṁs tridivaṁ gataḥ saḥ
yato yato dhāvati tatra tatra
sudarśanaṁ duṣprasahaṁ dadarśa
Synonyms
diśaḥ — all directions; nabhaḥ — in the sky; kṣmām — on the surface of the earth; vivarān — within the holes; samudrān — within the seas; lokān — all places; sa-pālān — as well as their rulers; tridivam — the heavenly planets; gataḥ — gone; saḥ — Durvāsā Muni; yataḥ yataḥ — wheresoever; dhāvati — he went; tatra tatra — there, everywhere; sudarśanam — the disc of the Lord; duṣprasaham — extremely fearful; dadarśa — Durvāsā Muni saw.

Translation
Just to protect himself, Durvāsā Muni fled everywhere, in all directions — in the sky, on the surface of the earth, in caves, in the ocean, on different planets of the rulers of the three worlds, and even on the heavenly planets — but wherever he went he immediately saw following him the unbearable fire of the Sudarśana cakra.

Text 52
अलब्धनाथ: स सदा कुतश्चित्
सन्त्रस्तचित्तोऽरणमेषमाण: ।
देवं विरिञ्चं समगाद्विधात-
स्त्राह्यात्मयोनेऽजिततेजसो माम् ॥ ५२ ॥
alabdha-nāthaḥ sa sadā kutaścit
santrasta-citto ’raṇam eṣamāṇaḥ
devaṁ viriñcaṁ samagād vidhātas
trāhy ātma-yone ’jita-tejaso mām
Synonyms
alabdha-nāthaḥ — without getting the shelter of a protector; saḥ — Durvāsā Muni; sadā — always; kutaścit — somewhere; santrasta-cittaḥ — with a fearful heart; araṇam — a person who can give shelter; eṣamāṇaḥ — seeking; devam — at last to the chief demigod; viriñcam — Lord Brahmā; samagāt — approached; vidhātaḥ — O my lord; trāhi — kindly protect; ātma-yone — O Lord Brahmā; ajita-tejasaḥ — from the fire released by Ajita, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mām — unto me.

Translation
With a fearful heart, Durvāsā Muni went here and there seeking shelter, but when he could find no shelter, he finally approached Lord Brahmā and said, “O my lord, O Lord Brahmā, kindly protect me from the blazing Sudarśana cakra sent by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.”

Texts 53-54
श्रीब्रह्मोवाच
स्थानं मदीयं सहविश्वमेतत्
क्रीडावसाने द्विपरार्धसंज्ञे ।
भ्रूभङ्गमात्रेण हि सन्दिधक्षो:
कालात्मनो यस्य तिरोभविष्यति ॥ ५३ ॥
अहं भवो दक्षभृगुप्रधाना:
प्रजेशभूतेशसुरेशमुख्या: ।
सर्वे वयं यन्नियमं प्रपन्ना
मूर्ध्‍न्यार्पितं लोकहितं वहाम: ॥ ५४ ॥
śrī-brahmovāca
sthānaṁ madīyaṁ saha-viśvam etat
krīḍāvasāne dvi-parārdha-saṁjñe
bhrū-bhaṅga-mātreṇa hi sandidhakṣoḥ
kālātmano yasya tirobhaviṣyati
ahaṁ bhavo dakṣa-bhṛgu-pradhānāḥ
prajeśa-bhūteśa-sureśa-mukhyāḥ
sarve vayaṁ yan-niyamaṁ prapannā
mūrdhnyārpitaṁ loka-hitaṁ vahāmaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-brahmā uvāca — Lord Brahmā said; sthānam — the place where I am; madīyam — my residence, Brahmaloka; saha — with; viśvam — the whole universe; etat — this; krīḍā-avasāne — at the end of the period for the pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dvi-parārdha-saṁjñe — the time known as the end of a dvi-parārdha; bhrū-bhaṅga-mātreṇa — simply by the flicking of the eyebrows; hi — indeed; sandidhakṣoḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, when He desires to burn the whole universe; kāla-ātmanaḥ — of the form of destruction; yasya — of whom; tirobhaviṣyati — will be vanquished; aham — I; bhavaḥ — Lord Śiva; dakṣa — Prajāpati Dakṣa; bhṛgu — the great saint Bhṛgu; pradhānāḥ — and others headed by them; prajā-īśa — the controllers of the prajās; bhūta-īśa — the controllers of the living entities; sura-īśa — the controllers of the demigods; mukhyāḥ — headed by them; sarve — all of them; vayam — we also; yat-niyamam — whose regulative principle; prapannāḥ — are surrendered; mūrdhnyā arpitam — bowing our heads; loka-hitam — for the benefit of all living entities; vahāmaḥ — carry out the orders ruling over the living entities.

Translation
Lord Brahmā said: At the end of the dvi-parārdha, when the pastimes of the Lord come to an end, Lord Viṣṇu, by a flick of His eyebrows, vanquishes the entire universe, including our places of residence. Such personalities as me and Lord Śiva, as well as Dakṣa, Bhṛgu and similar great saints of which they are the head, and also the rulers of the living entities, the rulers of human society and the rulers of the demigods — all of us surrender to that Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, bowing our heads, to carry out His orders for the benefit of all living entities.

Text 55
प्रत्याख्यातो विरिञ्चेन विष्णुचक्रोपतापित: ।
दुर्वास: शरणं यात: शर्वं कैलासवासिनम् ॥ ५५ ॥
pratyākhyāto viriñcena
viṣṇu-cakropatāpitaḥ
durvāsāḥ śaraṇaṁ yātaḥ
śarvaṁ kailāsa-vāsinam
Synonyms
pratyākhyātaḥ — being refused; viriñcena — by Lord Brahmā; viṣṇu-cakra-upatāpitaḥ — being scorched by the blazing fire of Lord Viṣṇu’s disc; durvāsāḥ — the great mystic named Durvāsā; śaraṇam — for shelter; yātaḥ — went; śarvam — unto Lord Śiva; kailāsa-vāsinam — the resident of the place known as Kailāsa.

Translation
When Durvāsā, who was greatly afflicted by the blazing fire of the Sudarśana cakra, was thus refused by Lord Brahmā, he tried to take shelter of Lord Śiva, who always resides on his planet, known as Kailāsa.

Text 56
श्रीशङ्कर उवाच
वयं न तात प्रभवाम भूम्नि
यस्मिन् परेऽन्येऽप्यजजीवकोशा: ।
भवन्ति काले न भवन्ति हीद‍ृशा:
सहस्रशो यत्र वयं भ्रमाम: ॥ ५६ ॥
śrī-śaṅkara uvāca
vayaṁ na tāta prabhavāma bhūmni
yasmin pare ’nye ’py aja-jīva-kośāḥ
bhavanti kāle na bhavanti hīdṛśāḥ
sahasraśo yatra vayaṁ bhramāmaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śaṅkaraḥ uvāca — Lord Śiva said; vayam — we; na — not; tāta — O my dear son; prabhavāmaḥ — sufficiently able; bhūmni — unto the great Supreme Personality of Godhead; yasmin — in whom; pare — in the Transcendence; anye — others; api — even; aja — Lord Brahmā; jīva — living entities; kośāḥ — the universes; bhavanti — can become; kāle — in due course of time; na — not; bhavanti — can become; hi — indeed; īdṛśāḥ — like this; sahasraśaḥ — many thousands and millions; yatra — wherein; vayam — all of us; bhramāmaḥ — are rotating.

Translation
Lord Śiva said: My dear son, I, Lord Brahmā and the other demigods, who rotate within this universe under the misconception of our greatness, cannot exhibit any power to compete with the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for innumerable universes and their inhabitants come into existence and are annihilated by the simple direction of the Lord.

Texts 57-59
अहं सनत्कुमारश्च नारदो भगवानज: ।
कपिलोऽपान्तरतमो देवलो धर्म आसुरि: ॥ ५७ ॥
मरीचिप्रमुखाश्चान्ये सिद्धेशा: पारदर्शना: ।
विदाम न वयं सर्वे यन्मायां माययावृता: ॥ ५८ ॥
तस्य विश्वेश्वरस्येदं शस्त्रं दुर्विषहं हि न: ।
तमेवं शरणं याहि हरिस्ते शं विधास्यति ॥ ५९ ॥
ahaṁ sanat-kumāraś ca
nārado bhagavān ajaḥ
kapilo ’pāntaratamo
devalo dharma āsuriḥ
marīci-pramukhāś cānye
siddheśāḥ pāra-darśanāḥ
vidāma na vayaṁ sarve
yan-māyāṁ māyayāvṛtāḥ
tasya viśveśvarasyedaṁ
śastraṁ durviṣahaṁ hi naḥ
tam evaṁ śaraṇaṁ yāhi
haris te śaṁ vidhāsyati
Synonyms
aham — I; sanat-kumāraḥ ca — and the four Kumāras (Sanaka, Sanātana, Sanat-kumāra and Sananda); nāradaḥ — the heavenly sage Nārada; bhagavān ajaḥ — the supreme creature of the universe, Lord Brahmā; kapilaḥ — the son of Devahūti; apāntaratamaḥ — Vyāsadeva; devalaḥ — the great sage Devala; dharmaḥ — Yamarāja; āsuriḥ — the great saint Āsuri; marīci — the great saint Marīci; pramukhāḥ — headed by; ca — also; anye — others; siddha-īśāḥ — all of them perfect in their knowledge; pāra-darśanāḥ — they have seen the end of all knowledge; vidāmaḥ — can understand; na — not; vayam — all of us; sarve — totally; yat-māyām — the illusory energy of whom; māyayā — by that illusory energy; āvṛtāḥ — being covered; tasya — His; viśva-īśvarasya — of the Lord of the universe; idam — this; śastram — weapon (the disc); durviṣaham — even intolerable; hi — indeed; naḥ — of us; tam — to Him; evam — therefore; śaraṇam yāhi — go to take shelter; hariḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; te — for you; śam — auspiciousness; vidhāsyati — certainly will perform.

Translation
Past, present and future are known to me [Lord Śiva], Sanat-kumāra, Nārada, the most revered Lord Brahmā, Kapila [the son of Devahūti], Apāntaratama [Lord Vyāsadeva], Devala, Yamarāja, Āsuri, Marīci and many saintly persons headed by him, as well as many others who have achieved perfection. Nonetheless, because we are covered by the illusory energy of the Lord, we cannot understand how expansive that illusory energy is. You should simply approach that Supreme Personality of Godhead to get relief, for this Sudarśana cakra is intolerable even to us. Go to Lord Viṣṇu. He will certainly be kind enough to bestow all good fortune upon you.

Text 60
ततो निराशो दुर्वास: पदं भगवतो ययौ ।
वैकुण्ठाख्यं यदध्यास्ते श्रीनिवास: श्रिया सह ॥ ६० ॥
tato nirāśo durvāsāḥ
padaṁ bhagavato yayau
vaikuṇṭhākhyaṁ yad adhyāste
śrīnivāsaḥ śriyā saha
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; nirāśaḥ — disappointed; durvāsāḥ — the great mystic Durvāsā; padam — to the place; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu; yayau — went; vaikuṇṭha-ākhyam — the place known as Vaikuṇṭha; yat — wherein; adhyāste — lives perpetually; śrīnivāsaḥ — Lord Viṣṇu; śriyā — with the goddess of fortune; saha — with.

Translation
Thereafter, being disappointed even in taking shelter of Lord Śiva, Durvāsā Muni went to Vaikuṇṭha-dhāma, where the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, resides with His consort, the goddess of fortune.

Text 61
सन्दह्यमानोऽजितशस्त्रवह्निना
तत्पादमूले पतित: सवेपथु: ।
आहाच्युतानन्त सदीप्सित प्रभो
कृतागसं माव हि विश्वभावन ॥ ६१ ॥
sandahyamāno ’jita-śastra-vahninā
tat-pāda-mūle patitaḥ savepathuḥ
āhācyutānanta sad-īpsita prabho
kṛtāgasaṁ māvahi viśva-bhāvana
Synonyms
sandahyamānaḥ — being burned by the heat; ajita-śastra-vahninā — by the blazing fire of the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s weapon; tat-pāda-mūle — at His lotus feet; patitaḥ — falling down; sa-vepathuḥ — with trembling of the body; āha — said; acyuta — O my Lord, O infallible one; ananta — O You of unlimited prowess; sat-īpsita — O Lord desired by saintly persons; prabho — O Supreme; kṛta-āgasam — the greatest offender; mā — to me; avahi — give protection; viśva-bhāvana — O well-wisher of the whole universe.

Translation
Durvāsā Muni, the great mystic, scorched by the heat of the Sudarśana cakra, fell at the lotus feet of Nārāyaṇa. His body trembling, he spoke as follows: O infallible, unlimited Lord, protector of the entire universe, You are the only desirable objective for all devotees. I am a great offender, my Lord. Please give me protection.

Text 62
अजानता ते परमानुभावं
कृतं मयाघं भवत: प्रियाणाम् ।
विधेहि तस्यापचितिं विधात-
र्मुच्येत यन्नाम्न्युदिते नारकोऽपि ॥ ६२ ॥
ajānatā te paramānubhāvaṁ
kṛtaṁ mayāghaṁ bhavataḥ priyāṇām
vidhehi tasyāpacitiṁ vidhātar
mucyeta yan-nāmny udite nārako ’pi
Synonyms
ajānatā — without knowledge; te — of Your Lordship; parama-anubhāvam — the inconceivable prowess; kṛtam — has been committed; mayā — by me; agham — a great offense; bhavataḥ — of Your Lordship; priyāṇām — at the feet of the devotees; vidhehi — now kindly do the needful; tasya — of such an offense; apacitim — counteraction; vidhātaḥ — O supreme controller; mucyeta — can be delivered; yat — of whose; nāmni — when the name; udite — is awakened; nārakaḥ api — even a person fit for going to hell.

Translation
O my Lord, O supreme controller, without knowledge of Your unlimited prowess I have offended Your most dear devotee. Very kindly save me from the reaction of this offense. You can do everything, for even if a person is fit for going to hell, You can deliver him simply by awakening within his heart the holy name of Your Lordship.

Text 63
श्रीभगवानुवाच
अहं भक्तपराधीनो ह्यस्वतन्त्र इव द्विज ।
साधुभिर्ग्रस्तहृदयो भक्तैर्भक्तजनप्रिय: ॥ ६३ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
ahaṁ bhakta-parādhīno
hy asvatantra iva dvija
sādhubhir grasta-hṛdayo
bhaktair bhakta-jana-priyaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; aham — I; bhakta-parādhīnaḥ — am dependent on the will of My devotees; hi — indeed; asvatantraḥ — am not independent; iva — exactly like that; dvija — O brāhmaṇa; sādhubhiḥ — by pure devotees, completely free from all material desires; grasta-hṛdayaḥ — My heart is controlled; bhaktaiḥ — because they are devotees; bhakta-jana-priyaḥ — I am dependent not only on My devotee but also on My devotee’s devotee (the devotee’s devotee is extremely dear to Me).

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said to the brāhmaṇa: I am completely under the control of My devotees. Indeed, I am not at all independent. Because My devotees are completely devoid of material desires, I sit only within the cores of their hearts. What to speak of My devotee, even those who are devotees of My devotee are very dear to Me.

Text 64
नाहमात्मानमाशासे मद्भक्तै: साधुभिर्विना ।
श्रियं चात्यन्तिकीं ब्रह्मन् येषां गतिरहं परा ॥ ६४ ॥
nāham ātmānam āśāse
mad-bhaktaiḥ sādhubhir vinā
śriyaṁ cātyantikīṁ brahman
yeṣāṁ gatir ahaṁ parā
Synonyms
na — not; aham — I; ātmānam — transcendental bliss; āśāse — desire; mat-bhaktaiḥ — with My devotees; sādhubhiḥ — with the saintly persons; vinā — without them; śriyam — all My six opulences; ca — also; ātyantikīm — the supreme; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; yeṣām — of whom; gatiḥ — destination; aham — I am; parā — the ultimate.

Translation
O best of the brāhmaṇas, without saintly persons for whom I am the only destination, I do not desire to enjoy My transcendental bliss and My supreme opulences.

Text 65
ये दारागारपुत्राप्तप्राणान् वित्तमिमं परम् ।
हित्वा मां शरणं याता: कथं तांस्त्यक्तुमुत्सहे ॥ ६५ ॥
ye dārāgāra-putrāpta-
prāṇān vittam imaṁ param
hitvā māṁ śaraṇaṁ yātāḥ
kathaṁ tāṁs tyaktum utsahe
Synonyms
ye — those devotees of Mine who; dāra — wife; agāra — house; putra — children, sons; āpta — relatives, society; prāṇān — even life; vittam — wealth; imam — all these; param — elevation to the heavenly planets or becoming one by merging into Brahman; hitvā — giving up (all these ambitions and paraphernalia); mām — unto Me; śaraṇam — shelter; yātāḥ — having taken; katham — how; tān — such persons; tyaktum — to give them up; utsahe — I can be enthusiastic in that way (it is not possible).

Translation
Since pure devotees give up their homes, wives, children, relatives, riches and even their lives simply to serve Me, without any desire for material improvement in this life or in the next, how can I give up such devotees at any time?

Text 66
मयि निर्बद्धहृदया: साधव: समदर्शना: ।
वशीकुर्वन्ति मां भक्त्या सत्स्त्रिय: सत्पतिं यथा ॥ ६६ ॥
mayi nirbaddha-hṛdayāḥ
sādhavaḥ sama-darśanāḥ
vaśe kurvanti māṁ bhaktyā
sat-striyaḥ sat-patiṁ yathā
Synonyms
mayi — unto Me; nirbaddha-hṛdayāḥ — firmly attached in the core of the heart; sādhavaḥ — the pure devotees; sama-darśanāḥ — who are equal to everyone; vaśe — under control; kurvanti — they make; mām — unto Me; bhaktyā — by devotional service; sat-striyaḥ — chaste women; sat-patim — unto the gentle husband; yathā — as.

Translation
As chaste women bring their gentle husbands under control by service, the pure devotees, who are equal to everyone and completely attached to Me in the core of the heart, bring Me under their full control.

Text 67
मत्सेवया प्रतीतं ते सालोक्यादिचतुष्टयम् ।
नेच्छन्ति सेवया पूर्णा: कुतोऽन्यत् कालविप्लुतम् ॥ ६७ ॥
mat-sevayā pratītaṁ te
sālokyādi-catuṣṭayam
necchanti sevayā pūrṇāḥ
kuto ’nyat kāla-viplutam
Synonyms
mat-sevayā — by being engaged fully in My transcendental loving service; pratītam — automatically achieved; te — such pure devotees are fully satisfied; sālokya-ādi-catuṣṭayam — the four different types of liberation (sālokya, sārūpya, sāmīpya and sārṣṭi, what to speak of sāyujya); na — not; icchanti — desire; sevayā — simply by devotional service; pūrṇāḥ — fully complete; kutaḥ — where is the question; anyat — other things; kāla-viplutam — which are finished in the course of time.

Translation
My devotees, who are always satisfied to be engaged in My loving service, are not interested even in the four principles of liberation [sālokya, sārūpya, sāmīpya and sārṣṭi], although these are automatically achieved by their service. What then is to be said of such perishable happiness as elevation to the higher planetary systems?

Text 68
साधवो हृदयं मह्यं साधूनां हृदयं त्वहम् ।
मदन्यत् ते न जानन्ति नाहं तेभ्यो मनागपि ॥ ६८ ॥
sādhavo hṛdayaṁ mahyaṁ
sādhūnāṁ hṛdayaṁ tv aham
mad-anyat te na jānanti
nāhaṁ tebhyo manāg api
Synonyms
sādhavaḥ — the pure devotees; hṛdayam — in the core of the heart; mahyam — of Me; sādhūnām — of the pure devotees also; hṛdayam — in the core of the heart; tu — indeed; aham — I am; mat-anyat — anything else but me; te — they; na — not; jānanti — know; na — not; aham — I; tebhyaḥ — than them; manāk api — even by a little fraction.

Translation
The pure devotee is always within the core of My heart, and I am always in the heart of the pure devotee. My devotees do not know anything else but Me, and I do not know anyone else but them.

Text 69
उपायं कथयिष्यामि तव विप्र श‍ृणुष्व तत् ।
अयं ह्यात्माभिचारस्ते यतस्तं याहि मा चिरम् ।
साधुषु प्रहितं तेज: प्रहर्तु: कुरुतेऽशिवम् ॥ ६९ ॥
upāyaṁ kathayiṣyāmi
tava vipra śṛṇuṣva tat
ayaṁ hy ātmābhicāras te
yatas taṁ yāhi mā ciram
sādhuṣu prahitaṁ tejaḥ
prahartuḥ kurute ’śivam
Synonyms
upāyam — the means of protection in this dangerous position; kathayiṣyāmi — I shall speak to you; tava — of your deliverance from this danger; vipra — O brāhmaṇa; śṛṇuṣva — just hear from me; tat — what I say; ayam — this action taken by you; hi — indeed; ātma-abhicāraḥ — self-envy or envious of yourself (your mind has become your enemy); te — for you; yataḥ — because of whom; tam — to him (Mahārāja Ambarīṣa); yāhi — immediately go; mā ciram — do not wait even a moment; sādhuṣu — unto devotees; prahitam — applied; tejaḥ — power; prahartuḥ — of the executor; kurute — does; aśivam — inauspiciousness.

Translation
O brāhmaṇa, let Me now advise you for your own protection. Please hear from Me. By offending Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, you have acted with self-envy. Therefore you should go to him immediately, without a moment’s delay. One’s so-called prowess, when employed against the devotee, certainly harms he who employs it. Thus it is the subject, not the object, who is harmed.

Text 70
तपो विद्या च विप्राणां नि:श्रेयसकरे उभे ।
ते एव दुर्विनीतस्य कल्पेते कर्तुरन्यथा ॥ ७० ॥
tapo vidyā ca viprāṇāṁ
niḥśreyasa-kare ubhe
te eva durvinītasya
kalpete kartur anyathā
Synonyms
tapaḥ — austerities; vidyā — knowledge; ca — also; viprāṇām — of the brāhmaṇas; niḥśreyasa — of what is certainly very auspicious for upliftment; kare — are causes; ubhe — both of them; te — such austerity and knowledge; eva — indeed; durvinītasya — when such a person is an upstart; kalpete — become; kartuḥ — of the performer; anyathā — just the opposite.

Translation
For a brāhmaṇa, austerity and learning are certainly auspicious, but when acquired by a person who is not gentle, such austerity and learning are most dangerous.

Text 71
ब्रह्मंस्तद् गच्छ भद्रं ते नाभागतनयं नृपम् ।
क्षमापय महाभागं तत: शान्तिर्भविष्यति ॥ ७१ ॥
brahmaṁs tad gaccha bhadraṁ te
nābhāga-tanayaṁ nṛpam
kṣamāpaya mahā-bhāgaṁ
tataḥ śāntir bhaviṣyati
Synonyms
brahman — O brāhmaṇa; tat — therefore; gaccha — you go; bhadram — all auspiciousness; te — unto you; nābhāga-tanayam — to the son of Mahārāja Nābhāga; nṛpam — the King (Ambarīṣa); kṣamāpaya — just try to pacify him; mahā-bhāgam — a great personality, a pure devotee; tataḥ — thereafter; śāntiḥ — peace; bhaviṣyati — there will be.

Translation
O best of the brāhmaṇas, you should therefore go immediately to King Ambarīṣa, the son of Mahārāja Nābhāga. I wish you all good fortune. If you can satisfy Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, then there will be peace for you.