Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं भगवतादिष्टो दुर्वासश्चक्रतापित: ।
अम्बरीषमुपावृत्य तत्पादौ दु:खितोऽग्रहीत् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ bhagavatādiṣṭo
durvāsāś cakra-tāpitaḥ
ambarīṣam upāvṛtya
tat-pādau duḥkhito ’grahīt
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — in this way; bhagavatā ādiṣṭaḥ — being ordered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; durvāsāḥ — the great mystic yogī named Durvāsā; cakra-tāpitaḥ — being very much harassed by the Sudarśana cakra; ambarīṣam — unto Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; upāvṛtya — approaching; tat-pādau — at his lotus feet; duḥkhitaḥ — being very much aggrieved; agrahīt — he caught.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When thus advised by Lord Viṣṇu, Durvāsā Muni, who was very much harassed by the Sudarśana cakra, immediately approached Mahārāja Ambarīṣa. Being very much aggrieved, the muni fell down and clasped the King’s lotus feet.

Text 2
तस्य सोद्यममावीक्ष्य पादस्पर्शविलज्जित: ।
अस्तावीत् तद्धरेरस्त्रं कृपया पीडितो भृशम् ॥ २ ॥
tasya sodyamam āvīkṣya
pāda-sparśa-vilajjitaḥ
astāvīt tad dharer astraṁ
kṛpayā pīḍito bhṛśam
Synonyms
tasya — of Durvāsā; saḥ — he, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; udyamam — the endeavor; āvīkṣya — after seeing; pāda-sparśa-vilajjitaḥ — being ashamed because Durvāsā was touching his lotus feet; astāvīt — offered prayers; tat — to that; hareḥ astram — weapon of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kṛpayā — with mercy; pīḍitaḥ — aggrieved; bhṛśam — very much.

Translation
When Durvāsā touched his lotus feet, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was very much ashamed, and when he saw Durvāsā attempting to offer prayers, because of mercy he was aggrieved even more. Thus he immediately began offering prayers to the great weapon of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 3
अम्बरीष उवाच
त्वमग्निर्भगवान् सूर्यस्त्वं सोमो ज्योतिषां पति: ।
त्वमापस्त्वं क्षितिर्व्योम वायुर्मात्रेन्द्रियाणि च ॥ ३ ॥
ambarīṣa uvāca
tvam agnir bhagavān sūryas
tvaṁ somo jyotiṣāṁ patiḥ
tvam āpas tvaṁ kṣitir vyoma
vāyur mātrendriyāṇi ca
Synonyms
ambarīṣaḥ — Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; uvāca — said; tvam — you (are); agniḥ — the fire; bhagavān — the most powerful; sūryaḥ — the sun; tvam — you (are); somaḥ — the moon; jyotiṣām — of all the luminaries; patiḥ — the master; tvam — you (are); āpaḥ — water; tvam — you (are); kṣitiḥ — earth; vyoma — sky; vāyuḥ — the air; mātra — the objects of the senses; indriyāṇi — and the senses; ca — also.

Translation
Mahārāja Ambarīṣa said: O Sudarśana cakra, you are fire, you are the most powerful sun, and you are the moon, the master of all luminaries. You are water, earth and sky, you are the air, you are the five sense objects [sound, touch, form, taste and smell], and you are the senses also.

Text 4
सुदर्शन नमस्तुभ्यं सहस्राराच्युतप्रिय ।
सर्वास्त्रघातिन् विप्राय स्वस्ति भूया इडस्पते ॥ ४ ॥
sudarśana namas tubhyaṁ
sahasrārācyuta-priya
sarvāstra-ghātin viprāya
svasti bhūyā iḍaspate
Synonyms
sudarśana — O original vision of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaḥ — respectful obeisances; tubhyam — unto you; sahasra-ara — O you who have thousands of spokes; acyuta-priya — O most favorite of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Acyuta; sarva-astra-ghātin — O destroyer of all weapons; viprāya — unto this brāhmaṇa; svasti — very auspicious; bhūyāḥ — just become; iḍaspate — O master of the material world.

Translation
O most favorite of Acyuta, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, you have thousands of spokes. O master of the material world, destroyer of all weapons, original vision of the Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto you. Kindly give shelter and be auspicious to this brāhmaṇa.

Text 5
त्वं धर्मस्त्वमृतं सत्यं त्वं यज्ञोऽखिलयज्ञभुक् ।
त्वं लोकपाल: सर्वात्मा त्वं तेज: पौरुषं परम् ॥ ५ ॥
tvaṁ dharmas tvam ṛtaṁ satyaṁ
tvaṁ yajño ’khila-yajña-bhuk
tvaṁ loka-pālaḥ sarvātmā
tvaṁ tejaḥ pauruṣaṁ param
Synonyms
tvam — you; dharmaḥ — religion; tvam — you; ṛtam — encouraging statements; satyam — the ultimate truth; tvam — you; yajñaḥ — sacrifice; akhila — universal; yajña-bhuk — the enjoyer of the fruits resulting from sacrifice; tvam — you; loka-pālaḥ — the maintainer of the various planets; sarva-ātmā — all-pervading; tvam — you; tejaḥ — prowess; pauruṣam — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; param — transcendental.

Translation
O Sudarśana wheel, you are religion, you are truth, you are encouraging statements, you are sacrifice, and you are the enjoyer of the fruits of sacrifice. You are the maintainer of the entire universe, and you are the supreme transcendental prowess in the hands of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. You are the original vision of the Lord, and therefore you are known as Sudarśana. Everything has been created by your activities, and therefore you are all-pervading.

Text 6
नम: सुनाभाखिलधर्मसेतवे
ह्यधर्मशीलासुरधूमकेतवे ।
त्रैलोक्यगोपाय विशुद्धवर्चसे
मनोजवायाद्भ‍ुतकर्मणे गृणे ॥ ६ ॥
namaḥ sunābhākhila-dharma-setave
hy adharma-śīlāsura-dhūma-ketave
trailokya-gopāya viśuddha-varcase
mano-javāyādbhuta-karmaṇe gṛṇe
Synonyms
namaḥ — all respectful obeisances unto you; su-nābha — O you who have an auspicious hub; akhila-dharma-setave — whose spokes are considered to be a breech of the entire universe; hi — indeed; adharma-śīla — who are irreligious; asura — for the demons; dhūma-ketave — unto you who are like fire or an inauspicious comet; trailokya — of the three material worlds; gopāya — the maintainer; viśuddha — transcendental; varcase — whose effulgence; manaḥ-javāya — as speedy as the mind; adbhuta — wonderful; karmaṇe — so active; gṛṇe — I simply utter.

Translation
O Sudarśana, you have a very auspicious hub, and therefore you are the upholder of all religion. You are just like an inauspicious comet for the irreligious demons. Indeed, you are the maintainer of the three worlds, you are full of transcendental effulgence, you are as quick as the mind, and you are able to work wonders. I can simply utter the word “namaḥ,” offering all obeisances unto you.

Text 7
त्वत्तेजसा धर्ममयेन संहृतं
तम: प्रकाशश्च द‍ृशो महात्मनाम् ।
दुरत्ययस्ते महिमा गिरां पते
त्वद्रूपमेतत् सदसत् परावरम् ॥ ७ ॥
tvat-tejasā dharma-mayena saṁhṛtaṁ
tamaḥ prakāśaś ca dṛśo mahātmanām
duratyayas te mahimā girāṁ pate
tvad-rūpam etat sad-asat parāvaram
Synonyms
tvat-tejasā — by your effulgence; dharma-mayena — which is full of religious principles; saṁhṛtam — dissipated; tamaḥ — darkness; prakāśaḥ ca — illumination also; dṛśaḥ — of all directions; mahā-ātmanām — of great, learned personalities; duratyayaḥ — insurmountable; te — your; mahimā — glories; girām pate — O master of speech; tvat-rūpam — your manifestation; etat — this; sat-asat — manifested and unmanifested; para-avaram — superior and inferior.

Translation
O master of speech, by your effulgence, full of religious principles, the darkness of the world is dissipated, and the knowledge of learned persons or great souls is manifested. Indeed, no one can surpass your effulgence, for all things, manifested and unmanifested, gross and subtle, superior and inferior, are but various forms of you that are manifested by your effulgence.

Text 8
यदा विसृष्टस्त्वमनञ्जनेन वै
बलं प्रविष्टोऽजित दैत्यदानवम् ।
बाहूदरोर्वङ्‌घ्रिशिरोधराणि
वृश्चन्नजस्रं प्रधने विराजसे ॥ ८ ॥
yadā visṛṣṭas tvam anañjanena vai
balaṁ praviṣṭo ’jita daitya-dānavam
bāhūdarorv-aṅghri-śirodharāṇi
vṛścann ajasraṁ pradhane virājase
Synonyms
yadā — when; visṛṣṭaḥ — sent; tvam — your good self; anañjanena — by the transcendental Supreme Personality of Godhead; vai — indeed; balam — the soldiers; praviṣṭaḥ — entering among; ajita — O indefatigable and unconquerable one; daitya-dānavam — of the Daityas and Dānavas, the demons; bāhu — arms; udara — bellies; ūru — thighs; aṅghri — legs; śiraḥ-dharāṇi — necks; vṛścan — separating; ajasram — incessantly; pradhane — in the battlefield; virājase — you stay.

Translation
O indefatigable one, when you are sent by the Supreme Personality of Godhead to enter among the soldiers of the Daityas and the Dānavas, you stay on the battlefield and unendingly separate their arms, bellies, thighs, legs and heads.

Text 9
स त्वं जगत् त्राण खलप्रहाणये
निरूपित: सर्वसहो गदाभृता ।
विप्रस्य चास्मत्कुलदैवहेतवे
विधेहि भद्रं तदनुग्रहो हि न: ॥ ९ ॥
sa tvaṁ jagat-trāṇa khala-prahāṇaye
nirūpitaḥ sarva-saho gadā-bhṛtā
viprasya cāsmat-kula-daiva-hetave
vidhehi bhadraṁ tad anugraho hi naḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — that person; tvam — your good self; jagat-trāṇa — O protector of the whole universe; khala-prahāṇaye — in killing the envious enemies; nirūpitaḥ — are engaged; sarva-sahaḥ — all-powerful; gadā-bhṛtā — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viprasya — of this brāhmaṇa; ca — also; asmat — our; kula-daiva-hetave — for the good fortune of the dynasty; vidhehi — kindly do; bhadram — all-good; tat — that; anugrahaḥ — favor; hi — indeed; naḥ — our.

Translation
O protector of the universe, you are engaged by the Supreme Personality of Godhead as His all-powerful weapon in killing the envious enemies. For the benefit of our entire dynasty, kindly favor this poor brāhmaṇa. This will certainly be a favor for all of us.

Text 10
यद्यस्ति दत्तमिष्टं वा स्वधर्मो वा स्वनुष्ठित: ।
कुलं नो विप्रदैवं चेद् द्विजो भवतु विज्वर: ॥ १० ॥
yady asti dattam iṣṭaṁ vā
sva-dharmo vā svanuṣṭhitaḥ
kulaṁ no vipra-daivaṁ ced
dvijo bhavatu vijvaraḥ
Synonyms
yadi — if; asti — there is; dattam — charity; iṣṭam — worshiping the Deity; vā — either; sva-dharmaḥ — occupational duty; vā — either; su-anuṣṭhitaḥ — perfectly performed; kulam — dynasty; naḥ — our; vipra-daivam — favored by the brāhmaṇas; cet — if so; dvijaḥ — this brāhmaṇa; bhavatu — may become; vijvaraḥ — without a burning (from the Sudarśana cakra).

Translation
If our family has given charity to the proper persons, if we have performed ritualistic ceremonies and sacrifices, if we have properly carried out our occupational duties, and if we have been guided by learned brāhmaṇas, I wish, in exchange, that this brāhmaṇa be freed from the burning caused by the Sudarśana cakra.

Text 11
यदि नो भगवान् प्रीत एक: सर्वगुणाश्रय: ।
सर्वभूतात्मभावेन द्विजो भवतु विज्वर: ॥ ११ ॥
yadi no bhagavān prīta
ekaḥ sarva-guṇāśrayaḥ
sarva-bhūtātma-bhāvena
dvijo bhavatu vijvaraḥ
Synonyms
yadi — if; naḥ — unto us; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prītaḥ — is satisfied; ekaḥ — without any duplicate; sarva-guṇa-āśrayaḥ — the reservoir of all transcendental qualities; sarva-bhūta-ātma-bhāvena — by a merciful attitude toward all living entities; dvijaḥ — this brāhmaṇa; bhavatu — may become; vijvaraḥ — freed from all burning.

Translation
If the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is one without a second, who is the reservoir of all transcendental qualities, and who is the life and soul of all living entities, is pleased with us, we wish that this brāhmaṇa, Durvāsā Muni, be freed from the pain of being burned.

Text 12
श्रीशुक उवाच
इति संस्तुवतो राज्ञो विष्णुचक्रं सुदर्शनम् ।
अशाम्यत् सर्वतो विप्रं प्रदहद् राजयाञ्चया ॥ १२ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
iti saṁstuvato rājño
viṣṇu-cakraṁ sudarśanam
aśāmyat sarvato vipraṁ
pradahad rāja-yācñayā
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti — thus; saṁstuvataḥ — being prayed to; rājñaḥ — by the King; viṣṇu-cakram — the disc weapon of Lord Viṣṇu; sudarśanam — of the name Sudarśana cakra; aśāmyat — became no longer disturbing; sarvataḥ — in every respect; vipram — unto the brāhmaṇa; pradahat — causing to burn; rāja — of the King; yācñayā — by the begging.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: When the King offered prayers to the Sudarśana cakra and Lord Viṣṇu, because of his prayers the Sudarśana cakra became peaceful and stopped burning the brāhmaṇa known as Durvāsā Muni.

Text 13
स मुक्तोऽस्त्राग्नितापेन दुर्वास: स्वस्तिमांस्तत: ।
प्रशशंस तमुर्वीशं युञ्जान: परमाशिष: ॥ १३ ॥
sa mukto ’strāgni-tāpena
durvāsāḥ svastimāṁs tataḥ
praśaśaṁsa tam urvīśaṁ
yuñjānaḥ paramāśiṣaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he, Durvāsā Muni; muktaḥ — being freed; astra-agni-tāpena — from the heat of the fire of the Sudarśana cakra; durvāsāḥ — the great mystic Durvāsā; svastimān — fully satisfied, relieved of the burning; tataḥ — then; praśaśaṁsa — offered praise; tam — unto him; urvī-īśam — the King; yuñjānaḥ — performing; parama-āśiṣaḥ — the highest benedictions.

Translation
Durvāsā Muni, the greatly powerful mystic, was indeed satisfied when freed from the fire of the Sudarśana cakra. Thus he praised the qualities of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa and offered him the highest benedictions.

Text 14
दुर्वासा उवाच
अहो अनन्तदासानां महत्त्वं द‍ृष्टमद्य मे ।
कृतागसोऽपि यद् राजन् मङ्गलानि समीहसे ॥ १४ ॥
durvāsā uvāca
aho ananta-dāsānāṁ
mahattvaṁ dṛṣṭam adya me
kṛtāgaso ’pi yad rājan
maṅgalāni samīhase
Synonyms
durvāsāḥ uvāca — Durvāsā Muni said; aho — alas; ananta-dāsānām — of the servants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahattvam — greatness; dṛṣṭam — seen; adya — today; me — by me; kṛta-āgasaḥ api — although I was an offender; yat — still; rājan — O King; maṅgalāni — good fortune; samīhase — you are praying for.

Translation
Durvāsā Muni said: My dear King, today I have experienced the greatness of devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for although I have committed an offense, you have prayed for my good fortune.

Text 15
दुष्कर: को नु साधूनां दुस्त्यजो वा महात्मनाम् ।
यै: संगृहीतो भगवान् सात्वतामृषभो हरि: ॥ १५ ॥
duṣkaraḥ ko nu sādhūnāṁ
dustyajo vā mahātmanām
yaiḥ saṅgṛhīto bhagavān
sātvatām ṛṣabho hariḥ
Synonyms
duṣkaraḥ — difficult to do; kaḥ — what; nu — indeed; sādhūnām — of the devotees; dustyajaḥ — impossible to give up; vā — either; mahā-ātmanām — of the great persons; yaiḥ — by which persons; saṅgṛhītaḥ — achieved (by devotional service); bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sātvatām — of the pure devotees; ṛṣabhaḥ — the leader; hariḥ — the Lord.

Translation
For those who have achieved the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of the pure devotees, what is impossible to do, and what is impossible to give up?

Text 16
यन्नामश्रुतिमात्रेण पुमान् भवति निर्मल: ।
तस्य तीर्थपद: किं वा दासानामवशिष्यते ॥ १६ ॥
yan-nāma-śruti-mātreṇa
pumān bhavati nirmalaḥ
tasya tīrtha-padaḥ kiṁ vā
dāsānām avaśiṣyate
Synonyms
yat-nāma — the holy name of the Lord; śruti-mātreṇa — simply by hearing; pumān — a person; bhavati — becomes; nirmalaḥ — purified; tasya — of Him; tīrtha-padaḥ — the Lord, at whose feet are the holy places; kim vā — what; dāsānām — by the servants; avaśiṣyate — remains to be done.

Translation
What is impossible for the servants of the Lord? By the very hearing of His holy name one is purified.

Text 17
राजन्ननुगृहीतोऽहं त्वयातिकरुणात्मना ।
मदघं पृष्ठत: कृत्वा प्राणा यन्मेऽभिरक्षिता: ॥ १७ ॥
rājann anugṛhīto ’haṁ
tvayātikaruṇātmanā
mad-aghaṁ pṛṣṭhataḥ kṛtvā
prāṇā yan me ’bhirakṣitāḥ
Synonyms
rājan — O King; anugṛhītaḥ — very much favored; aham — I (am); tvayā — by you; ati-karuṇa-ātmanā — because of your being extremely merciful; mat-agham — my offenses; pṛṣṭhataḥ — to the back; kṛtvā — doing so; prāṇāḥ — life; yat — that; me — my; abhirakṣitāḥ — saved.

Translation
O King, overlooking my offenses, you have saved my life. Thus I am very much obliged to you because you are so merciful.

Text 18
राजा तमकृताहार: प्रत्यागमनकाङ्क्षuया ।
चरणावुपसङ्गृह्य प्रसाद्य समभोजयत् ॥ १८ ॥
rājā tam akṛtāhāraḥ
pratyāgamana-kāṅkṣayā
caraṇāv upasaṅgṛhya
prasādya samabhojayat
Synonyms
rājā — the King; tam — unto him, Durvāsā Muni; akṛta-āhāraḥ — who refrained from taking food; pratyāgamana — returning; kāṅkṣayā — desiring; caraṇau — the feet; upasaṅgṛhya — approaching; prasādya — pleasing in all respects; samabhojayat — fed sumptuously.

Translation
Expecting the return of Durvāsā Muni, the King had not taken his food. Therefore, when the sage returned, the King fell at his lotus feet, pleasing him in all respects, and fed him sumptuously.

Text 19
सोऽशित्वाद‍ृतमानीतमातिथ्यं सार्वकामिकम् ।
तृप्तात्मा नृपतिं प्राह भुज्यतामिति सादरम् ॥ १९ ॥
so ’śitvādṛtam ānītam
ātithyaṁ sārva-kāmikam
tṛptātmā nṛpatiṁ prāha
bhujyatām iti sādaram
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Durvāsā); aśitvā — after eating sumptuously; ādṛtam — with great respect; ānītam — received; ātithyam — offered different varieties of food; sārva-kāmikam — fulfilling all kinds of tastes; tṛpta-ātmā — thus being fully satisfied; nṛpatim — unto the King; prāha — said; bhujyatām — my dear King, you eat also; iti — in this way; sa-ādaram — with great respect.

Translation
Thus the King respectfully received Durvāsā Muni, who after eating varieties of palatable food was so satisfied that with great affection he requested the King to eat also, saying, “Please take your meal.”

Text 20
प्रीतोऽस्म्यनुगृहीतोऽस्मि तव भागवतस्य वै ।
दर्शनस्पर्शनालापैरातिथ्येनात्ममेधसा ॥ २० ॥
prīto ’smy anugṛhīto ’smi
tava bhāgavatasya vai
darśana-sparśanālāpair
ātithyenātma-medhasā
Synonyms
prītaḥ — very much satisfied; asmi — I am; anugṛhītaḥ — very much favored; asmi — I am; tava — your; bhāgavatasya — because of your being a pure devotee; vai — indeed; darśana — by seeing you; sparśana — and touching your feet; ālāpaiḥ — by talking with you; ātithyena — by your hospitality; ātma-medhasā — by my own intelligence.

Translation
Durvāsā Muni said: I am very pleased with you, my dear King. At first I thought of you as an ordinary human being and accepted your hospitality, but later I could understand, by my own intelligence, that you are the most exalted devotee of the Lord. Therefore, simply by seeing you, touching your feet and talking with you, I have been pleased and have become obliged to you.

Text 21
कर्मावदातमेतत् ते गायन्ति स्व:स्त्रियो मुहु: ।
कीर्तिं परमपुण्यां च कीर्तयिष्यति भूरियम् ॥ २१ ॥
karmāvadātam etat te
gāyanti svaḥ-striyo muhuḥ
kīrtiṁ parama-puṇyāṁ ca
kīrtayiṣyati bhūr iyam
Synonyms
karma — activity; avadātam — without any tinge; etat — all this; te — your; gāyanti — will sing; svaḥ-striyaḥ — women from the heavenly planets; muhuḥ — always; kīrtim — glories; parama-puṇyām — highly glorified and pious; ca — also; kīrtayiṣyati — will continuously chant; bhūḥ — the whole world; iyam — this.

Translation
All the blessed women in the heavenly planets will continuously chant about your spotless character at every moment, and the people of this world will also chant your glories continuously.

Text 22
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं सङ्कीर्त्य राजानं दुर्वास: परितोषित: ।
ययौ विहायसामन्‍त्र्य ब्रह्मलोकमहैतुकम् ॥ २२ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ saṅkīrtya rājānaṁ
durvāsāḥ paritoṣitaḥ
yayau vihāyasāmantrya
brahmalokam ahaitukam
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — thus; saṅkīrtya — glorifying; rājānam — the King; durvāsāḥ — the great mystic yogī Durvāsā Muni; paritoṣitaḥ — being satisfied in all respects; yayau — left that place; vihāyasā — by the spaceways; āmantrya — taking permission; brahmalokam — to the topmost planet of this universe; ahaitukam — where there is no dry philosophical speculation.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Thus being satisfied in all respects, the great mystic yogī Durvāsā took permission and left, continuously glorifying the King. Through the skyways, he went to Brahmaloka, which is devoid of agnostics and dry philosophical speculators.

Text 23
संवत्सरोऽत्यगात् तावद् यावता नागतो गत: ।
मुनिस्तद्दर्शनाकाङ्क्षोत राजाब्भक्षो बभूव ह ॥ २३ ॥
saṁvatsaro ’tyagāt tāvad
yāvatā nāgato gataḥ
munis tad-darśanākāṅkṣo
rājāb-bhakṣo babhūva ha
Synonyms
saṁvatsaraḥ — one complete year; atyagāt — passed; tāvat — as long as; yāvatā — so long; na — not; āgataḥ — returned; gataḥ — Durvāsā Muni, who had left that place; muniḥ — the great sage; tat-darśana-ākāṅkṣaḥ — desiring to see him again; rājā — the King; ap-bhakṣaḥ — taking only water; babhūva — remained; ha — indeed.

Translation
Durvāsā Muni had left the place of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, and as long as he had not returned — for one complete year — the King had fasted, maintaining himself simply by drinking water.

Text 24
गतेऽथ दुर्वाससि सोऽम्बरीषो
द्विजोपयोगातिपवित्रमाहरत् ।
ऋषेर्विमोक्षं व्यसनं च वीक्ष्य
मेने स्ववीर्यं च परानुभावम् ॥ २४ ॥
gate ’tha durvāsasi so ’mbarīṣo
dvijopayogātipavitram āharat
ṛṣer vimokṣaṁ vyasanaṁ ca vīkṣya
mene sva-vīryaṁ ca parānubhāvam
Synonyms
gate — on his return; atha — then; durvāsasi — the great mystic yogī Durvāsā; saḥ — he, the King; ambarīṣaḥ — Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; dvija-upayoga — most suitable for a pure brāhmaṇa; ati-pavitram — very pure food; āharat — gave him to eat and he also ate; ṛṣeḥ — of the great sage; vimokṣam — release; vyasanam — from the great danger of being burned by the Sudarśana cakra; ca — and; vīkṣya — seeing; mene — considered; sva-vīryam — about his own power; ca — also; para-anubhāvam — because of his pure devotion to the Supreme Lord.

Translation
After one year, when Durvāsā Muni had returned, King Ambarīṣa sumptuously fed him all varieties of pure food, and then he himself also ate. When the King saw that the brāhmaṇa Durvāsā had been released from the great danger of being burned, he could understand that by the grace of the Lord he himself was also powerful, but he did not take any credit, for everything had been done by the Lord.

Text 25
एवं विधानेकगुण: स राजा
परात्मनि ब्रह्मणि वासुदेवे ।
क्रियाकलापै: समुवाह भक्तिं
ययाविरिञ्‍च्यान् निरयांश्चकार ॥ २५ ॥
evaṁ vidhāneka-guṇaḥ sa rājā
parātmani brahmaṇi vāsudeve
kriyā-kalāpaiḥ samuvāha bhaktiṁ
yayāviriñcyān nirayāṁś cakāra
Synonyms
evam — in this way; vidhā-aneka-guṇaḥ — endowed with varieties of good qualities; saḥ — he, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; rājā — the King; para-ātmani — unto the Supersoul; brahmaṇi — unto Brahman; vāsudeve — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva; kriyā-kalāpaiḥ — by practical activities; samuvāha — executed; bhaktim — devotional service; yayā — by such activities; āviriñcyān — beginning from the topmost planet; nirayān — down to the hellish planets; cakāra — he experienced that there is danger everywhere.

Translation
In this way, because of devotional service, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, who was endowed with varieties of transcendental qualities, was completely aware of Brahman, Paramātmā and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and thus he executed devotional service perfectly. Because of his devotion, he thought even the topmost planet of this material world no better than the hellish planets.

Text 26
श्रीशुक उवाच
अथाम्बरीषस्तनयेषु राज्यं
समानशीलेषु विसृज्य धीर: ।
वनं विवेशात्मनि वासुदेवे
मनो दधद् ध्वस्तगुणप्रवाह: ॥ २६ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
athāmbarīṣas tanayeṣu rājyaṁ
samāna-śīleṣu visṛjya dhīraḥ
vanaṁ viveśātmani vāsudeve
mano dadhad dhvasta-guṇa-pravāhaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; atha — in this way; ambarīṣaḥ — King Ambarīṣa; tanayeṣu — unto his sons; rājyam — the kingdom; samāna-śīleṣu — who were equally as qualified as their father; visṛjya — dividing; dhīraḥ — the most learned person, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; vanam — into the forest; viveśa — entered; ātmani — unto the Supreme Lord; vāsudeve — Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is known as Vāsudeva; manaḥ — mind; dadhat — concentrating; dhvasta — vanquished; guṇa-pravāhaḥ — the waves of the material modes of nature.

Translation
Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Thereafter, because of his advanced position in devotional life, Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, who no longer desired to live with material things, retired from active family life. He divided his property among his sons, who were equally as qualified, and he himself took the order of vānaprastha and went to the forest to concentrate his mind fully upon Lord Vāsudeva.

Text 27
इत्येतत् पुण्यमाख्यानमम्बरीषस्य भूपते ।
सङ्कीर्तयन्ननुध्यायन् भक्तो भगवतो भवेत् ॥ २७ ॥
ity etat puṇyam ākhyānam
ambarīṣasya bhūpate
saṅkīrtayann anudhyāyan
bhakto bhagavato bhavet
Synonyms
iti — thus; etat — this; puṇyam ākhyānam — most pious activity in history; ambarīṣasya — of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; bhūpate — O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); saṅkīrtayan — by chanting, repeating; anudhyāyan — or by meditating upon; bhaktaḥ — a devotee; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhavet — one can become.

Translation
Anyone who chants this narration or even thinks of this narration about the activities of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa certainly becomes a pure devotee of the Lord.

Text 28
अम्बरीषस्यचरितं येश‍ृण्वन्तिमहात्मन: ।
मुक्तिं प्रयान्तितेसर्वेभक्त्याविष्णो: प्रसादत: ॥ २८ ॥
ambarīṣasya caritaṁ
ye śṛṇvanti mahātmanaḥ
muktiṁ prayānti te sarve
bhaktyā viṣṇoḥ prasādataḥ
Synonyms
ambarīṣasya — of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa; caritam — character; ye — persons who; śṛṇvanti — hear; mahā-ātmanaḥ — of the great personality, the great devotee; muktim — liberation; prayānti — certainly they attain; te — such persons; sarve — all of them; bhaktyā — simply by devotional service; viṣṇoḥ — of Lord Viṣṇu; prasādataḥ — by the mercy.

Translation
By the grace of the Lord, those who hear about the activities of Mahārāja Ambarīṣa, the great devotee, certainly become liberated or become devotees without delay.