Text 1
विदुर उवाच
अन्तर्हिते भगवति ब्रह्मा लोकपितामह: ।
प्रजा: ससर्ज कतिधा दैहिकीर्मानसीर्विभु: ॥ १ ॥
vidura uvāca
antarhite bhagavati
brahmā loka-pitāmahaḥ
prajāḥ sasarja katidhā
daihikīr mānasīr vibhuḥ
Synonyms
viduraḥ uvāca — Śrī Vidura said; antarhite — after the disappearance; bhagavati — of the Personality of Godhead; brahmā — the first created living being; loka-pitāmahaḥ — the grandfather of all planetary inhabitants; prajāḥ — generations; sasarja — created; katidhāḥ — how many; daihikīḥ — from his body; mānasīḥ — from his mind; vibhuḥ — the great.

Translation
Śrī Vidura said: O great sage, please let me know how Brahmā, the grandfather of the planetary inhabitants, created the bodies of the living entities from his own body and mind after the disappearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 2
ये च मे भगवन् पृष्टास्त्वय्यर्था बहुवित्तम ।
तान् वदस्वानुपूर्व्येण छिन्धि न: सर्वसंशयान् ॥ २ ॥
ye ca me bhagavan pṛṣṭās
tvayy arthā bahuvittama
tān vadasvānupūrvyeṇa
chindhi naḥ sarva-saṁśayān
Synonyms
ye — all those; ca — also; me — by me; bhagavan — O powerful one; pṛṣṭāḥ — inquired; tvayi — unto you; arthāḥ — purpose; bahu-vit-tama — O greatly learned one; tān — all of them; vadasva — kindly describe; ānupūrvyeṇa — from beginning to end; chindhi — kindly eradicate; naḥ — my; sarva — all; saṁśayān — doubts.

Translation
O greatly learned one, kindly eradicate all my doubts, and let me know of all that I have inquired from you from the beginning to the end.

Text 3
सूत उवाच
एवं सञ्चोदितस्तेन क्षत्‍त्रा कौषारविर्मुनि: ।
प्रीत: प्रत्याह तान् प्रश्नान् हृदिस्थानथ भार्गव ॥ ३ ॥
sūta uvāca
evaṁ sañcoditas tena
kṣattrā kauṣāravir muniḥ
prītaḥ pratyāha tān praśnān
hṛdi-sthān atha bhārgava
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said; evam — thus; sañcoditaḥ — being enlivened; tena — by him; kṣattrā — by Vidura; kauṣāraviḥ — the son of Kuṣāra; muniḥ — great sage; prītaḥ — being pleased; pratyāha — replied; tān — those; praśnān — questions; hṛdi-sthān — from the core of his heart; atha — thus; bhārgava — O son of Bhṛgu.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī said: O son of Bhṛgu, the great sage Maitreya Muni, thus hearing from Vidura, felt very much enlivened. Everything was in his heart, and thus he began to reply to the questions one after another.

Text 4
मैत्रेय उवाच
विरिञ्चोऽपि तथा चक्रे दिव्यं वर्षशतं तप: ।
आत्मन्यात्मानमावेश्य यथाह भगवानज: ॥ ४ ॥
maitreya uvāca
viriñco ’pi tathā cakre
divyaṁ varṣa-śataṁ tapaḥ
ātmany ātmānam āveśya
yathāha bhagavān ajaḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya said; viriñcaḥ — Brahmā; api — also; tathā — in that manner; cakre — performed; divyam — celestial; varṣa-śatam — one hundred years; tapaḥ — penances; ātmani — unto the Lord; ātmānam — his own self; āveśya — engaging; yathā āha — as it was spoken; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; ajaḥ — the unborn.

Translation
The greatly learned sage Maitreya said: O Vidura, Brahmā thus engaged himself in penances for one hundred celestial years, as advised by the Personality of Godhead, and applied himself in devotional service to the Lord.

Text 5
तद्विलोक्याब्जसम्भूतो वायुना यदधिष्ठित: ।
पद्ममम्भश्च तत्कालकृतवीर्येण कम्पितम् ॥ ५ ॥
tad vilokyābja-sambhūto
vāyunā yad-adhiṣṭhitaḥ
padmam ambhaś ca tat-kāla-
kṛta-vīryeṇa kampitam
Synonyms
tat vilokya — looking into that; abja-sambhūtaḥ — whose source of birth was a lotus; vāyunā — by the air; yat — that; adhiṣṭhitaḥ — on which he was situated; padmam — lotus; ambhaḥ — water; ca — also; tat-kāla-kṛta — which was effected by eternal time; vīryeṇa — by its inherent force; kampitam — trembling.

Translation
Thereafter Brahmā saw that both the lotus on which he was situated and the water on which the lotus was growing were trembling due to a strong, violent wind.

Text 6
तपसा ह्येधमानेन विद्यया चात्मसंस्थया ।
विवृद्धविज्ञानबलो न्यपाद् वायुं सहाम्भसा ॥ ६ ॥
tapasā hy edhamānena
vidyayā cātma-saṁsthayā
vivṛddha-vijñāna-balo
nyapād vāyuṁ sahāmbhasā
Synonyms
tapasā — by penance; hi — certainly; edhamānena — increasing; vidyayā — by transcendental knowledge; ca — also; ātma — self; saṁsthayā — situated in the self; vivṛddha — matured; vijñāna — practical knowledge; balaḥ — power; nyapāt — drank; vāyum — the wind; saha ambhasā — along with the water.

Translation
Long penance and transcendental knowledge of self-realization had matured Brahmā in practical knowledge, and thus he drank the wind completely, along with the water.

Text 7
तद्विलोक्य वियद्व्यापि पुष्करं यदधिष्ठितम् ।
अनेन लोकान् प्राग्लीनान् कल्पितास्मीत्यचिन्तयत् ॥ ७ ॥
tad vilokya viyad-vyāpi
puṣkaraṁ yad-adhiṣṭhitam
anena lokān prāg-līnān
kalpitāsmīty acintayat
Synonyms
tat vilokya — looking into that; viyat-vyāpi — extensively widespread; puṣkaram — the lotus; yat — that which; adhiṣṭhitam — he was situated; anena — by this; lokān — all the planets; prāk-līnān — previously merged in dissolution; kalpitā asmi — I shall create; iti — thus; acintayat — he thought.

Translation
Thereafter he saw that the lotus on which he was situated was spread throughout the universe, and he contemplated how to create all the planets, which were previously merged in that very same lotus.

Text 8
पद्मकोशं तदाविश्य भगवत्कर्मचोदित: ।
एकं व्यभाङ्‌क्षीदुरुधा त्रिधा भाव्यं द्विसप्तधा ॥ ८ ॥
padma-kośaṁ tadāviśya
bhagavat-karma-coditaḥ
ekaṁ vyabhāṅkṣīd urudhā
tridhā bhāvyaṁ dvi-saptadhā
Synonyms
padma-kośam — the whorl of the lotus; tadā — then; āviśya — entering into; bhagavat — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; karma — in activities; coditaḥ — being encouraged by; ekam — one; vyabhāṅkṣīt — divided into; urudhā — great division; tridhā — three divisions; bhāvyam — capable of further creation; dvi-saptadhā — fourteen divisions.

Translation
Thus engaged in the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Brahmā entered into the whorl of the lotus, and as it spread all over the universe he divided it into three divisions of worlds and later into fourteen divisions.

Text 9
एतावाञ्जीवलोकस्य संस्थाभेद: समाहृत: ।
धर्मस्य ह्यनिमित्तस्य विपाक: परमेष्ठ्यसौ ॥ ९ ॥
etāvāñ jīva-lokasya
saṁsthā-bhedaḥ samāhṛtaḥ
dharmasya hy animittasya
vipākaḥ parameṣṭhy asau
Synonyms
etāvān — up to this; jīva-lokasya — of the planets inhabited by the living entities; saṁsthā-bhedaḥ — different situations of habitation; samāhṛtaḥ — performed completely; dharmasya — of religion; hi — certainly; animittasya — of causelessness; vipākaḥ — mature stage; parameṣṭhī — the highest personality in the universe; asau — that.

Translation
Lord Brahmā is the most exalted personality in the universe because of his causeless devotional service unto the Lord in mature transcendental knowledge. He therefore created all the fourteen planetary divisions for inhabitation by the different types of living entities.

Text 10
विदुर उवाच
यथात्थ बहुरूपस्य हरेरद्भुतकर्मण: ।
कालाख्यं लक्षणं ब्रह्मन् यथा वर्णय न: प्रभो ॥ १० ॥
vidura uvāca
yathāttha bahu-rūpasya
harer adbhuta-karmaṇaḥ
kālākhyaṁ lakṣaṇaṁ brahman
yathā varṇaya naḥ prabho
Synonyms
viduraḥ uvāca — Vidura said; yathā — as; āttha — you have said; bahu-rūpasya — having varieties of forms; hareḥ — of the Lord; adbhuta — wonderful; karmaṇaḥ — of the actor; kāla — time; ākhyam — of the name; lakṣaṇam — symptoms; brahman — O learned brāhmaṇa; yathā — as it is; varṇaya — please describe; naḥ — unto us; prabho — O lord.

Translation
Vidura inquired from Maitreya: O my lord, O greatly learned sage, kindly describe eternal time, which is another form of the Supreme Lord, the wonderful actor. What are the symptoms of that eternal time? Please describe them to us in detail.

Text 11
मैत्रेय उवाच
गुणव्यतिकराकारो निर्विशेषोऽप्रतिष्ठित: ।
पुरुषस्तदुपादानमात्मानं लीलयासृजत् ॥ ११ ॥
maitreya uvāca
guṇa-vyatikarākāro
nirviśeṣo ’pratiṣṭhitaḥ
puruṣas tad-upādānam
ātmānaṁ līlayāsṛjat
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; guṇa-vyatikara — of the interactions of the modes of material nature; ākāraḥ — source; nirviśeṣaḥ — without diversity; apratiṣṭhitaḥ — unlimited; puruṣaḥ — of the Supreme Person; tat — that; upādānam — instrument; ātmānam — the material creation; līlayā — by pastimes; asṛjat — created.

Translation
Maitreya said: Eternal time is the primeval source of the interactions of the three modes of material nature. It is unchangeable and limitless, and it works as the instrument of the Supreme Personality of Godhead for His pastimes in the material creation.

Text 12
विश्वं वै ब्रह्मतन्मात्रं संस्थितं विष्णुमायया ।
ईश्वरेण परिच्छिन्नं कालेनाव्यक्तमूर्तिना ॥ १२ ॥
viśvaṁ vai brahma-tan-mātraṁ
saṁsthitaṁ viṣṇu-māyayā
īśvareṇa paricchinnaṁ
kālenāvyakta-mūrtinā
Synonyms
viśvam — the material phenomenon; vai — certainly; brahma — the Supreme; tat-mātram — the same as; saṁsthitam — situated; viṣṇu-māyayā — by the energy of Viṣṇu; īśvareṇa — by the Personality of Godhead; paricchinnam — separated; kālena — by the eternal time; avyakta — unmanifested; mūrtinā — by such a feature.

Translation
This cosmic manifestation is separated from the Supreme Lord as material energy by means of kāla, which is the unmanifested, impersonal feature of the Lord. It is situated as the objective manifestation of the Lord under the influence of the same material energy of Viṣṇu.

Text 13
यथेदानीं तथाग्रे च पश्चादप्येतदीद‍ृशम् ॥ १३ ॥
yathedānīṁ tathāgre ca
paścād apy etad īdṛśam
Synonyms
yathā — as it is; idānīm — at present; tathā — so it was; agre — in the beginning; ca — and; paścāt — at the end; api — also; etat īdṛśam — it continues to be the same.

Translation
This cosmic manifestation is as it is now, it was the same in the past, and it will continue in the same way in the future.

Text 14
सर्गो नवविधस्तस्य प्राकृतो वैकृतस्तु य: ।
कालद्रव्यगुणैरस्य त्रिविध: प्रतिसंक्रम: ॥ १४ ॥
sargo nava-vidhas tasya
prākṛto vaikṛtas tu yaḥ
kāla-dravya-guṇair asya
tri-vidhaḥ pratisaṅkramaḥ
Synonyms
sargaḥ — creation; nava-vidhaḥ — of nine different kinds; tasya — its; prākṛtaḥ — material; vaikṛtaḥ — by the modes of material nature; tu — but; yaḥ — that which; kāla — eternal time; dravya — matter; guṇaiḥ — qualities; asya — its; tri-vidhaḥ — three kinds; pratisaṅkramaḥ — annihilation.

Translation
There are nine different kinds of creations besides the one which naturally occurs due to the interactions of the modes. There are three kinds of annihilations due to eternal time, the material elements and the quality of one’s work.

Text 15
आद्यस्तु महत: सर्गो गुणवैषम्यमात्मन: ।
द्वितीयस्त्वहमो यत्र द्रव्यज्ञानक्रियोदय: ॥ १५ ॥
ādyas tu mahataḥ sargo
guṇa-vaiṣamyam ātmanaḥ
dvitīyas tv ahamo yatra
dravya-jñāna-kriyodayaḥ
Synonyms
ādyaḥ — the first; tu — but; mahataḥ — of the total emanation from the Lord; sargaḥ — creation; guṇa-vaiṣamyam — interaction of the material modes; ātmanaḥ — of the Supreme; dvitīyaḥ — the second; tu — but; ahamaḥ — false ego; yatra — wherein; dravya — material ingredients; jñāna — material knowledge; kriyā-udayaḥ — awakening of activities (work).

Translation
Of the nine creations, the first one is the creation of the mahat-tattva, or the sum total of the material ingredients, wherein the modes interact due to the presence of the Supreme Lord. In the second, the false ego is generated, in which the material ingredients, material knowledge and material activities arise.

Text 16
भूतसर्गस्तृतीयस्तु तन्मात्रो द्रव्यशक्तिमान् ।
चतुर्थ ऐन्द्रिय: सर्गो यस्तु ज्ञानक्रियात्मक: ॥ १६ ॥
bhūta-sargas tṛtīyas tu
tan-mātro dravya-śaktimān
caturtha aindriyaḥ sargo
yas tu jñāna-kriyātmakaḥ
Synonyms
bhūta-sargaḥ — creation of matter; tṛtīyaḥ — is the third; tu — but; tat-mātraḥ — sense perception; dravya — of the elements; śaktimān — generator; caturthaḥ — the fourth; aindriyaḥ — in the matter of the senses; sargaḥ — creation; yaḥ — that which; tu — but; jñāna — knowledge-acquiring; kriyā — working; ātmakaḥ — basically.

Translation
The sense perceptions are created in the third creation, and from these the elements are generated. The fourth creation is the creation of knowledge and of working capacity.

Text 17
वैकारिको देवसर्ग: पञ्चमो यन्मयं मन: ।
पष्ठस्तु तमस: सर्गो यस्त्वबुद्धिकृत: प्रभो: ॥ १७ ॥
vaikāriko deva-sargaḥ
pañcamo yan-mayaṁ manaḥ
ṣaṣṭhas tu tamasaḥ sargo
yas tv abuddhi-kṛtaḥ prabhoḥ
Synonyms
vaikārikaḥ — interaction of the mode of goodness; deva — the demigods, or controlling deities; sargaḥ — creation; pañcamaḥ — fifth; yat — that which; mayam — sum total; manaḥ — mind; ṣaṣṭhaḥ — sixth; tu — but; tamasaḥ — of darkness; sargaḥ — creation; yaḥ — that which; tu — expletive; abuddhi-kṛtaḥ — made foolish; prabhoḥ — of the master.

Translation
The fifth creation is that of the controlling deities by the interaction of the mode of goodness, of which the mind is the sum total. The sixth creation is the ignorant darkness of the living entity, by which the master acts as a fool.

Text 18
षडिमे प्राकृता: सर्गा वैकृतानपि मे श‍ृणु ।
रजोभाजो भगवतो लीलेयं हरिमेधस: ॥ १८ ॥
ṣaḍ ime prākṛtāḥ sargā
vaikṛtān api me śṛṇu
rajo-bhājo bhagavato
līleyaṁ hari-medhasaḥ
Synonyms
ṣaṭ — six; ime — all these; prākṛtāḥ — of the material energy; sargāḥ — creations; vaikṛtān — secondary creations by Brahmā; api — also; me — from me; śṛṇu — just hear; rajaḥ-bhājaḥ — of the incarnation of the mode of passion (Brahmā); bhagavataḥ — of the greatly powerful; līlā — pastime; iyam — this; hari — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; medhasaḥ — of one who has such a brain.

Translation
All the above are natural creations by the external energy of the Lord. Now hear from me about the creations by Brahmā, who is an incarnation of the mode of passion and who, in the matter of creation, has a brain like that of the Personality of Godhead.

Text 19
सप्तमो मुख्यसर्गस्तु षङ्‌विधस्तस्थुषां च य: ।
वनस्पत्योषधिलतात्वक्सारा वीरुधो द्रुमा: ॥ १९ ॥
saptamo mukhya-sargas tu
ṣaḍ-vidhas tasthuṣāṁ ca yaḥ
vanaspaty-oṣadhi-latā-
tvaksārā vīrudho drumāḥ
Synonyms
saptamaḥ — the seventh; mukhya — principle; sargaḥ — creation; tu — indeed; ṣaṭ-vidhaḥ — six kinds of; tasthuṣām — of those who do not move; ca — also; yaḥ — those; vanaspati — fruit trees without flowers; oṣadhi — trees and plants existing until the fruit is ripe; latā — creepers; tvaksārāḥ — pipe plants; vīrudhaḥ — creepers without support; drumāḥ — trees with flowers and fruits.

Translation
The seventh creation is that of the immovable entities, which are of six kinds: the fruit trees without flowers, trees and plants which exist until the fruit is ripe, creepers, pipe plants, creepers which have no support, and trees with flowers and fruits.

Text 20
उत्स्रोतसस्तम:प्राया अन्त:स्पर्शा विशेषिण: ॥ २० ॥
utsrotasas tamaḥ-prāyā
antaḥ-sparśā viśeṣiṇaḥ
Synonyms
utsrotasaḥ — they seek their subsistence upwards; tamaḥ-prāyāḥ — almost unconscious; antaḥ-sparśāḥ — slightly feeling within; viśeṣiṇaḥ — with varieties of manifestation.

Translation
All the immovable trees and plants seek their subsistence upwards. They are almost unconscious but have feelings of pain within. They are manifested in variegatedness.

Text 21
तिरश्चामष्टम: सर्ग: सोऽष्टाविंशद्विधो मत: ।
अविदो भूरितमसो घ्राणज्ञा ह्यद्यवेदिन: ॥ २१ ॥
tiraścām aṣṭamaḥ sargaḥ
so ’ṣṭāviṁśad-vidho mataḥ
avido bhūri-tamaso
ghrāṇa-jñā hṛdy avedinaḥ
Synonyms
tiraścām — species of lower animals; aṣṭamaḥ — the eighth; sargaḥ — creation; saḥ — they are; aṣṭāviṁśat — twenty-eight; vidhaḥ — varieties; mataḥ — considered; avidaḥ — without knowledge of tomorrow; bhūri — extensively; tamasaḥ — ignorant; ghrāṇa-jñāḥ — can know desirables by smell; hṛdi avedinaḥ — can remember very little in the heart.

Translation
The eighth creation is that of the lower species of life, and they are of different varieties, numbering twenty-eight. They are all extensively foolish and ignorant. They know their desirables by smell, but are unable to remember anything within the heart.

Text 22
गौरजो महिष: कृष्ण: सूकरो गवयो रुरु: ।
द्विशफा: पशवश्चेमे अविरुष्ट्रश्च सत्तम ॥ २२ ॥
gaur ajo mahiṣaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ
sūkaro gavayo ruruḥ
dvi-śaphāḥ paśavaś ceme
avir uṣṭraś ca sattama
Synonyms
gauḥ — the cow; ajaḥ — the goat; mahiṣaḥ — the buffalo; kṛṣṇaḥ — a kind of stag; sūkaraḥ — hog; gavayaḥ — a species of animal; ruruḥ — deer; dvi-śaphāḥ — having cloven hooves; paśavaḥ — animals; ca — also; ime — all these; aviḥ — lamb; uṣṭraḥ — camel; ca — and; sattama — O purest.

Translation
O purest Vidura, of the lower animals the cow, goat, buffalo, kṛṣṇa stag, hog, gavaya animal, deer, lamb and camel all have cloven hooves.

Text 23
खरोऽश्वोऽश्वतरो गौर: शरभश्चमरी तथा ।
एते चैकशफा: क्षत्त: श‍ृणु पञ्चनखान् पशून् ॥ २३ ॥
kharo ’śvo ’śvataro gauraḥ
śarabhaś camarī tathā
ete caika-śaphāḥ kṣattaḥ
śṛṇu pañca-nakhān paśūn
Synonyms
kharaḥ — ass; aśvaḥ — horse; aśvataraḥ — mule; gauraḥ — white deer; śarabhaḥ — bison; camarī — wild cow; tathā — thus; ete — all these; ca — and; eka — only one; śaphāḥ — hoof; kṣattaḥ — O Vidura; śṛṇu — just hear now; pañca — five; nakhān — nails; paśūn — animals.

Translation
The horse, mule, ass, gaura, śarabha bison and wild cow all have only one hoof. Now you may hear from me about the animals who have five nails.

Text 24
श्वा सृगालो वृको व्याघ्रो मार्जार: शशशल्लकौ ।
सिंह: कपिर्गज: कूर्मो गोधा च मकरादय: ॥ २४ ॥
śvā sṛgālo vṛko vyāghro
mārjāraḥ śaśa-śallakau
siṁhaḥ kapir gajaḥ kūrmo
godhā ca makarādayaḥ
Synonyms
śvā — dog; sṛgālaḥ — jackal; vṛkaḥ — fox; vyāghraḥ — tiger; mārjāraḥ — cat; śaśa — rabbit; śallakau — sajāru (with thorns on the body); siṁhaḥ — lion; kapiḥ — monkey; gajaḥ — elephant; kūrmaḥ — tortoise; godhā — gosāpa (snake with four legs); ca — also; makara-ādayaḥ — the alligator and others.

Translation
The dog, jackal, tiger, fox, cat, rabbit, sajāru, lion, monkey, elephant, tortoise, alligator, gosāpa, etc., all have five nails in their claws. They are known as pañca-nakhas, or animals having five nails.

Text 25
कङ्कगृधबकश्येनभासभल्लूकबर्हिण: ।
हंससारसचक्राह्वकाकोलूकादय: खगा: ॥ २५ ॥
kaṅka-gṛdhra-baka-śyena-
bhāsa-bhallūka-barhiṇaḥ
haṁsa-sārasa-cakrāhva-
kākolūkādayaḥ khagāḥ
Synonyms
kaṅka — heron; gṛdhra — vulture; baka — crane; śyena — hawk; bhāsa — the bhāsa; bhallūka — the bhallūka; barhiṇaḥ — the peacock; haṁsa — swan; sārasa — the sārasa; cakrāhva — the cakravāka; kāka — crow; ulūka — owl; ādayaḥ — and others; khagāḥ — the birds.

Translation
The heron, vulture, crane, hawk, bhāsa, bhallūka, peacock, swan, sārasa, cakravāka, crow, owl and others are the birds.

Text 26
अर्वाक्स्रोतस्तु नवम: क्षत्तरेकविधो नृणाम् ।
रजोऽधिका: कर्मपरा दु:खे च सुखमानिन: ॥ २६ ॥
arvāk-srotas tu navamaḥ
kṣattar eka-vidho nṛṇām
rajo ’dhikāḥ karma-parā
duḥkhe ca sukha-māninaḥ
Synonyms
arvāk — downwards; srotaḥ — passage of food; tu — but; navamaḥ — the ninth; kṣattaḥ — O Vidura; eka-vidhaḥ — one species; nṛṇām — of human beings; rajaḥ — the mode of passion; adhikāḥ — very prominent; karma-parāḥ — interested in working; duḥkhe — in misery; ca — but; sukha — happiness; māninaḥ — thinking.

Translation
The creation of the human beings, who are of one species only and who stock their eatables in the belly, is the ninth in the rotation. In the human race, the mode of passion is very prominent. Humans are always busy in the midst of miserable life, but they think themselves happy in all respects.

Text 27
वैकृतास्रय एवैते देवसर्गश्च सत्तम ।
वैकारिकस्तु य: प्रोक्त: कौमारस्तूभयात्मक: ॥ २७ ॥
vaikṛtās traya evaite
deva-sargaś ca sattama
vaikārikas tu yaḥ proktaḥ
kaumāras tūbhayātmakaḥ
Synonyms
vaikṛtāḥ — creations of Brahmā; trayaḥ — three kinds; eva — certainly; ete — all these; deva-sargaḥ — appearance of the demigods; ca — also; sattama — O good Vidura; vaikārikaḥ — creation of demigods by nature; tu — but; yaḥ — which; proktaḥ — described before; kaumāraḥ — the four Kumāras; tu — but; ubhaya-ātmakaḥ — both ways (namely vaikṛta and prākṛta).

Translation
O good Vidura, these last three creations and the creation of demigods (the tenth creation) are vaikṛta creations, which are different from the previously described prākṛta (natural) creations. The appearance of the Kumāras is both.

Texts 28-29
देवसर्गश्चाष्टविधो विबुधा: पितरोऽसुरा: ।
गन्धर्वाप्सरस: सिद्धा यक्षरक्षांसि चारणा: ॥ २८ ॥
भूतप्रेतपिशाचाश्च विद्याध्रा: किन्नरादय: ।
दशैते विदुराख्याता: सर्गास्ते विश्वसृक्‍कृता: ॥ २९ ॥
deva-sargaś cāṣṭa-vidho
vibudhāḥ pitaro ’surāḥ
gandharvāpsarasaḥ siddhā
yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi cāraṇāḥ
bhūta-preta-piśācāś ca
vidyādhrāḥ kinnarādayaḥ
daśaite vidurākhyātāḥ
sargās te viśva-sṛk-kṛtāḥ
Synonyms
deva-sargaḥ — creation of the demigods; ca — also; aṣṭa-vidhaḥ — eight kinds; vibudhāḥ — the demigods; pitaraḥ — the forefathers; asurāḥ — the demons; gandharva — the expert artisans in the higher planets; apsarasaḥ — the angels; siddhāḥ — persons who are perfect in mystic powers; yakṣa — the superprotectors; rakṣāṁsi — giants; cāraṇāḥ — the celestial singers; bhūta — jinn; preta — evil spirits; piśācāḥ — attendant spirits; ca — also; vidyādhrāḥ — the celestial denizens named Vidyādharas; kinnara — superhuman beings; ādayaḥ — and others; daśa ete — all these ten (creations); vidura — O Vidura; ākhyātāḥ — described; sargāḥ — creations; te — unto you; viśva-sṛk — the creator of the universe (Brahmā); kṛtāḥ — done by him.

Translation
The creation of the demigods is of eight varieties: (1) the demigods, (2) the forefathers, (3) the asuras, or demons, (4) the Gandharvas and Apsarās, or angels, (5) the Yakṣas and Rākṣasas, (6) the Siddhas, Cāraṇas and Vidyādharas, (7) the Bhūtas, Pretas and Piśācas, and (8) the superhuman beings, celestial singers, etc. All are created by Brahmā, the creator of the universe.

Text 30
अत: परं प्रवक्ष्यामि वंशान्मन्वन्तराणि च ।
एवं रज:प्लुत: स्रष्टा कल्पादिष्वात्मभूर्हरि: ।
सृजत्यमोघसङ्कल्प आत्मैवात्मानमात्मना ॥ ३० ॥
ataḥ paraṁ pravakṣyāmi
vaṁśān manvantarāṇi ca
evaṁ rajaḥ-plutaḥ sraṣṭā
kalpādiṣv ātmabhūr hariḥ
sṛjaty amogha-saṅkalpa
ātmaivātmānam ātmanā
Synonyms
ataḥ — here; param — after; pravakṣyāmi — I shall explain; vaṁśān — descendants; manvantarāṇi — different advents of Manus; ca — and; evam — thus; rajaḥ-plutaḥ — infused with the mode of passion; sraṣṭā — the creator; kalpa-ādiṣu — in different millenniums; ātma-bhūḥ — self-advent; hariḥ — the Personality of Godhead; sṛjati — creates; amogha — unfailing; saṅkalpaḥ — determination; ātmā eva — He Himself; ātmānam — Himself; ātmanā — by His own energy.

Translation
Now I shall describe the descendants of the Manus. The creator, Brahmā, as the incarnation of the passion mode of the Personality of Godhead, creates the universal affairs with unfailing desires in every millennium by the force of the Lord’s energy.