Text 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
इति ते वर्णित: क्षत्त: कालाख्य: परमात्मन: ।
महिमा वेदगर्भोऽथ यथास्राक्षीन्निबोध मे ॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvāca
iti te varṇitaḥ kṣattaḥ
kālākhyaḥ paramātmanaḥ
mahimā veda-garbho ’tha
yathāsrākṣīn nibodha me
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Śrī Maitreya said; iti — thus; te — unto you; varṇitaḥ — described; kṣattaḥ — O Vidura; kāla-ākhyaḥ — by the name eternal time; paramātmanaḥ — of the Supersoul; mahimā — glories; veda-garbhaḥ — Lord Brahmā, the reservoir of the Vedas; atha — hereafter; yathā — as it is; asrākṣīt — did create; nibodha — just try to understand; me — from me.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya said: O learned Vidura, so far I have explained to you the glories of the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His feature of kāla. Now you can hear from me about the creation of Brahmā, the reservoir of all Vedic knowledge.

Text 2
ससर्जाग्रेऽन्धतामिस्रमथ तामिस्रमादिकृत् ।
महामोहं च मोहं च तमश्चाज्ञानवृत्तय: ॥ २ ॥
sasarjāgre ’ndha-tāmisram
atha tāmisram ādi-kṛt
mahāmohaṁ ca mohaṁ ca
tamaś cājñāna-vṛttayaḥ
Synonyms
sasarja — created; agre — at first; andha-tāmisram — the sense of death; atha — then; tāmisram — anger upon frustration; ādi-kṛt — all these; mahā-moham — ownership of enjoyable objects; ca — also; moham — illusory conception; ca — also; tamaḥ — darkness in self-knowledge; ca — as well as; ajñāna — nescience; vṛttayaḥ — engagements.

Translation
Brahmā first created the nescient engagements like self-deception, the sense of death, anger after frustration, the sense of false ownership, and the illusory bodily conception, or forgetfulness of one’s real identity.

Text 3
दृष्ट्वा पापीयसीं सृष्टिं नात्मानं बह्वमन्यत ।
भगवद्ध्यानपूतेन मनसान्यां ततोऽसृजत् ॥ ३ ॥
dṛṣṭvā pāpīyasīṁ sṛṣṭiṁ
nātmānaṁ bahv amanyata
bhagavad-dhyāna-pūtena
manasānyāṁ tato ’sṛjat
Synonyms
dṛṣṭvā — by seeing; pāpīyasīm — sinful; sṛṣṭim — creation; na — did not; ātmānam — unto Himself; bahu — much pleasure; amanyata — felt; bhagavat — on the Personality of Godhead; dhyāna — meditation; pūtena — purified by that; manasā — by such a mentality; anyām — another; tataḥ — thereafter; asṛjat — created.

Translation
Seeing such a misleading creation as a sinful task, Brahmā did not feel much pleasure in his activity, and therefore he purified himself by meditation on the Personality of Godhead. Then he began another term of creation.

Text 4
सनकं च सनन्दं च सनातनमथात्मभू: ।
सनत्कुमारं च मुनीन्निष्क्रियानूर्ध्वरेतस: ॥ ४ ॥
sanakaṁ ca sanandaṁ ca
sanātanam athātmabhūḥ
sanat-kumāraṁ ca munīn
niṣkriyān ūrdhva-retasaḥ
Synonyms
sanakam — Sanaka; ca — also; sanandam — Sananda; ca — and; sanātanam — Sanātana; atha — thereafter; ātma-bhūḥ — Brahmā, who is self-born; sanat-kumāram — Sanat-kumāra; ca — also; munīn — the great sages; niṣkriyān — free from all fruitive action; ūrdhva-retasaḥ — those whose semen flows upwards.

Translation
In the beginning, Brahmā created four great sages named Sanaka, Sananda, Sanātana and Sanat-kumāra. All of them were unwilling to adopt materialistic activities because they were highly elevated due to their semen’s flowing upwards.

Text 5
तान् बभाषे स्वभू: पुत्रान् प्रजा: सृजत पुत्रका: ।
तन्नैच्छन्मोक्षधर्माणो वासुदेवपरायणा: ॥ ५ ॥
tān babhāṣe svabhūḥ putrān
prajāḥ sṛjata putrakāḥ
tan naicchan mokṣa-dharmāṇo
vāsudeva-parāyaṇāḥ
Synonyms
tān — unto the Kumāras, as above mentioned; babhāṣe — addressed; svabhūḥ — Brahmā; putrān — unto the sons; prajāḥ — generations; sṛjata — to create; putrakāḥ — O my sons; tat — that; na — not; aicchan — desired; mokṣa-dharmāṇaḥ — pledged to the principles of liberation; vāsudeva — the Personality of Godhead; parāyaṇāḥ — who are so devoted.

Translation
Brahmā spoke to his sons after generating them. “My dear sons,” he said, “now generate progeny.” But due to their being attached to Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they aimed at liberation, and therefore they expressed their unwillingness.

Text 6
सोऽवध्यात: सुतैरेवं प्रत्याख्यातानुशासनै: ।
क्रोधं दुर्विषहं जातं नियन्तुमुपचक्रमे ॥ ६ ॥
so ’vadhyātaḥ sutair evaṁ
pratyākhyātānuśāsanaiḥ
krodhaṁ durviṣahaṁ jātaṁ
niyantum upacakrame
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Brahmā); avadhyātaḥ — thus being disrespected; sutaiḥ — by the sons; evam — thus; pratyākhyāta — refusing to obey; anuśāsanaiḥ — the order of their father; krodham — anger; durviṣaham — too much to be tolerated; jātam — thus generated; niyantum — to control; upacakrame — tried his best.

Translation
On the refusal of the sons to obey the order of their father, there was much anger generated in the mind of Brahmā, which he tried to control and not express.

Text 7
धिया निगृह्यमाणोऽपि भ्रुवोर्मध्यात्प्रजापते: ।
सद्योऽजायत तन्मन्यु: कुमारो नीललोहित: ॥ ७ ॥
dhiyā nigṛhyamāṇo ’pi
bhruvor madhyāt prajāpateḥ
sadyo ’jāyata tan-manyuḥ
kumāro nīla-lohitaḥ
Synonyms
dhiyā — by intelligence; nigṛhyamāṇaḥ — being controlled; api — in spite of; bhruvoḥ — of the eyebrows; madhyāt — from between; prajāpateḥ — of Brahmā; sadyaḥ — at once; ajāyata — generated; tat — his; manyuḥ — anger; kumāraḥ — a child; nīla-lohitaḥ — mixture of blue and red.

Translation
Although he tried to curb his anger, it came out from between his eyebrows, and a child mixed blue and red was immediately generated.

Text 8
स वै रुरोद देवानां पूर्वजो भगवान् भव: ।
नामानि कुरु मे धात: स्थानानि च जगद्गुरो ॥ ८ ॥
sa vai ruroda devānāṁ
pūrvajo bhagavān bhavaḥ
nāmāni kuru me dhātaḥ
sthānāni ca jagad-guro
Synonyms
saḥ — he; vai — certainly; ruroda — cried loudly; devānām pūrvajaḥ — the eldest of all demigods; bhagavān — the most powerful; bhavaḥ — Lord Śiva; nāmāni — different names; kuru — designate; me — my; dhātaḥ — O destiny maker; sthānāni — places; ca — also; jagat-guro — O teacher of the universe.

Translation
After his birth he began to cry: O destiny maker, teacher of the universe, kindly designate my name and place.

Text 9
इति तस्य वच: पाद्मो भगवान् परिपालयन् ।
अभ्यधाद्भद्रया वाचा मा रोदीस्तत्करोमि ते ॥ ९ ॥
iti tasya vacaḥ pādmo
bhagavān paripālayan
abhyadhād bhadrayā vācā
mā rodīs tat karomi te
Synonyms
iti — thus; tasya — his; vacaḥ — request; pādmaḥ — one who is born from the lotus flower; bhagavān — the powerful; paripālayan — accepting the request; abhyadhāt — pacified; bhadrayā — by gentle; vācā — words; mā — do not; rodīḥ — cry; tat — that; karomi — I shall do it; te — as desired by you.

Translation
The all-powerful Brahmā, who was born from the lotus flower, pacified the boy with gentle words, accepting his request, and said: Do not cry. I shall certainly do as you desire.

Text 10
यदरोदी: सुरश्रेष्ठ सोद्वेग इव बालक: ।
ततस्त्वामभिधास्यन्ति नाम्ना रुद्र इति प्रजा: ॥ १० ॥
yad arodīḥ sura-śreṣṭha
sodvega iva bālakaḥ
tatas tvām abhidhāsyanti
nāmnā rudra iti prajāḥ
Synonyms
yat — as much as; arodīḥ — cried loudly; sura-śreṣṭha — O chief of the demigods; sa-udvegaḥ — with great anxiety; iva — like; bālakaḥ — a boy; tataḥ — therefore; tvām — you; abhidhāsyanti — will call; nāmnā — by the name; rudraḥ — Rudra; iti — thus; prajāḥ — people.

Translation
Thereafter Brahmā said: O chief of the demigods, you shall be called by the name Rudra by all people because you have so anxiously cried.

Text 11
हृदिन्द्रियाण्यसुर्व्योम वायुरग्निर्जलं मही ।
सूर्यश्चन्द्रस्तपश्चैव स्थानान्यग्रे कृतानि ते ॥ ११ ॥
hṛd indriyāṇy asur vyoma
vāyur agnir jalaṁ mahī
sūryaś candras tapaś caiva
sthānāny agre kṛtāni te
Synonyms
hṛt — the heart; indriyāṇi — the senses; asuḥ — life air; vyoma — the sky; vāyuḥ — the air; agniḥ — fire; jalam — water; mahī — the earth; sūryaḥ — the sun; candraḥ — the moon; tapaḥ — austerity; ca — as well as; eva — certainly; sthānāni — all these places; agre — hereinbefore; kṛtāni — already made; te — for you.

Translation
My dear boy, I have already selected the following places for your residence: the heart, the senses, the air of life, the sky, the air, the fire, the water, the earth, the sun, the moon and austerity.

Text 12
मन्युर्मनुर्महिनसो महाञ्छिव ऋतध्वज: ।
उग्ररेता भव: कालो वामदेवो धृतव्रत: ॥ १२ ॥
manyur manur mahinaso
mahāñ chiva ṛtadhvajaḥ
ugraretā bhavaḥ kālo
vāmadevo dhṛtavrataḥ
Synonyms
manyuḥ, manuḥ, mahinasaḥ, mahān, śivaḥ, ṛtadhvajaḥ, ugaretāḥ, bhavaḥ, kālaḥ, vāmadevaḥ, dhṛtavrataḥ — all names of Rudra.

Translation
Lord Brahmā said: My dear boy Rudra, you have eleven other names: Manyu, Manu, Mahinasa, Mahān, Śiva, Ṛtadhvaja, Ugraretā, Bhava, Kāla, Vāmadeva and Dhṛtavrata.

Text 13
धीर्धृतिरसलोमा च नियुत्सर्पिरिलाम्बिका ।
इरावती स्वधा दीक्षा रुद्राण्यो रुद्र ते स्त्रिय: ॥ १३ ॥
dhīr dhṛti-rasalomā ca
niyut sarpir ilāmbikā
irāvatī svadhā dīkṣā
rudrāṇyo rudra te striyaḥ
Synonyms
dhīḥ, dhṛti, rasalā, umā, niyut, sarpiḥ, ilā, ambikā, irāvatī, svadhā, dīkṣā rudrāṇyaḥ — the eleven Rudrāṇīs; rudra — O Rudra; te — unto you; striyaḥ — wives.

Translation
O Rudra, you also have eleven wives, called the Rudrāṇīs, and they are as follows: Dhī, Dhṛti, Rasalā, Umā, Niyut, Sarpi, Ilā, Ambikā, Irāvatī, Svadhā and Dīkṣā.

Text 14
गृहाणैतानि नामानि स्थानानि च सयोषण: ।
एभि: सृज प्रजा बह्वी: प्रजानामसि यत्पति: ॥ १४ ॥
gṛhāṇaitāni nāmāni
sthānāni ca sa-yoṣaṇaḥ
ebhiḥ sṛja prajā bahvīḥ
prajānām asi yat patiḥ
Synonyms
gṛhāṇa — just accept; etāni — all these; nāmāni — different names; sthānāni — as well as places; ca — also; sa-yoṣaṇaḥ — along with wives; ebhiḥ — with them; sṛja — just generate; prajāḥ — progeny; bahvīḥ — on a large scale; prajānām — of the living entities; asi — you are; yat — since; patiḥ — the master.

Translation
My dear boy, you may now accept all the names and places designated for you and your different wives, and since you are now one of the masters of the living entities, you may increase the population on a large scale.

Text 15
इत्यादिष्ट: स्वगुरुणा भगवान्नीललोहित: ।
सत्त्वाकृतिस्वभावेन ससर्जात्मसमा: प्रजा: ॥ १५ ॥
ity ādiṣṭaḥ sva-guruṇā
bhagavān nīla-lohitaḥ
sattvākṛti-svabhāvena
sasarjātma-samāḥ prajāḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus; ādiṣṭaḥ — being ordered; sva-guruṇā — by his own spiritual master; bhagavān — the most powerful; nīla-lohitaḥ — Rudra, whose color is mixed blue and red; sattva — power; ākṛti — bodily features; svabhāvena — and with a very furious mode of nature; sasarja — created; ātma-samāḥ — like his own prototype; prajāḥ — generations.

Translation
The most powerful Rudra, whose bodily color was blue mixed with red, created many offspring exactly resembling him in features, strength and furious nature.

Text 16
रुद्राणां रुद्रसृष्टानां समन्ताद् ग्रसतां जगत् ।
निशाम्यासंख्यशो यूथान् प्रजापतिरशङ्कत ॥ १६ ॥
rudrāṇāṁ rudra-sṛṣṭānāṁ
samantād grasatāṁ jagat
niśāmyāsaṅkhyaśo yūthān
prajāpatir aśaṅkata
Synonyms
rudrāṇām — of the sons of Rudra; rudra-sṛṣṭānām — who were generated by Rudra; samantāt — being assembled together; grasatām — while devouring; jagat — the universe; niśāmya — by observing their activities; asaṅkhyaśaḥ — unlimited; yūthān — assembly; prajā-patiḥ — the father of the living entities; aśaṅkata — became afraid of.

Translation
The sons and grandsons generated by Rudra were unlimited in number, and when they assembled together they attempted to devour the entire universe. When Brahmā, the father of the living entities, saw this, he became afraid of the situation.

Text 17
अलं प्रजाभि: सृष्टाभिरीद‍ृशीभि: सुरोत्तम ।
मया सह दहन्तीभिर्दिशश्चक्षुर्भिरुल्बणै: ॥ १७ ॥
alaṁ prajābhiḥ sṛṣṭābhir
īdṛśībhiḥ surottama
mayā saha dahantībhir
diśaś cakṣurbhir ulbaṇaiḥ
Synonyms
alam — unnecessary; prajābhiḥ — by such living entities; sṛṣṭābhiḥ — generated; īdṛśībhiḥ — of this type; sura-uttama — O best among the demigods; mayā — me; saha — along with; dahantībhiḥ — who are burning; diśaḥ — all sides; cakṣurbhiḥ — by the eyes; ulbaṇaiḥ — fiery flames.

Translation
Brahmā told Rudra: O best among the demigods, there is no need for you to generate living entities of this nature. They have begun to devastate everything on all sides with the fiery flames from their eyes, and they have even attacked me.

Text 18
तप आतिष्ठ भद्रं ते सर्वभूतसुखावहम् ।
तपसैव यथापूर्व स्रष्टा विश्वमिदं भवान् ॥ १८ ॥
tapa ātiṣṭha bhadraṁ te
sarva-bhūta-sukhāvaham
tapasaiva yathā pūrvaṁ
sraṣṭā viśvam idaṁ bhavān
Synonyms
tapaḥ — penance; ātiṣṭha — be situated; bhadram — auspicious; te — unto you; sarva — all; bhūta — living entities; sukha-āvaham — bringing happiness; tapasā — by penance; eva — only; yathā — as much as; pūrvam — before; sraṣṭā — will create; viśvam — the universe; idam — this; bhavān — yourself.

Translation
My dear son, you had better situate yourself in penance, which is auspicious for all living entities and which will bring all benediction upon you. By penance only shall you be able to create the universe as it was before.

Text 19
तपसैव परं ज्योतिर्भगवन्तमधोक्षजम् ।
सर्वभूतगुहावासमञ्जसा विन्दते पुमान् ॥ १९ ॥
tapasaiva paraṁ jyotir
bhagavantam adhokṣajam
sarva-bhūta-guhāvāsam
añjasā vindate pumān
Synonyms
tapasā — by penance; eva — only; param — the supreme; jyotiḥ — light; bhagavantam — unto the Personality of Godhead; adhokṣajam — He who is beyond the approach of the senses; sarva-bhūta-guhā-āvāsam — residing in the heart of all living entities; añjasā — completely; vindate — can know; pumān — a person.

Translation
By penance only can one even approach the Personality of Godhead, who is within the heart of every living entity and at the same time beyond the reach of all senses.

Text 20
मैत्रेय उवाच
एवमात्मभुवादिष्ट: परिक्रम्य गिरां पतिम् ।
बाढमित्यमुमामन्‍त्र्य विवेश तपसे वनम् ॥ २० ॥
maitreya uvāca
evam ātmabhuvādiṣṭaḥ
parikramya girāṁ patim
bāḍham ity amum āmantrya
viveśa tapase vanam
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Śrī Maitreya said; evam — thus; ātma-bhuvā — by Brahmā; ādiṣṭaḥ — being so requested; parikramya — by circumambulating; girām — of the Vedas; patim — unto the master; bāḍham — that is right; iti — thus; amum — unto Brahmā; āmantrya — thus addressing; viveśa — entered into; tapase — for the matter of penance; vanam — into the forest.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya said: Thus Rudra, having been ordered by Brahmā, circumambulated his father, the master of the Vedas. Addressing him with words of assent, he entered the forest to perform austere penances.

Text 21
अथाभिध्यायत: सर्गं दश पुत्रा: प्रजज्ञिरे ।
भगवच्छक्तियुक्तस्य लोकसन्तानहेतव: ॥ २१ ॥
athābhidhyāyataḥ sargaṁ
daśa putrāḥ prajajñire
bhagavac-chakti-yuktasya
loka-santāna-hetavaḥ
Synonyms
atha — thus; abhidhyāyataḥ — while thinking of; sargam — creation; daśa — ten; putrāḥ — sons; prajajñire — were begotten; bhagavat — regarding the Personality of Godhead; śakti — potency; yuktasya — empowered with; loka — the world; santāna — generation; hetavaḥ — the causes.

Translation
Brahmā, who was empowered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, thought of generating living entities and begot ten sons for the extension of the generations.

Text 22
मरीचिरत्र्याङ्गिरसौ पुलस्त्य: पुलह: क्रतु: ।
भृगुर्वसिष्ठो दक्षश्च दशमस्तत्र नारद: ॥ २२ ॥
marīcir atry-aṅgirasau
pulastyaḥ pulahaḥ kratuḥ
bhṛgur vasiṣṭho dakṣaś ca
daśamas tatra nāradaḥ
Synonyms
marīciḥ, atri, aṅgirasau, pulastyaḥ, pulahaḥ, kratuḥ, bhṛguḥ, vasiṣṭhaḥ, dakṣaḥ — names of sons of Brahmā; ca — and; daśamaḥ — the tenth; tatra — there; nāradaḥ — Nārada.

Translation
Marīci, Atri, Aṅgirā, Pulastya, Pulaha, Kratu, Bhṛgu, Vasiṣṭha, Dakṣa, and the tenth son, Nārada, were thus born.

Text 23
उत्सङ्गान्नारदो जज्ञे दक्षोऽङ्गुष्ठात्स्वयम्भुव: ।
प्राणाद्वसिष्ठ: सञ्जातो भृगुस्त्वचि करात्क्रतु: ॥ २३ ॥
utsaṅgān nārado jajñe
dakṣo ’ṅguṣṭhāt svayambhuvaḥ
prāṇād vasiṣṭhaḥ sañjāto
bhṛgus tvaci karāt kratuḥ
Synonyms
utsaṅgāt — by transcendental deliberation; nāradaḥ — Mahāmuni Nārada; jajñe — was generated; dakṣaḥ — Dakṣa; aṅguṣṭhāt — from the thumb; svayambhuvaḥ — of Brahmā; prāṇāt — from the life air, or breathing; vasiṣṭhaḥ — Vasiṣṭha; sañjātaḥ — was born; bhṛguḥ — the sage Bhṛgu; tvaci — from the touch; karāt — from the hand; kratuḥ — the sage Kratu.

Translation
Nārada was born from the deliberation of Brahmā, which is the best part of the body. Vasiṣṭha was born from his breathing, Dakṣa from a thumb, Bhṛgu from his touch, and Kratu from his hand.

Text 24
पुलहो नाभितो जज्ञे पुलस्त्य: कर्णयोऋर्षि: ।
अङ्गिरा मुखतोऽक्ष्णोऽत्रिर्मरीचिर्मनसोऽभवत् ॥ २४ ॥
pulaho nābhito jajñe
pulastyaḥ karṇayor ṛṣiḥ
aṅgirā mukhato ’kṣṇo ’trir
marīcir manaso ’bhavat
Synonyms
pulahaḥ — the sage Pulaha; nābhitaḥ — from the navel; jajñe — generated; pulastyaḥ — the sage Pulastya; karṇayoḥ — from the ears; ṛṣiḥ — the great sage; aṅgirāḥ — the sage Aṅgirā; mukhataḥ — from the mouth; akṣṇaḥ — from the eyes; atriḥ — the sage Atri; marīciḥ — the sage Marīci; manasaḥ — from the mind; abhavat — appeared.

Translation
Pulastya was generated from the ears, Aṅgirā from the mouth, Atri from the eyes, Marīci from the mind and Pulaha from the navel of Brahmā.

Text 25
धर्म: स्तनाद्दक्षिणतो यत्र नारायण: स्वयम् ।
अधर्म पृष्ठतो यस्मान्मृत्युर्लोकभयङ्कर: ॥ २५ ॥
dharmaḥ stanād dakṣiṇato
yatra nārāyaṇaḥ svayam
adharmaḥ pṛṣṭhato yasmān
mṛtyur loka-bhayaṅkaraḥ
Synonyms
dharmaḥ — religion; stanāt — from the breast; dakṣiṇataḥ — on the right side; yatra — wherein; nārāyaṇaḥ — the Supreme Lord; svayam — personally; adharmaḥ — irreligion; pṛṣṭhataḥ — from the back; yasmāt — from which; mṛtyuḥ — death; loka — to the living entity; bhayam-karaḥ — horrible.

Translation
Religion was manifested from the breast of Brahmā, wherein is seated the Supreme Personality of Godhead Nārāyaṇa, and irreligion appeared from his back, where horrible death takes place for the living entity.

Text 26
हृदि कामो भ्रुव: क्रोधो लोभश्चाधरदच्छदात् ।
आस्याद्वाक्सिन्धवो मेढ्रान्निऋर्ति: पायोरघाश्रय: ॥ २६ ॥
hṛdi kāmo bhruvaḥ krodho
lobhaś cādhara-dacchadāt
āsyād vāk sindhavo meḍhrān
nirṛtiḥ pāyor aghāśrayaḥ
Synonyms
hṛdi — from the heart; kāmaḥ — lust; bhruvaḥ — from the eyebrows; krodhaḥ — anger; lobhaḥ — greed; ca — also; adhara-dacchadāt — from between the lips; āsyāt — from the mouth; vāk — speaking; sindhavaḥ — the seas; meḍhrāt — from the penis; nirṛtiḥ — low activities; pāyoḥ — from the anus; agha-āśrayaḥ — reservoir of all vices.

Translation
Lust and desire became manifested from the heart of Brahmā, anger from between his eyebrows, greed from between his lips, the power of speaking from his mouth, the ocean from his penis, and low and abominable activities from his anus, the source of all sins.

Text 27
छायाया: कर्दमो जज्ञे देवहूत्या: पति: प्रभु: ।
मनसो देहतश्चेदं जज्ञे विश्वकृतो जगत् ॥ २७ ॥
chāyāyāḥ kardamo jajñe
devahūtyāḥ patiḥ prabhuḥ
manaso dehataś cedaṁ
jajñe viśva-kṛto jagat
Synonyms
chāyāyāḥ — by the shadow; kardamaḥ — Kardama Muni; jajñe — became manifested; devahūtyāḥ — of Devahūti; patiḥ — husband; prabhuḥ — the master; manasaḥ — from the mind; dehataḥ — from the body; ca — also; idam — this; jajñe — developed; viśva — the universe; kṛtaḥ — of the creator; jagat — cosmic manifestation.

Translation
Sage Kardama, husband of the great Devahūti, was manifested from the shadow of Brahmā. Thus all became manifested from either the body or the mind of Brahmā.

Text 28
वाचं दुहितरं तन्वीं स्वयम्भूर्हरतीं मन: ।
अकामां चकमे क्षत्त: सकाम इति न: श्रुतम् ॥ २८ ॥
vācaṁ duhitaraṁ tanvīṁ
svayambhūr haratīṁ manaḥ
akāmāṁ cakame kṣattaḥ
sa-kāma iti naḥ śrutam
Synonyms
vācam — Vāk; duhitaram — unto the daughter; tanvīm — born of his body; svayambhūḥ — Brahmā; haratīm — attracting; manaḥ — his mind; akāmām — without being sexually inclined; cakame — desired; kṣattaḥ — O Vidura; sa-kāmaḥ — being sexually inclined; iti — thus; naḥ — we; śrutam — have heard.

Translation
O Vidura, we have heard that Brahmā had a daughter named Vāk who was born from his body and who attracted his mind toward sex, although she was not sexually inclined towards him.

Text 29
तमधर्मे कृतमतिं विलोक्य पितरं सुता: ।
मरीचिमुख्या मुनयो विश्रम्भात्प्रत्यबोधयन् ॥ २९ ॥
tam adharme kṛta-matiṁ
vilokya pitaraṁ sutāḥ
marīci-mukhyā munayo
viśrambhāt pratyabodhayan
Synonyms
tam — unto him; adharme — in the matter of immortality; kṛta-matim — the mind being so given; vilokya — seeing thus; pitaram — unto the father; sutāḥ — sons; marīci-mukhyāḥ — headed by Marīci; munayaḥ — sages; viśrambhāt — with due respect; pratyabodhayan — submitted as follows.

Translation
Thus, finding their father so deluded in an act of immorality, the sages headed by Marīci, all sons of Brahmā, spoke as follows with great respect.

Text 30
नैतत्पूर्वै: कृतं त्वद्ये न करिष्यन्ति चापरे ।
यस्त्वं दुहितरं गच्छेरनिगृह्याङ्गजं प्रभु: ॥ ३० ॥
naitat pūrvaiḥ kṛtaṁ tvad ye
na kariṣyanti cāpare
yas tvaṁ duhitaraṁ gaccher
anigṛhyāṅgajaṁ prabhuḥ
Synonyms
na — never; etat — such a thing; pūrvaiḥ — by any other Brahmā, or yourself in any previous kalpa; kṛtam — performed; tvat — by you; ye — that which; na — nor; kariṣyanti — will do; ca — also; apare — anyone else; yaḥ — that which; tvam — you; duhitaram — unto the daughter; gaccheḥ — would go; anigṛhya — without controlling; aṅgajam — sex desire; prabhuḥ — O father.

Translation
O father, this performance in which you are endeavoring to complicate yourself was never attempted by any other Brahmā, nor by anyone else, nor by you in previous kalpas, nor will anyone dare to attempt it in the future. You are the supreme being in the universe, so how is it that you want to have sex with your daughter and cannot control your desire?

Text 31
तेजीयसामपि ह्येतन्न सुश्लोक्यं जगद्गुरो ।
यद्‌वृत्तमनुतिष्ठन् वै लोक: क्षेमाय कल्पते ॥ ३१ ॥
tejīyasām api hy etan
na suślokyaṁ jagad-guro
yad-vṛttam anutiṣṭhan vai
lokaḥ kṣemāya kalpate
Synonyms
tejīyasām — of the most powerful; api — also; hi — certainly; etat — such an act; na — not suitable; su-ślokyam — good behavior; jagat-guro — O spiritual master of the universe; yat — whose; vṛttam — character; anutiṣṭhan — following; vai — certainly; lokaḥ — the world; kṣemāya — for prosperity; kalpate — becomes eligible.

Translation
Even though you are the most powerful being, this act does not suit you because your character is followed for spiritual improvement by people in general.

Text 32
तस्मै नमो भगवते य इदं स्वेन रोचिषा ।
आत्मस्थं व्यञ्जयामास स धर्मं पातुमर्हति ॥ ३२ ॥
tasmai namo bhagavate
ya idaṁ svena rociṣā
ātma-sthaṁ vyañjayām āsa
sa dharmaṁ pātum arhati
Synonyms
tasmai — unto Him; namaḥ — obeisances; bhagavate — unto the Personality of Godhead; yaḥ — who; idam — this; svena — by His own; rociṣā — effulgence; ātma-stham — situated in Himself; vyañjayām āsa — has manifested; saḥ — He; dharmam — religion; pātum — for protection; arhati — may kindly do so.

Translation
Let us offer our respectful obeisances unto the Personality of Godhead, who, by His own effulgence, while situated in Himself, has manifested this cosmos. May He also protect religion for all goodness.

Text 33
स इत्थं गृणत: पुत्रान् पुरो दृष्ट्वा प्रजापतीन् ।
प्रजापतिपतिस्तन्वं तत्याज व्रीडितस्तदा ।
तां दिशो जगृहुर्घोरां नीहारं यद्विदुस्तम: ॥ ३३ ॥
sa itthaṁ gṛṇataḥ putrān
puro dṛṣṭvā prajāpatīn
prajāpati-patis tanvaṁ
tatyāja vrīḍitas tadā
tāṁ diśo jagṛhur ghorāṁ
nīhāraṁ yad vidus tamaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Brahmā); ittham — thus; gṛṇataḥ — speaking; putrān — sons; puraḥ — before; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; prajā-patīn — all the progenitors of living entities; prajāpati-patiḥ — the father of them (Brahmā); tanvam — body; tatyāja — quit; vrīḍitaḥ — ashamed; tadā — at that time; tām — that body; diśaḥ — all directions; jagṛhuḥ — accepted; ghorām — blamable; nīhāram — fog; yat — which; viduḥ — they know as; tamaḥ — darkness.

Translation
The father of all Prajāpatis, Brahmā, thus seeing all his Prajāpati sons speaking in that way, became very much ashamed and at once gave up the body he had accepted. Later that body appeared in all directions as the dangerous fog in darkness.

Text 34
कदाचिद् ध्यायत: स्रष्टुर्वेदा आसंश्चतुर्मुखात् ।
कथं स्रक्ष्याम्यहं लोकान् समवेतान् यथा पुरा ॥ ३४ ॥
kadācid dhyāyataḥ sraṣṭur
vedā āsaṁś catur-mukhāt
kathaṁ srakṣyāmy ahaṁ lokān
samavetān yathā purā
Synonyms
kadācit — once upon a time; dhyāyataḥ — while contemplating; sraṣṭuḥ — of Brahmā; vedāḥ — the Vedic literature; āsan — became manifested; catuḥ-mukhāt — from the four mouths; katham srakṣyāmi — how shall I create; aham — myself; lokān — all these worlds; samavetān — assembled; yathā — as they were; purā — in the past.

Translation
Once upon a time, when Brahmā was thinking of how to create the worlds as in the past millennium, the four Vedas, which contain all varieties of knowledge, became manifested from his four mouths.

Text 35
चातुर्होत्रं कर्मतन्त्रमुपवेदनयै: सह ।
धर्मस्य पादाश्चत्वारस्तथैवाश्रमवृत्तय: ॥ ३५ ॥
cātur-hotraṁ karma-tantram
upaveda-nayaiḥ saha
dharmasya pādāś catvāras
tathaivāśrama-vṛttayaḥ
Synonyms
cātuḥ — four; hotram — paraphernalia for sacrifice; karma — action; tantram — expansions of such activities; upaveda — supplementary to the Vedas; nayaiḥ — by logical conclusions; saha — along with; dharmasya — of religiosity; pādāḥ — principles; catvāraḥ — four; tathā eva — in the same way; āśrama — social orders; vṛttayaḥ — occupations.

Translation
The four kinds of paraphernalia for conducting the fire sacrifice became manifest: the performer [the chanter], the offerer, the fire, and the action performed in terms of the supplementary Vedas. Also the four principles of religiosity [truth, austerity, mercy and cleanliness] and the duties in the four social orders all became manifest.

Text 36
विदुर उवाच
स वै विश्वसृजामीशो वेदादीन् मुखतोऽसृजत् ।
यद् यद् येनासृजद् देवस्तन्मे ब्रूहि तपोधन ॥ ३६ ॥
vidura uvāca
sa vai viśva-sṛjām īśo
vedādīn mukhato ’sṛjat
yad yad yenāsṛjad devas
tan me brūhi tapo-dhana
Synonyms
viduraḥ uvāca — Vidura said; saḥ — he (Brahmā); vai — certainly; viśva — the universe; sṛjām — of those who created; īśaḥ — the controller; veda-ādīn — the Vedas, etc.; mukhataḥ — from the mouth; asṛjat — established; yat — that; yat — which; yena — by which; asṛjat — created; devaḥ — the god; tat — that; me — unto me; brūhi — please explain; tapaḥ-dhana — O sage whose only wealth is penance.

Translation
Vidura said: O great sage whose only wealth is penance, kindly explain to me how and with whose help Brahmā established the Vedic knowledge which emanated from his mouth.

Text 37
मैत्रेय उवाच
ऋग्यजु:सामाथर्वाख्यान् वेदान् पूर्वादिभिर्मुखै: ।
शास्त्रमिज्यां स्तुतिस्तोमं प्रायश्चित्तं व्यधात्क्रमात् ॥ ३७ ॥
maitreya uvāca
ṛg-yajuḥ-sāmātharvākhyān
vedān pūrvādibhir mukhaiḥ
śāstram ijyāṁ stuti-stomaṁ
prāyaścittaṁ vyadhāt kramāt
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; ṛk-yajuḥ-sāma-atharva — the four Vedas; ākhyān — of the name; vedān — Vedic literatures; pūrva-ādibhiḥ — beginning with the front; mukhaiḥ — by the mouths; śāstram — Vedic hymns not pronounced before; ijyām — priestly rituals; stuti-stomam — the subject matter of the reciters; prāyaścittam — transcendental activities; vyadhāt — established; kramāt — one after another.

Translation
Maitreya said: Beginning from the front face of Brahmā, gradually the four Vedas — Ṛk, Yajur, Sāma and Atharva — became manifest. Thereafter, Vedic hymns which had not been pronounced before, priestly rituals, the subject matters of the recitation, and transcendental activities were all established, one after another.

Text 38
आयुर्वेदं धनुर्वेदं गान्धर्वं वेदमात्मन: ।
स्थापत्यं चासृजद् वेदं क्रमात्पूर्वादिभिर्मुखै: ॥ ३८ ॥
āyur-vedaṁ dhanur-vedaṁ
gāndharvaṁ vedam ātmanaḥ
sthāpatyaṁ cāsṛjad vedaṁ
kramāt pūrvādibhir mukhaiḥ
Synonyms
āyuḥ-vedam — medical science; dhanuḥ-vedam — military science; gāndharvam — musical art; vedam — they are all Vedic knowledge; ātmanaḥ — of his own; sthāpatyam — architectural; ca — also; asṛjat — created; vedam — knowledge; kramāt — respectively; pūrva-ādibhiḥ — beginning from the front face; mukhaiḥ — by the mouths.

Translation
He also created the medical science, military art, musical art and architectural science, all from the Vedas. They all emanated one after another, beginning from the front face.

Text 39
इतिहासपुराणानि पञ्चमं वेदमीश्वर: ।
सर्वेभ्य एव वक्त्रेभ्य: ससृजे सर्वदर्शन: ॥ ३९ ॥
itihāsa-purāṇāni
pañcamaṁ vedam īśvaraḥ
sarvebhya eva vaktrebhyaḥ
sasṛje sarva-darśanaḥ
Synonyms
itihāsa — histories; purāṇāni — the Purāṇas (supplementary Vedas); pañcamam — the fifth; vedam — the Vedic literature; īśvaraḥ — the Lord; sarvebhyaḥ — all together; eva — certainly; vaktrebhyaḥ — from his mouths; sasṛje — created; sarva — all around; darśanaḥ — one who can see all time.

Translation
Then he created the fifth Veda — the Purāṇas and the histories — from all his mouths, since he could see all the past, present and future.

Text 40
षोडश्युक्थौ पूर्ववक्त्रात्पुरीष्यग्निष्टुतावथ ।
आप्तोर्यामातिरात्रौ च वाजपेयं सगोसवम् ॥ ४० ॥
ṣoḍaśy-ukthau pūrva-vaktrāt
purīṣy-agniṣṭutāv atha
āptoryāmātirātrau ca
vājapeyaṁ sagosavam
Synonyms
ṣoḍaśī-ukthau — types of sacrifice; pūrva-vaktrāt — from the eastern mouth; purīṣi-agniṣṭutau — types of sacrifice; atha — then; āptoryāma-atirātrau — types of sacrifice; ca — and; vājapeyam — type of sacrifice; sa-gosavam — type of sacrifice.

Translation
All the different varieties of fire sacrifices [ṣoḍaśī, uktha, purīṣi, agniṣṭoma, āptoryāma, atirātra, vājapeya and gosava] became manifested from the eastern mouth of Brahmā.

Text 41
विद्या दानं तप: सत्यं धर्मस्येति पदानि च ।
आश्रमांश्च यथासंख्यमसृजत्सह वृत्तिभि: ॥ ४१ ॥
vidyā dānaṁ tapaḥ satyaṁ
dharmasyeti padāni ca
āśramāṁś ca yathā-saṅkhyam
asṛjat saha vṛttibhiḥ
Synonyms
vidyā — education; dānam — charity; tapaḥ — penance; satyam — truth; dharmasya — of religion; iti — thus; padāni — four legs; ca — also; āśramān — orders of life; ca — also; yathā — as they are; saṅkhyam — in number; asṛjat — created; saha — along with; vṛttibhiḥ — by vocations.

Translation
Education, charity, penance and truth are said to be the four legs of religion, and to learn this there are four orders of life with different classifications of castes according to vocation. Brahmā created all these in systematic order.

Text 42
सावित्रं प्राजापत्यं च ब्राह्मं चाथ बृहत्तथा ।
वार्तासञ्चयशालीनशिलोञ्छ इति वै गृहे ॥ ४२ ॥
sāvitraṁ prājāpatyaṁ ca
brāhmaṁ cātha bṛhat tathā
vārtā sañcaya-śālīna-
śiloñcha iti vai gṛhe
Synonyms
sāvitram — the thread ceremony of the twice-born; prājāpatyam — to execute the vow for one year; ca — and; brāhmam — acceptance of the Vedas; ca — and; atha — also; bṛhat — complete abstinence from sex life; tathā — then; vārtā — vocation in terms of Vedic sanction; sañcaya — professional duty; śālīna — livelihood without asking anyone for cooperation; śila-uñchaḥ — picking up rejected grains; iti — thus; vai — even though; gṛhe — in household life.

Translation
Then the thread ceremony for the twice-born was inaugurated, as were the rules to be followed for at least one year after acceptance of the Vedas, rules for observing complete abstinence from sex life, vocations in terms of Vedic injunctions, various professional duties in household life, and the method of maintaining a livelihood without anyone’s cooperation by picking up rejected grains.

Text 43
वैखानसा वालखिल्यौदुम्बरा: फेनपा वने ।
न्यासे कुटीचक: पूर्वं बह्वोदो हंसनिष्क्रियौ ॥ ४३ ॥
vaikhānasā vālakhilyau-
dumbarāḥ phenapā vane
nyāse kuṭīcakaḥ pūrvaṁ
bahvodo haṁsa-niṣkriyau
Synonyms
vaikhānasāḥ — the section of men who retire from active life and live on half-boiled meals; vālakhilya — one who quits his former stock of grains on receipt of more; audumbarāḥ — one who lives on what he gets from the direction towards which he starts after rising from bed; phenapāḥ — one who lives on the fruits which automatically fall from the tree; vane — in the forest; nyāse — in the order of renunciation; kuṭīcakaḥ — life in the family without attachment; pūrvam — in the beginning; bahvodaḥ — giving up all material activities and engaging fully in transcendental service; haṁsa — fully engaged in transcendental knowledge; niṣkriyau — stopping all kinds of activities.

Translation
The four divisions of retired life are the vaikhānasas, vālakhilyas, audumbaras and phenapas. The four divisions of the renounced order of life are the kuṭīcakas, bahvodas, haṁsas and niṣkriyas. All these were manifested from Brahmā.

Text 44
आन्वीक्षिकी त्रयी वार्ता दण्डनीतिस्तथैव च ।
एवं व्याहृतयश्वासन् प्रणवो ह्यस्य दहृत: ॥ ४४ ॥
ānvīkṣikī trayī vārtā
daṇḍa-nītis tathaiva ca
evaṁ vyāhṛtayaś cāsan
praṇavo hy asya dahrataḥ
Synonyms
ānvīkṣikī — logic; trayī — the three goals, namely religion, economy and salvation; vārtā — sense gratification; daṇḍa — law and order; nītiḥ — moral codes; tathā — as also; eva ca — respectively; evam — thus; vyāhṛtayaḥ — the celebrated hymns bhūḥ, bhuvaḥ and svaḥ; ca — also; āsan — came into existence; praṇavaḥ — the oṁkāra; hi — certainly; asya — of him (Brahmā); dahrataḥ — from the heart.

Translation
The science of logical argument, the Vedic goals of life, and also law and order, moral codes and the celebrated hymns bhūḥ, bhuvaḥ and svaḥ all became manifested from the mouths of Brahmā, and the praṇava oṁkāra was manifested from his heart.

Text 45
तस्योष्णिगासील्लोमभ्यो गायत्री च त्वचो विभो: ।
त्रिष्टुम्मांसात्स्‍नुतोऽनुष्टुब्जगत्यस्थ्न: प्रजापते: ॥ ४५ ॥
tasyoṣṇig āsīl lomabhyo
gāyatrī ca tvaco vibhoḥ
triṣṭum māṁsāt snuto ’nuṣṭub
jagaty asthnaḥ prajāpateḥ
Synonyms
tasya — his; uṣṇik — one of the Vedic meters; āsīt — generated; lomabhyaḥ — from the hairs on the body; gāyatrī — the principal Vedic hymn; ca — also; tvacaḥ — from the skin; vibhoḥ — of the Lord; triṣṭup — a particular type of poetic meter; māṁsāt — from the flesh; snutaḥ — from the sinews; anuṣṭup — another type of poetic meter; jagatī — another type of poetic meter; asthnaḥ — from the bones; prajāpateḥ — of the father of the living entities.

Translation
Thereafter the art of literary expression, uṣṇik, was generated from the hairs on the body of the almighty Prajāpati. The principal Vedic hymn, gāyatrī, was generated from the skin, triṣṭup from the flesh, anuṣṭup from the veins, and jagatī from the bones of the lord of the living entities.

Text 46
मज्जाया: पङ्‌क्तिरुत्पन्ना बृहती प्राणतोऽभवत् ॥ ४६ ॥
majjāyāḥ paṅktir utpannā
bṛhatī prāṇato ’bhavat
Synonyms
majjāyāḥ — from the bone marrow; paṅktiḥ — a particular type of verse; utpannā — became manifested; bṛhatī — another type of verse; prāṇataḥ — out of the life-breathing; abhavat — generated.

Translation
The art of writing verse, paṅkti, became manifested from the bone marrow, and that of bṛhatī, another type of verse, was generated from the life-breath of the lord of the living entities.

Text 47
स्पर्शस्तस्याभवज्जीव: स्वरो देह उदाहृत ।
ऊष्माणमिन्द्रियाण्याहुरन्त:स्था बलमात्मन: ।
स्वरा: सप्त विहारेण भवन्ति स्म प्रजापते: ॥ ४७ ॥
sparśas tasyābhavaj jīvaḥ
svaro deha udāhṛta
ūṣmāṇam indriyāṇy āhur
antaḥ-sthā balam ātmanaḥ
svarāḥ sapta vihāreṇa
bhavanti sma prajāpateḥ
Synonyms
sparśaḥ — the set of letters from ka to ma; tasya — his; abhavat — became; jīvaḥ — the soul; svaraḥ — vowels; dehaḥ — his body; udāhṛtaḥ — are expressed; ūṣmāṇam — the letters śa, ṣa, sa and ha; indriyāṇi — the senses; āhuḥ — are called; antaḥ-sthāḥ — the set of letters so known (ya, ra, la and va); balam — energy; ātmanaḥ — of his self; svarāḥ — music; sapta — seven; vihāreṇa — by the sensual activities; bhavanti sma — became manifested; prajāpateḥ — of the lord of the living entities.

Translation
Brahmā’s soul was manifested as the touch alphabets, his body as the vowels, his senses as the sibilant alphabets, his strength as the intermediate alphabets and his sensual activities as the seven notes of music.

Text 48
शब्दब्रह्मात्मनस्तस्य व्यक्ताव्यक्तात्मन: पर: ।
ब्रह्मावभाति विततो नानाशक्त्युपबृंहित: ॥ ४८ ॥
śabda-brahmātmanas tasya
vyaktāvyaktātmanaḥ paraḥ
brahmāvabhāti vitato
nānā-śakty-upabṛṁhitaḥ
Synonyms
śabda-brahma — transcendental sound; ātmanaḥ — of the Supreme Lord; tasya — His; vyakta — manifested; avyakta-ātmanaḥ — of the unmanifested; paraḥ — transcendental; brahmā — the Absolute; avabhāti — completely manifested; vitataḥ — distributing; nānā — multifarious; śakti — energies; upabṛṁhitaḥ — invested with.

Translation
Brahmā is the personal representation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the source of transcendental sound and is therefore above the conception of manifested and unmanifested. Brahmā is the complete form of the Absolute Truth and is invested with multifarious energies.

Text 49
ततोऽपरामुपादाय स सर्गाय मनो दधे ॥ ४९ ॥
tato ’parām upādāya
sa sargāya mano dadhe
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; aparām — another; upādāya — having accepted; saḥ — he; sargāya — in the matter of creation; manaḥ — mind; dadhe — gave attention.

Translation
Thereafter Brahmā accepted another body, in which sex life was not forbidden, and thus he engaged himself in the matter of further creation.

Text 50
ऋषीणां भूरिवीर्याणामपि सर्गमविस्तृतम् ।
ज्ञात्वा तद्‍धृदये भूयश्चिन्तयामास कौरव ॥ ५० ॥
ṛṣīṇāṁ bhūri-vīryāṇām
api sargam avistṛtam
jñātvā tad dhṛdaye bhūyaś
cintayām āsa kaurava
Synonyms
ṛṣīṇām — of the great sages; bhūri-vīryāṇām — with great potency; api — in spite of; sargam — the creation; avistṛtam — not extended; jñātvā — knowing; tat — that; hṛdaye — in his heart; bhūyaḥ — again; cintayām āsa — he began to consider; kaurava — O son of the Kurus.

Translation
O son of the Kurus, when Brahmā saw that in spite of the presence of sages of great potency there was no sufficient increase in population, he seriously began to consider how the population could be increased.

Text 51
अहो अद्भुतमेतन्मे व्यापृतस्यापि नित्यदा ।
न ह्येधन्ते प्रजा नूनं दैवमत्र विघातकम् ॥ ५१ ॥
aho adbhutam etan me
vyāpṛtasyāpi nityadā
na hy edhante prajā nūnaṁ
daivam atra vighātakam
Synonyms
aho — alas; adbhutam — it is wonderful; etat — this; me — for me; vyāpṛtasya — being busy; api — although; nityadā — always; na — does not; hi — certainly; edhante — generate; prajāḥ — living entities; nūnam — however; daivam — destiny; atra — herein; vighātakam — against.

Translation
Brahmā thought to himself: Alas, it is wonderful that in spite of my being scattered all over, there is still insufficient population throughout the universe. There is no other cause for this misfortune but destiny.

Text 52
एवं युक्तकृतस्तस्य दैवञ्चावेक्षतस्तदा ।
कस्य रूपमभूद् द्वेधा यत्कायमभिचक्षते ॥ ५२ ॥
evaṁ yukta-kṛtas tasya
daivaṁ cāvekṣatas tadā
kasya rūpam abhūd dvedhā
yat kāyam abhicakṣate
Synonyms
evam — thus; yukta — contemplating; kṛtaḥ — while doing so; tasya — his; daivam — supernatural power; ca — also; avekṣataḥ — observing; tadā — at that time; kasya — of Brahmā; rūpam — form; abhūt — became manifested; dvedhā — twofold; yat — which is; kāyam — his body; abhicakṣate — is said to be.

Translation
While he was thus absorbed in contemplation and was observing the supernatural power, two other forms were generated from his body. They are still celebrated as the body of Brahmā.

Text 53
ताभ्यां रूपविभागाभ्यां मिथुनं समपद्यत ॥ ५३ ॥
tābhyāṁ rūpa-vibhāgābhyāṁ
mithunaṁ samapadyata
Synonyms
tābhyām — of them; rūpa — form; vibhāgābhyām — thus being divided; mithunam — sex relation; samapadyata — perfectly executed.

Translation
The two newly separated bodies united together in a sexual relationship.

Text 54
यस्तु तत्र पुमान् सोऽभून्मनु: स्वायम्भुव: स्वराट् ।
स्त्री याऽसीच्छतरूपाख्या महिष्यस्य महात्मन: ॥ ५४ ॥
yas tu tatra pumān so ’bhūn
manuḥ svāyambhuvaḥ svarāṭ
strī yāsīc chatarūpākhyā
mahiṣy asya mahātmanaḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — one who; tu — but; tatra — there; pumān — the male; saḥ — he; abhūt — became; manuḥ — the father of mankind; svāyambhuvaḥ — of the name Svāyambhuva; sva-rāṭ — fully independent; strī — the woman; yā — one who; āsīt — there was; śatarūpā — of the name Śatarūpā; ākhyā — known as; mahiṣī — the queen; asya — of him; mahātmanaḥ — the great soul.

Translation
Out of them, the one who had the male form became known as the Manu named Svāyambhuva, and the woman became known as Śatarūpā, the queen of the great soul Manu.

Text 55
तदा मिथुनधर्मेण प्रजा ह्येधाम्बभूविरे ॥ ५५ ॥
tadā mithuna-dharmeṇa
prajā hy edhām babhūvire
Synonyms
tadā — at that time; mithuna — sex life; dharmeṇa — according to regulative principles; prajāḥ — generations; hi — certainly; edhām — increased; babhūvire — took place.

Translation
Thereafter, by sex indulgence, they gradually increased generations of population one after another.

Text 56
स चापि शतरूपायां पञ्चापत्यान्यजीजनत् ।
प्रियव्रतोत्तानपादौ तिस्र: कन्याश्च भारत ।
आकूतिर्देवहूतिश्च प्रसूतिरिति सत्तम ॥ ५६ ॥
sa cāpi śatarūpāyāṁ
pañcāpatyāny ajījanat
priyavratottānapādau
tisraḥ kanyāś ca bhārata
ākūtir devahūtiś ca
prasūtir iti sattama
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Manu); ca — also; api — in due course; śatarūpāyām — unto Śatarūpā; pañca — five; apatyāni — children; ajījanat — begot; priyavrata — Priyavrata; uttānapādau — Uttānapāda; tisraḥ — three in number; kanyāḥ — daughters; ca — also; bhārata — O son of Bharata; ākūtiḥ — Ākūti; devahūtiḥ — Devahūti; ca — and; prasūtiḥ — Prasūti; iti — thus; sattama — O best of all.

Translation
O son of Bharata, in due course of time he [Manu] begot in Śatarūpā five children — two sons, Priyavrata and Uttānapāda, and three daughters, Ākūti, Devahūti and Prasūti.

Text 57
आकूतिं रुचये प्रादात्कर्दमाय तु मध्यमाम् ।
दक्षायादात्प्रसूतिं च यत आपूरितं जगत् ॥ ५७ ॥
ākūtiṁ rucaye prādāt
kardamāya tu madhyamām
dakṣāyādāt prasūtiṁ ca
yata āpūritaṁ jagat
Synonyms
ākūtim — the daughter named Ākūti; rucaye — unto the sage Ruci; prādāt — handed over; kardamāya — unto the sage Kardama; tu — but; madhyamām — the middle one (Devahūti); dakṣāya — unto Dakṣa; adāt — handed over; prasūtim — the youngest daughter; ca — also; yataḥ — wherefrom; āpūritam — is fulfilled; jagat — the whole world.

Translation
The father, Manu, handed over his first daughter, Ākūti, to the sage Ruci, the middle daughter, Devahūti, to the sage Kardama, and the youngest, Prasūti, to Dakṣa. From them, all the world filled with population.