Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
निशम्य कौषारविणोपवर्णितां
हरे: कथां कारणसूकरात्मन: ।
पुन: स पप्रच्छ तमुद्यताञ्जलि-
र्न चातितृप्तो विदुरो धृतव्रत: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
niśamya kauṣāraviṇopavarṇitāṁ
hareḥ kathāṁ kāraṇa-sūkarātmanaḥ
punaḥ sa papraccha tam udyatāñjalir
na cātitṛpto viduro dhṛta-vrataḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; niśamya — after hearing; kauṣāraviṇā — by the sage Maitreya; upavarṇitām — described; hareḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; kathām — narrations; kāraṇa — for the reason of lifting the earth; sūkara-ātmanaḥ — of the boar incarnation; punaḥ — again; saḥ — he; papraccha — inquired; tam — from him (Maitreya); udyata-añjaliḥ — with folded hands; na — never; ca — also; ati-tṛptaḥ — very much satisfied; viduraḥ — Vidura; dhṛta-vrataḥ — taken to a vow.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: After hearing from the great sage Maitreya about the Lord’s incarnation as Varāha, Vidura, who had taken a vow, begged him with folded hands to please narrate further transcendental activities of the Lord, since he [Vidura] did not yet feel satisfied.

Text 2
विदुर उवाच
तेनैव तु मुनिश्रेष्ठ हरिणा यज्ञमूर्तिना ।
आदिदैत्यो हिरण्याक्षो हत इत्यनुशुश्रुम ॥ २ ॥
vidura uvāca
tenaiva tu muni-śreṣṭha
hariṇā yajña-mūrtinā
ādi-daityo hiraṇyākṣo
hata ity anuśuśruma
Synonyms
viduraḥ uvāca — Śrī Vidura said; tena — by Him; eva — certainly; tu — but; muni-śreṣṭha — O chief among the sages; hariṇā — by the Personality of Godhead; yajña-mūrtinā — the form of sacrifices; ādi — original; daityaḥ — demon; hiraṇyākṣaḥ — by the name Hiraṇyākṣa; hataḥ — slain; iti — thus; anuśuśruma — heard in succession.

Translation
Śrī Vidura said: O chief amongst the great sages, I have heard by disciplic succession that Hiraṇyākṣa, the original demon, was slain by the same form of sacrifices, the Personality of Godhead [Lord Boar].

Text 3
तस्य चोद्धरत: क्षौणीं स्वदंष्ट्राग्रेण लीलया ।
दैत्यराजस्य च ब्रह्मन् कस्माद्धेतोरभून्मृध: ॥ ३ ॥
tasya coddharataḥ kṣauṇīṁ
sva-daṁṣṭrāgreṇa līlayā
daitya-rājasya ca brahman
kasmād dhetor abhūn mṛdhaḥ
Synonyms
tasya — His; ca — also; uddharataḥ — while lifting; kṣauṇīm — the earth planet; sva-daṁṣṭra-agreṇa — by the edge of His tusks; līlayā — in His pastimes; daitya-rājasya — of the king of demons; ca — and; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; kasmāt — from what; hetoḥ — reason; abhūt — there was; mṛdhaḥ — fight.

Translation
What was the reason, O brāhmaṇa, for the fight between the demon king and Lord Boar while the Lord was lifting the earth as His pastime?

Text 4
श्रद्दधानाय भक्ताय ब्रूहि तज्जन्मविस्तरम् ।
ऋषे न तृप्यति मन: परं कौतूहलं हि मे ॥ ४ ॥
śraddadhānāya bhaktāya
brūhi taj-janma-vistaram
ṛṣe na tṛpyati manaḥ
paraṁ kautūhalaṁ hi me
Synonyms
śraddadhānāya — unto a faithful person; bhaktāya — unto a devotee; brūhi — please narrate; tat — His; janma — appearance; vistaram — in detail; ṛṣe — O great sage; na — not; tṛpyati — become satisfied; manaḥ — mind; param — very much; kautūhalam — inquisitive; hi — certainly; me — my.

Translation
My mind has become very inquisitive, and therefore I am not satisfied with hearing the narration of the Lord’s appearance. Please, therefore, speak more and more to a devotee who is faithful.

Text 5
मैत्रेय उवाच
साधु वीर त्वया पृष्टमवतारकथां हरे: ।
यत्त्वं पृच्छसि मर्त्यानां मृत्युपाशविशातनीम् ॥ ५ ॥
maitreya uvāca
sādhu vīra tvayā pṛṣṭam
avatāra-kathāṁ hareḥ
yat tvaṁ pṛcchasi martyānāṁ
mṛtyu-pāśa-viśātanīm
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; sādhu — devotee; vīra — O warrior; tvayā — by you; pṛṣṭam — inquired; avatāra-kathām — topics on the incarnation of the Lord; hareḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; yat — that which; tvam — your good self; pṛcchasi — asking me; martyānām — of those who are destined for death; mṛtyu-pāśa — the chain of birth and death; viśātanīm — source of liberation.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya said: O warrior, the inquiry made by you is just befitting a devotee because it concerns the incarnation of the Personality of Godhead. He is the source of liberation from the chain of birth and death for all those who are otherwise destined to die.

Text 6
ययोत्तानपद: पुत्रो मुनिना गीतयार्भक: ।
मृत्यो: कृत्वैव मूर्ध्‍न्यङ्‌घ्रि मारुरोह हरे: पदम् ॥ ६ ॥
yayottānapadaḥ putro
muninā gītayārbhakaḥ
mṛtyoḥ kṛtvaiva mūrdhny aṅghrim
āruroha hareḥ padam
Synonyms
yayā — by which; uttānapadaḥ — of King Uttānapāda; putraḥ — son; muninā — by the sage; gītayā — being sung; arbhakaḥ — a child; mṛtyoḥ — of death; kṛtvā — placing; eva — certainly; mūrdhni — on the head; aṅghrim — feet; āruroha — ascended; hareḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; padam — to the abode.

Translation
By hearing these topics from the sage [Nārada], the son of King Uttānapāda [Dhruva] was enlightened regarding the Personality of Godhead, and he ascended to the abode of the Lord, placing his feet over the head of death.

Text 7
अथात्रापीतिहासोऽयं श्रुतो मे वर्णित: पुरा ।
ब्रह्मणा देवदेवेन देवानामनुपृच्छताम् ॥ ७ ॥
athātrāpītihāso ’yaṁ
śruto me varṇitaḥ purā
brahmaṇā deva-devena
devānām anupṛcchatām
Synonyms
atha — now; atra — in this matter; api — also; itihāsaḥ — history; ayam — this; śrutaḥ — heard; me — by me; varṇitaḥ — described; purā — years ago; brahmaṇā — by Brahmā; deva-devena — the foremost of the demigods; devānām — by the demigods; anupṛcchatām — asking.

Translation
This history of the fight between the Lord as a boar and the demon Hiraṇyākṣa was heard by me in a year long ago as it was described by the foremost of the demigods, Brahmā, when he was questioned by the other demigods.

Text 8
दितिर्दाक्षायणी क्षत्तर्मारीचं कश्यपं पतिम् ।
अपत्यकामा चकमे सन्ध्यायां हृच्छयार्दिता ॥ ८ ॥
ditir dākṣāyaṇī kṣattar
mārīcaṁ kaśyapaṁ patim
apatya-kāmā cakame
sandhyāyāṁ hṛc-chayārditā
Synonyms
ditiḥ — Diti; dākṣāyaṇī — the daughter of Dakṣa; kṣattaḥ — O Vidura; mārīcam — the son of Marīci; kaśyapam — Kaśyapa; patim — her husband; apatya-kāmā — desirous of having a child; cakame — longed for; sandhyāyām — in the evening; hṛt-śaya — by sex desires; arditā — distressed.

Translation
Diti, daughter of Dakṣa, being afflicted with sex desire, begged her husband, Kaśyapa, the son of Marīci, to have intercourse with her in the evening in order to beget a child.

Text 9
इष्ट्वाग्निजिह्वं पयसा पुरुषं यजुषां पतिम् ।
निम्‍लोचत्यर्क आसीनमग्‍न्यगारे समाहितम् ॥ ९ ॥
iṣṭvāgni-jihvaṁ payasā
puruṣaṁ yajuṣāṁ patim
nimlocaty arka āsīnam
agny-agāre samāhitam
Synonyms
iṣṭvā — after worshiping; agni — fire; jihvam — tongue; payasā — by oblation; puruṣam — unto the Supreme Person; yajuṣām — of all sacrifices; patim — master; nimlocati — while setting; arke — the sun; āsīnam — sitting; agni-agāre — in the sacrificial hall; samāhitam — completely in trance.

Translation
The sun was setting, and the sage was sitting in trance after offering oblations to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, whose tongue is the sacrificial fire.

Text 10
दितिरुवाच
एष मां त्वत्कृते विद्वन् काम आत्तशरासन: ।
दुनोति दीनां विक्रम्य रम्भामिव मतङ्गज: ॥ १० ॥
ditir uvāca
eṣa māṁ tvat-kṛte vidvan
kāma ātta-śarāsanaḥ
dunoti dīnāṁ vikramya
rambhām iva mataṅgajaḥ
Synonyms
ditiḥ uvāca — beautiful Diti said; eṣaḥ — all these; mām — unto me; tvat-kṛte — for you; vidvan — O learned one; kāmaḥ — Cupid; ātta-śarāsanaḥ — taking his arrows; dunoti — distresses; dīnām — poor me; vikramya — attacking; rambhām — banana tree; iva — like; matam-gajaḥ — mad elephant.

Translation
In that place the beautiful Diti expressed her desire: O learned one, Cupid is taking his arrows and distressing me forcibly, as a mad elephant troubles a banana tree.

Text 11
तद्भवान्दह्यमानायां सपत्नीनां समृद्धिभि: ।
प्रजावतीनां भद्रं ते मय्यायुङ्क्तामनुग्रहम् ॥ ११ ॥
tad bhavān dahyamānāyāṁ
sa-patnīnāṁ samṛddhibhiḥ
prajāvatīnāṁ bhadraṁ te
mayy āyuṅktām anugraham
Synonyms
tat — therefore; bhavān — your good self; dahyamānāyām — being distressed; sa-patnīnām — of the co-wives; samṛddhibhiḥ — by the prosperity; prajā-vatīnām — of those who have children; bhadram — all prosperity; te — unto you; mayi — unto me; āyuṅktām — do unto me, in all respects; anugraham — favor.

Translation
Therefore you should be kind towards me by showing me complete mercy. I desire to have sons, and I am much distressed by seeing the opulence of my co-wives. By performing this act, you will become happy.

Text 12
भर्तर्याप्तोरुमानानां लोकानाविशते यश: ।
पतिर्भवद्विधो यासां प्रजया ननु जायते ॥ १२ ॥
bhartary āptorumānānāṁ
lokān āviśate yaśaḥ
patir bhavad-vidho yāsāṁ
prajayā nanu jāyate
Synonyms
bhartari — by the husband; āpta-urumānānām — of those who are beloved; lokān — in the world; āviśate — spreads; yaśaḥ — fame; patiḥ — husband; bhavat-vidhaḥ — like your good self; yāsām — of those whose; prajayā — by children; nanu — certainly; jāyate — expands.

Translation
A woman is honored in the world by the benediction of her husband, and a husband like you will become famous by having children because you are meant for the expansion of living entities.

Text 13
पुरा पिता नो भगवान्दक्षो दुहितृवत्सल: ।
कं वृणीत वरं वत्सा इत्यपृच्छत न: पृथक् ॥ १३ ॥
purā pitā no bhagavān
dakṣo duhitṛ-vatsalaḥ
kaṁ vṛṇīta varaṁ vatsā
ity apṛcchata naḥ pṛthak
Synonyms
purā — in days long ago; pitā — father; naḥ — our; bhagavān — the most opulent; dakṣaḥ — Dakṣa; duhitṛ-vatsalaḥ — affectionate to his daughters; kam — unto whom; vṛṇīta — you want to accept; varam — your husband; vatsāḥ — O my children; iti — thus; apṛcchata — inquired; naḥ — us; pṛthak — separately.

Translation
In days long ago, our father, the most opulent Dakṣa, who was affectionate to his daughters, asked each of us separately whom we would prefer to select as our husband.

Text 14
स विदित्वात्मजानां नो भावं सन्तानभावन: ।
त्रयोदशाददात्तासां यास्ते शीलमनुव्रता: ॥ १४ ॥
sa viditvātmajānāṁ no
bhāvaṁ santāna-bhāvanaḥ
trayodaśādadāt tāsāṁ
yās te śīlam anuvratāḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — Dakṣa; viditvā — understanding; ātma-jānām — of the daughters; naḥ — our; bhāvam — indication; santāna — children; bhāvanaḥ — well-wisher; trayodaśa — thirteen; adadāt — handed over; tāsām — of all of them; yāḥ — those who are; te — your; śīlam — behavior; anuvratāḥ — all faithful.

Translation
Our well-wishing father, Dakṣa, after knowing our intentions, handed over thirteen of his daughters unto you, and since then we have all been faithful.

Text 15
अथ मे कुरु कल्याणं कामं कमललोचन ।
आर्तोपसर्पणं भूमन्नमोघं हि महीयसि ॥ १५ ॥
atha me kuru kalyāṇaṁ
kāmaṁ kamala-locana
ārtopasarpaṇaṁ bhūmann
amoghaṁ hi mahīyasi
Synonyms
atha — therefore; me — unto me; kuru — kindly do; kalyāṇam — benediction; kāmam — desire; kamala-locana — O lotus-eyed one; ārta — of the distressed; upasarpaṇam — the approaching; bhūman — O great one; amogham — without failure; hi — certainly; mahīyasi — to a great person.

Translation
O lotus-eyed one, kindly bless me by fulfilling my desire. When someone in distress approaches a great person, his pleas should never go in vain.

Text 16
इति तां वीर मारीच: कृपणां बहुभाषिणीम् ।
प्रत्याहानुनयन् वाचा प्रवृद्धानङ्गकश्मलाम् ॥ १६ ॥
iti tāṁ vīra mārīcaḥ
kṛpaṇāṁ bahu-bhāṣiṇīm
pratyāhānunayan vācā
pravṛddhānaṅga-kaśmalām
Synonyms
iti — thus; tām — unto her; vīra — O hero; mārīcaḥ — the son of Marīci (Kaśyapa); kṛpaṇām — unto the poor; bahu-bhāṣiṇīm — too talkative; pratyāha — replied; anunayan — pacifying; vācā — by words; pravṛddha — highly agitated; anaṅga — lust; kaśmalām — contaminated.

Translation
O hero [Vidura], Diti, being thus afflicted by the contamination of lust, and therefore poor and talkative, was pacified by the son of Marīci in suitable words.

Text 17
एष तेऽहं विधास्यामि प्रियं भीरु यदिच्छसि ।
तस्या: कामं न क: कुर्यात्सिद्धिस्त्रैवर्गिक यत: ॥ १७ ॥
eṣa te ’haṁ vidhāsyāmi
priyaṁ bhīru yad icchasi
tasyāḥ kāmaṁ na kaḥ kuryāt
siddhis traivargikī yataḥ
Synonyms
eṣaḥ — this; te — your request; aham — I; vidhāsyāmi — shall execute; priyam — very dear; bhīru — O afflicted one; yat — what; icchasi — you are desiring; tasyāḥ — her; kāmam — desires; na — not; kaḥ — who; kuryāt — would perform; siddhiḥ — perfection of liberation; traivargikī — three; yataḥ — from whom.

Translation
O afflicted one, I shall forthwith gratify whatever desire is dear to you, for who else but you is the source of the three perfections of liberation?

Text 18
सर्वाश्रमानुपादाय स्वाश्रमेण कलत्रवान् ।
व्यसनार्णवमत्येति जलयानैर्यथार्णवम् ॥ १८ ॥
sarvāśramān upādāya
svāśrameṇa kalatravān
vyasanārṇavam atyeti
jala-yānair yathārṇavam
Synonyms
sarva — all; āśramān — social orders; upādāya — completing; sva — own; āśrameṇa — by the social orders; kalatra-vān — a person living with a wife; vyasana-arṇavam — the dangerous ocean of material existence; atyeti — one can cross over; jala-yānaiḥ — with seagoing vessels; yathā — as; arṇavam — the ocean.

Translation
As one can cross over the ocean with seagoing vessels, one can cross the dangerous situation of the material ocean by living with a wife.

Text 19
यामाहुरात्मनो ह्यर्धं श्रेयस्कामस्य मानिनि ।
यस्यां स्वधुरमध्यस्य पुमांश्चरति विज्वर: ॥ १९ ॥
yām āhur ātmano hy ardhaṁ
śreyas-kāmasya mānini
yasyāṁ sva-dhuram adhyasya
pumāṁś carati vijvaraḥ
Synonyms
yām — the wife who; āhuḥ — is said; ātmanaḥ — of the body; hi — thus; ardham — half; śreyaḥ — welfare; kāmasya — of all desires; mānini — O respectful one; yasyām — in whom; sva-dhuram — all responsibilities; adhyasya — entrusting; pumān — a man; carati — moves; vijvaraḥ — without anxiety.

Translation
O respectful one, a wife is so helpful that she is called the better half of a man’s body because of her sharing in all auspicious activities. A man can move without anxiety entrusting all responsibilities to his wife.

Text 20
यामाश्रित्येन्द्रियारातीन्दुर्जयानितराश्रमै: ।
वयं जयेम हेलाभिर्दस्यून्दुर्गपतिर्यथा ॥ २० ॥
yām āśrityendriyārātīn
durjayān itarāśramaiḥ
vayaṁ jayema helābhir
dasyūn durga-patir yathā
Synonyms
yām — whom; āśritya — taking shelter of; indriya — senses; arātīn — enemies; durjayān — difficult to conquer; itara — other than the householders; āśramaiḥ — by orders of society; vayam — we; jayema — can conquer; helābhiḥ — easily; dasyūn — invading plunderers; durga-patiḥ — a fort commander; yathā — as.

Translation
As a fort commander very easily conquers invading plunderers, by taking shelter of a wife one can conquer the senses, which are unconquerable in the other social orders.

Text 21
न वयं प्रभवस्तां त्वामनुकर्तुं गृहेश्वरि ।
अप्यायुषा वा कार्त्स्‍न्येन ये चान्ये गुणगृध्नव: ॥ २१ ॥
na vayaṁ prabhavas tāṁ tvām
anukartuṁ gṛheśvari
apy āyuṣā vā kārtsnyena
ye cānye guṇa-gṛdhnavaḥ
Synonyms
na — never; vayam — we; prabhavaḥ — are able; tām — that; tvām — unto you; anukartum — do the same; gṛha-īśvari — O queen of the home; api — in spite of; āyuṣā — by duration of life; vā — or (in the next life); kārtsnyena — entire; ye — who; ca — also; anye — others; guṇa-gṛdhnavaḥ — those who are able to appreciate qualities.

Translation
O queen of the home, we are not able to act like you, nor could we repay you for what you have done, even if we worked for our entire life or even after death. To repay you is not possible, even for those who are admirers of personal qualities.

Text 22
अथापि काममेतं ते प्रजात्यै करवाण्यलम् ।
यथा मां नातिरोचन्ति मुहूर्तं प्रतिपालय ॥ २२ ॥
athāpi kāmam etaṁ te
prajātyai karavāṇy alam
yathā māṁ nātirocanti
muhūrtaṁ pratipālaya
Synonyms
atha api — even though (it is not possible); kāmam — this sex desire; etam — as it is; te — your; prajātyai — for the sake of children; karavāṇi — let me do; alam — without delay; yathā — as; mām — unto me; na — may not; atirocanti — reproach; muhūrtam — a few seconds; pratipālaya — wait for.

Translation
Even though it is not possible to repay you, I shall satisfy your sex desire immediately for the sake of begetting children. But you must wait for only a few seconds so that others may not reproach me.

Text 23
एषा घोरतमा वेला घोराणां घोरदर्शना ।
चरन्ति यस्यां भूतानि भूतेशानुचराणि ह ॥ २३ ॥
eṣā ghoratamā velā
ghorāṇāṁ ghora-darśanā
caranti yasyāṁ bhūtāni
bhūteśānucarāṇi ha
Synonyms
eṣā — this time; ghora-tamā — most horrible; velā — period; ghorāṇām — of the horrible; ghora-darśanā — horrible looking; caranti — move; yasyām — in which; bhūtāni — ghosts; bhūta-īśa — the lord of the ghosts; anucarāṇi — constant companions; ha — indeed.

Translation
This particular time is most inauspicious because at this time the horrible-looking ghosts and constant companions of the lord of the ghosts are visible.

Text 24
एतस्यां साध्वि सन्ध्यायां भगवान् भूतभावन: ।
परीतो भूतपर्षद्‍‌भिर्वृषेणाटति भूतराट् ॥ २४ ॥
etasyāṁ sādhvi sandhyāyāṁ
bhagavān bhūta-bhāvanaḥ
parīto bhūta-parṣadbhir
vṛṣeṇāṭati bhūtarāṭ
Synonyms
etasyām — in this period; sādhvi — O chaste one; sandhyāyām — at the junction of day and night (evening); bhagavān — the Personality of God; bhūta-bhāvanaḥ — the well-wisher of the ghostly characters; parītaḥ — surrounded by; bhūta-parṣadbhiḥ — by ghostly companions; vṛṣeṇa — on the back of the bull carrier; aṭati — travels; bhūta-rāṭ — the king of the ghosts.

Translation
Lord Śiva, the king of the ghosts, sitting on the back of his bull carrier, travels at this time, accompanied by ghosts who follow him for their welfare.

Text 25
श्मशानचक्रानिलधूलिधूम्र-
विकीर्णविद्योतजटाकलाप: ।
भस्मावगुण्ठामलरुक्‍मदेहो
देवस्त्रिभि: पश्यति देवरस्ते ॥ २५ ॥
śmaśāna-cakrānila-dhūli-dhūmra-
vikīrṇa-vidyota-jaṭā-kalāpaḥ
bhasmāvaguṇṭhāmala-rukma-deho
devas tribhiḥ paśyati devaras te
Synonyms
śmaśāna — burning crematorium; cakra-anila — whirlwind; dhūli — dust; dhūmra — smoky; vikīrṇa-vidyota — thus smeared over beauty; jaṭā-kalāpaḥ — bunches of matted hair; bhasma — ashes; avaguṇṭha — covered by; amala — stainless; rukma — reddish; dehaḥ — body; devaḥ — the demigod; tribhiḥ — with three eyes; paśyati — sees; devaraḥ — younger brother of the husband; te — your.

Translation
Lord Śiva’s body is reddish, and he is unstained, but he is covered with ashes. His hair is dusty from the whirlwind dust of the burning crematorium. He is the younger brother of your husband, and he sees with his three eyes.

Text 26
न यस्य लोके स्वजन: परो वा
नात्याद‍ृतो नोत कश्चिद्विगर्ह्य: ।
वयं व्रतैर्यच्चरणापविद्धा-
माशास्महेऽजां बत भुक्तभोगाम् ॥ २६ ॥
na yasya loke sva-janaḥ paro vā
nātyādṛto nota kaścid vigarhyaḥ
vayaṁ vratair yac-caraṇāpaviddhām
āśāsmahe ’jāṁ bata bhukta-bhogām
Synonyms
na — never; yasya — of whom; loke — in the world; sva-janaḥ — kinsman; paraḥ — unconnected; vā — nor; na — neither; ati — greater; ādṛtaḥ — favorable; na — not; uta — or; kaścit — anyone; vigarhyaḥ — criminal; vayam — we; vrataiḥ — by vows; yat — whose; caraṇa — feet; apaviddhām — rejected; āśāsmahe — respectfully worship; ajām — mahā-prasāda; bata — certainly; bhukta-bhogām — remnants of foodstuff.

Translation
Lord Śiva regards no one as his relative, yet there is no one who is not connected with him. He does not regard anyone as very favorable or abominable. We respectfully worship the remnants of his foodstuff, and we vow to accept what is rejected by him.

Text 27
यस्यानवद्याचरितं मनीषिणो
गृणन्त्यविद्यापटलं बिभित्सव: ।
निरस्तसाम्यातिशयोऽपि यत्स्वयं
पिशाचचर्यामचरद्‍गति: सताम् ॥ २७ ॥
yasyānavadyācaritaṁ manīṣiṇo
gṛṇanty avidyā-paṭalaṁ bibhitsavaḥ
nirasta-sāmyātiśayo ’pi yat svayaṁ
piśāca-caryām acarad gatiḥ satām
Synonyms
yasya — whose; anavadya — unimpeachable; ācaritam — character; manīṣiṇaḥ — great sages; gṛṇanti — follow; avidyā — nescience; paṭalam — mass; bibhitsavaḥ — desiring to dismantle; nirasta — nullified; sāmya — equality; atiśayaḥ — greatness; api — in spite of; yat — as; svayam — personally; piśāca — devil; caryām — activities; acarat — performed; gatiḥ — destination; satām — of the devotees of the Lord.

Translation
Although no one in the material world is equal to or greater than Lord Śiva, and although his unimpeachable character is followed by great souls to dismantle the mass of nescience, he nevertheless remains as if a devil to give salvation to all devotees of the Lord.

Text 28
हसन्ति यस्याचरितं हि दुर्भगा:
स्वात्मन्-रतस्याविदुष: समीहितम् ।
यैर्वस्त्रमाल्याभरणानुलेपनै:
श्वभोजनं स्वात्मतयोपलालितम् ॥ २८ ॥
hasanti yasyācaritaṁ hi durbhagāḥ
svātman-ratasyāviduṣaḥ samīhitam
yair vastra-mālyābharaṇānulepanaiḥ
śva-bhojanaṁ svātmatayopalālitam
Synonyms
hasanti — laugh at; yasya — whose; ācaritam — activity; hi — certainly; durbhagāḥ — the unfortunate; sva-ātman — in the self; ratasya — of one engaged; aviduṣaḥ — not knowing; samīhitam — his purpose; yaiḥ — by whom; vastra — clothing; mālya — garlands; ābharaṇa — ornaments; anu — such luxurious; lepanaiḥ — with ointments; śva-bhojanam — eatable by the dogs; sva-ātmatayā — as if the self; upalālitam — fondled.

Translation
Unfortunate, foolish persons, not knowing that he is engaged in his own self, laugh at him. Such foolish persons engage in maintaining the body — which is eatable by dogs — with dresses, ornaments, garlands and ointments.

Text 29
ब्रह्मादयो यत्कृतसेतुपाला
यत्कारणं विश्वमिदं च माया ।
आज्ञाकरी यस्य पिशाचचर्या
अहो विभूम्नश्चरितं विडम्बनम् ॥ २९ ॥
brahmādayo yat-kṛta-setu-pālā
yat-kāraṇaṁ viśvam idaṁ ca māyā
ājñā-karī yasya piśāca-caryā
aho vibhūmnaś caritaṁ viḍambanam
Synonyms
brahma-ādayaḥ — demigods like Brahmā; yat — whose; kṛta — activities; setu — religious rites; pālāḥ — observers; yat — one who is; kāraṇam — the origin of; viśvam — the universe; idam — this; ca — also; māyā — material energy; ājñā-karī — order carrier; yasya — whose; piśāca — devilish; caryā — activity; aho — O my lord; vibhūmnaḥ — of the great; caritam — character; viḍambanam — simply imitation.

Translation
Demigods like Brahmā also follow the religious rites observed by him. He is the controller of the material energy, which causes the creation of the material world. He is great, and therefore his devilish characteristics are simply imitation.

Text 30
मैत्रेय उवाच
सैवं संविदिते भर्त्रा मन्मथोन्मथितेन्द्रिया ।
जग्राह वासो ब्रह्मर्षेर्वृषलीव गतत्रपा ॥ ३० ॥
maitreya uvāca
saivaṁ saṁvidite bhartrā
manmathonmathitendriyā
jagrāha vāso brahmarṣer
vṛṣalīva gata-trapā
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; sā — she; evam — thus; saṁvidite — in spite of being informed; bhartrā — by her husband; manmatha — by Cupid; unmathita — being pressed; indriyā — senses; jagrāha — caught hold of; vāsaḥ — clothing; brahma-ṛṣeḥ — of the great brāhmaṇa sage; vṛṣalī — public prostitute; iva — like; gata-trapā — without shame.

Translation
Maitreya said: Diti was thus informed by her husband, but she was pressed by Cupid for sexual satisfaction. She caught hold of the clothing of the great brāhmaṇa sage, just like a shameless public prostitute.

Text 31
स विदित्वाथ भार्यायास्तं निर्बन्धं विकर्मणि ।
नत्वा दिष्टाय रहसि तयाथोपविवेश हि ॥ ३१ ॥
sa viditvātha bhāryāyās
taṁ nirbandhaṁ vikarmaṇi
natvā diṣṭāya rahasi
tayāthopaviveśa hi
Synonyms
saḥ — he; viditvā — understanding; atha — thereupon; bhāryāyāḥ — of the wife; tam — that; nirbandham — obstinacy; vikarmaṇi — in the forbidden act; natvā — offering obeisances; diṣṭāya — unto worshipable fate; rahasi — in a secluded place; tayā — with her; atha — thus; upaviveśa — lay; hi — certainly.

Translation
Understanding his wife’s purpose, he was obliged to perform the forbidden act, and thus after offering his obeisances unto worshipable fate, he lay with her in a secluded place.

Text 32
अथोपस्पृश्य सलिलं प्राणानायम्य वाग्यत: ।
ध्यायञ्जजाप विरजं ब्रह्म ज्योति: सनातनम् ॥ ३२ ॥
athopaspṛśya salilaṁ
prāṇān āyamya vāg-yataḥ
dhyāyañ jajāpa virajaṁ
brahma jyotiḥ sanātanam
Synonyms
atha — thereafter; upaspṛśya — touching or taking bath in water; salilam — water; prāṇān āyamya — practicing trance; vāk-yataḥ — controlling speech; dhyāyan — meditating; jajāpa — chanted within the mouth; virajam — pure; brahma — Gāyatrī hymns; jyotiḥ — effulgence; sanātanam — eternal.

Translation
Thereafter the brāhmaṇa took his bath in the water and controlled his speech by practicing trance, meditating on the eternal effulgence and chanting the holy Gāyatrī hymns within his mouth.

Text 33
दितिस्तु व्रीडिता तेन कर्मावद्येन भारत ।
उपसङ्गम्य विप्रर्षिमधोमुख्यभ्यभाषत ॥ ३३ ॥
ditis tu vrīḍitā tena
karmāvadyena bhārata
upasaṅgamya viprarṣim
adho-mukhy abhyabhāṣata
Synonyms
ditiḥ — Diti, the wife of Kaśyapa; tu — but; vrīḍitā — ashamed; tena — by that; karma — act; avadyena — faulty; bhārata — O son of the Bharata family; upasaṅgamya — going nearer to; vipra-ṛṣim — the brāhmaṇa sage; adhaḥ-mukhī — with her face lowered; abhyabhāṣata — politely said.

Translation
O son of the Bharata family, Diti, after this, went nearer to her husband, her face lowered because of her faulty action. She spoke as follows.

Text 34
दितिरुवाच
न मे गर्भमिमं ब्रह्मन् भूतानामृषभोऽवधीत् ।
रुद्र: पतिर्हि भूतानां यस्याकरवमंहसम् ॥ ३४ ॥
ditir uvāca
na me garbham imaṁ brahman
bhūtānām ṛṣabho ’vadhīt
rudraḥ patir hi bhūtānāṁ
yasyākaravam aṁhasam
Synonyms
ditiḥ uvāca — the beautiful Diti said; na — not; me — my; garbham — pregnancy; imam — this; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; bhūtānām — of all living entities; ṛṣabhaḥ — the noblest of all living entities; avadhīt — let him kill; rudraḥ — Lord Śiva; patiḥ — master; hi — certainly; bhūtānām — of all living entities; yasya — whose; akaravam — I have done; aṁhasam — offense.

Translation
The beautiful Diti said: My dear brāhmaṇa, kindly see that my embryo is not killed by Lord Śiva, the lord of all living entities, because of the great offense I have committed against him.

Text 35
नमो रुद्राय महते देवायोग्राय मीढुषे ।
शिवाय न्यस्तदण्डाय धृतदण्डाय मन्यवे ॥ ३५ ॥
namo rudrāya mahate
devāyogrāya mīḍhuṣe
śivāya nyasta-daṇḍāya
dhṛta-daṇḍāya manyave
Synonyms
namaḥ — all obeisances unto; rudrāya — unto the angry Lord Śiva; mahate — unto the great; devāya — unto the demigod; ugrāya — unto the ferocious; mīḍhuṣe — unto the fulfiller of all material desires; śivāya — unto the all-auspicious; nyasta-daṇḍāya — unto the forgiving; dhṛta-daṇḍāya — unto the immediate chastiser; manyave — unto the angry.

Translation
Let me offer my obeisances unto the angry Lord Śiva, who is simultaneously the very ferocious great demigod and the fulfiller of all material desires. He is all-auspicious and forgiving, but his anger can immediately move him to chastise.

Text 36
स न: प्रसीदतां भामो भगवानुर्वनुग्रह: ।
व्याधस्याप्यनुकम्प्यानां स्त्रीणां देव: सतीपति: ॥ ३६ ॥
sa naḥ prasīdatāṁ bhāmo
bhagavān urv-anugrahaḥ
vyādhasyāpy anukampyānāṁ
strīṇāṁ devaḥ satī-patiḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he; naḥ — with us; prasīdatām — be pleased; bhāmaḥ — brother-in-law; bhagavān — the personality of all opulences; uru — very great; anugrahaḥ — merciful; vyādhasya — of the hunter; api — also; anukampyānām — of the objects of mercy; strīṇām — of the women; devaḥ — the worshipable lord; satī-patiḥ — the husband of Satī (the chaste).

Translation
Let him be pleased with us, since he is my brother-in-law, the husband of my sister Satī. He is also the worshipable lord of all women. He is the personality of all opulences and can show mercy towards women, who are excused even by the uncivilized hunters.

Text 37
मैत्रेय उवाच
स्वसर्गस्याशिषं लोक्यामाशासानां प्रवेपतीम् ।
निवृत्तसन्ध्यानियमो भार्यामाह प्रजापति: ॥ ३७ ॥
maitreya uvāca
sva-sargasyāśiṣaṁ lokyām
āśāsānāṁ pravepatīm
nivṛtta-sandhyā-niyamo
bhāryām āha prajāpatiḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya said; sva-sargasya — of her own children; āśiṣam — welfare; lokyām — in the world; āśāsānām — desiring; pravepatīm — while trembling; nivṛtta — averted from; sandhyā-niyamaḥ — the rules and regulations of evening; bhāryām — unto the wife; āha — said; prajāpatiḥ — the progenitor.

Translation
Maitreya said: The great sage Kaśyapa thus addressed his wife, who was trembling because of fear that her husband was offended. She understood that he had been dissuaded from his daily duties of offering evening prayers, yet she desired the welfare of her children in the world.

Text 38
कश्यप उवाच
अप्रायत्यादात्मनस्ते दोषान्मौहूर्तिकादुत ।
मन्निदेशातिचारेण देवानां चातिहेलनात् ॥ ३८ ॥
kaśyapa uvāca
aprāyatyād ātmanas te
doṣān mauhūrtikād uta
man-nideśāticāreṇa
devānāṁ cātihelanāt
Synonyms
kaśyapaḥ uvāca — the learned brāhmaṇa Kaśyapa said; aprāyatyāt — because of the pollution; ātmanaḥ — of the mind; te — your; doṣāt — because of defilement; mauhūrtikāt — in terms of the moment; uta — also; mat — my; nideśa — direction; aticāreṇa — being too neglectful; devānām — of the demigods; ca — also; atihelanāt — being too apathetic.

Translation
The learned Kaśyapa said: Because of your mind’s being polluted, because of defilement of the particular time, because of your negligence of my directions, and because of your being apathetic to the demigods, everything was inauspicious.

Text 39
भविष्यतस्तवाभद्रावभद्रे जाठराधमौ ।
लोकान् सपालांस्त्रींश्चण्डि मुहुराक्रन्दयिष्यत: ॥ ३९ ॥
bhaviṣyatas tavābhadrāv
abhadre jāṭharādhamau
lokān sa-pālāṁs trīṁś caṇḍi
muhur ākrandayiṣyataḥ
Synonyms
bhaviṣyataḥ — will take birth; tava — your; abhadrau — two contemptuous sons; abhadre — O unlucky one; jāṭhara-adhamau — born of a condemned womb; lokān — all planets; sa-pālān — with their rulers; trīn — three; caṇḍi — haughty one; muhuḥ — constantly; ākran-dayiṣyataḥ — will cause lamentation.

Translation
O haughty one, you will have two contemptuous sons born of your condemned womb. Unlucky woman, they will cause constant lamentation to all the three worlds!

Text 40
प्राणिनां हन्यमानानां दीनानामकृतागसाम् ।
स्त्रीणां निगृह्यमाणानां कोपितेषु महात्मसु ॥ ४० ॥
prāṇināṁ hanyamānānāṁ
dīnānām akṛtāgasām
strīṇāṁ nigṛhyamāṇānāṁ
kopiteṣu mahātmasu
Synonyms
prāṇinām — when the living entities; hanyamānānām — being killed; dīnānām — of the poor; akṛta-āgasām — of the faultless; strīṇām — of the women; nigṛhyamāṇānām — being tortured; kopiteṣu — being enraged; mahātmasu — when the great souls.

Translation
They will kill poor, faultless living entities, torture women and enrage the great souls.

Text 41
तदा विश्वेश्वर: क्रुद्धो भगवाल्लोकभावन: ।
हनिष्यत्यवतीर्यासौ यथाद्रीन् शतपर्वधृक् ॥ ४१ ॥
tadā viśveśvaraḥ kruddho
bhagavāl loka-bhāvanaḥ
haniṣyaty avatīryāsau
yathādrīn śataparva-dhṛk
Synonyms
tadā — at that time; viśva-īśvaraḥ — the Lord of the universe; kruddhaḥ — in great anger; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; loka-bhāvanaḥ — desiring the welfare of the people in general; haniṣyati — will kill; avatīrya — descending Himself; asau — He; yathā — as if; adrīn — the mountains; śata-parva-dhṛk — the controller of the thunderbolt (Indra).

Translation
At that time the Lord of the universe, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the well-wisher of all living entities, will descend and kill them, just as Indra smashes the mountains with his thunderbolts.

Text 42
दितिरुवाच
वधं भगवता साक्षात्सुनाभोदारबाहुना ।
आशासे पुत्रयोर्मह्यं मा क्रुद्धाद्ब्राह्मणाद्प्रभो ॥ ४२ ॥
ditir uvāca
vadhaṁ bhagavatā sākṣāt
sunābhodāra-bāhunā
āśāse putrayor mahyaṁ
mā kruddhād brāhmaṇād prabho
Synonyms
ditiḥ uvāca — Diti said; vadham — the killing; bhagavatā — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sākṣāt — directly; sunābha — with His Sudarśana weapon; udāra — very magnanimous; bāhunā — by the arms; āśāse — I desire; putrayoḥ — of the sons; mahyam — of mine; mā — never be it so; kruddhāt — by the rage; brāhmaṇāt — of the brāhmaṇas; prabho — O my husband.

Translation
Diti said: It is very good that my sons will be magnanimously killed by the arms of the Personality of Godhead with His Sudarśana weapon. O my husband, may they never be killed by the wrath of the brāhmaṇa devotees.

Text 43
न ब्रह्मदण्डदग्धस्य न भूतभयदस्य च ।
नारकाश्चानुगृह्णन्ति यां यां योनिमसौ गत: ॥ ४३ ॥
na brahma-daṇḍa-dagdhasya
na bhūta-bhayadasya ca
nārakāś cānugṛhṇanti
yāṁ yāṁ yonim asau gataḥ
Synonyms
na — never; brahma-daṇḍa — punishment by a brāhmaṇa; dagdhasya — of one who is so punished; na — neither; bhūta-bhaya-dasya — of one who is always fearful to the living entities; ca — also; nārakāḥ — those condemned to hell; ca — also; anugṛhṇanti — do any favor; yām yām — whichever; yonim — species of life; asau — the offender; gataḥ — goes.

Translation
A person who is condemned by a brāhmaṇa or is always fearful to other living entities is not favored either by those who are already in hell or by those in the species in which he is born.

Texts 44-45
कश्यप उवाच
कृतशोकानुतापेन सद्य: प्रत्यवमर्शनात् ।
भगवत्युरुमानाच्च भवे मय्यपि चादरात् ॥ ४४ ॥
पुत्रस्यैव च पुत्राणां भवितैक: सतां मत: ।
गास्यन्ति यद्यश: शुद्धं भगवद्यशसा समम् ॥ ४५ ॥
kaśyapa uvāca
kṛta-śokānutāpena
sadyaḥ pratyavamarśanāt
bhagavaty uru-mānāc ca
bhave mayy api cādarāt
putrasyaiva ca putrāṇāṁ
bhavitaikaḥ satāṁ mataḥ
gāsyanti yad-yaśaḥ śuddhaṁ
bhagavad-yaśasā samam
Synonyms
kaśyapaḥ uvāca — the learned Kaśyapa said; kṛta-śoka — having lamented; anutāpena — by penitence; sadyaḥ — immediately; pratyavamarśanāt — by proper deliberation; bhagavati — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; uru — great; mānāt — adoration; ca — and; bhave — unto Lord Śiva; mayi api — unto me also; ca — and; ādarāt — by respect; putrasya — of the son; eva — certainly; ca — and; putrāṇām — of the sons; bhavitā — shall be born; ekaḥ — one; satām — of the devotees; mataḥ — approved; gāsyanti — will broadcast; yat — of whom; yaśaḥ — recognition; śuddham — transcendental; bhagavat — of the Personality of Godhead; yaśasā — with recognition; samam — equally.

Translation
The learned Kaśyapa said: Because of your lamentation, penitence and proper deliberation, and also because of your unflinching faith in the Supreme Personality of Godhead and your adoration for Lord Śiva and me, one of the sons [Prahlāda] of your son [Hiraṇyakaśipu] will be an approved devotee of the Lord, and his fame will be broadcast equally with that of the Personality of Godhead.

Text 46
योगैर्हेमेव दुर्वर्णं भावयिष्यन्ति साधव: ।
निर्वैरादिभिरात्मानं यच्छीलमनुवर्तितुम् ॥ ४६ ॥
yogair hemeva durvarṇaṁ
bhāvayiṣyanti sādhavaḥ
nirvairādibhir ātmānaṁ
yac-chīlam anuvartitum
Synonyms
yogaiḥ — by the rectifying processes; hema — gold; iva — like; durvarṇam — inferior quality; bhāvayiṣyanti — will purify; sādhavaḥ — saintly persons; nirvaira-ādibhiḥ — by practice of freedom from animosity, etc.; ātmānam — the self; yat — whose; śīlam — character; anuvartitum — to follow in the footsteps.

Translation
In order to follow in his footsteps, saintly persons will try to emulate his character by practicing freedom from animosity, just as the purifying processes rectify gold of inferior quality.

Text 47
यत्प्रसादादिदं विश्वं प्रसीदति यदात्मकम् ।
स स्वद‍ृग्भगवान् यस्य तोष्यतेऽनन्यया द‍ृशा ॥ ४७ ॥
yat-prasādād idaṁ viśvaṁ
prasīdati yad-ātmakam
sa sva-dṛg bhagavān yasya
toṣyate ’nanyayā dṛśā
Synonyms
yat — by whose; prasādāt — mercy of; idam — this; viśvam — universe; prasīdati — becomes happy; yat — whose; ātmakam — because of His omnipotence; saḥ — He; sva-dṛk — taking special care for His devotees; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yasya — whose; toṣyate — becomes pleased; ananyayā — without deviation; dṛśā — by intelligence.

Translation
Everyone will be pleased with him because the Personality of Godhead, the supreme controller of the universe, is always satisfied with a devotee who does not wish for anything beyond Him.

Text 48
स वै महाभागवतो महात्मा
महानुभावो महतां महिष्ठ: ।
प्रवृद्धभक्त्या ह्यनुभाविताशये
निवेश्य वैकुण्ठमिमं विहास्यति ॥ ४८ ॥
sa vai mahā-bhāgavato mahātmā
mahānubhāvo mahatāṁ mahiṣṭhaḥ
pravṛddha-bhaktyā hy anubhāvitāśaye
niveśya vaikuṇṭham imaṁ vihāsyati
Synonyms
saḥ — he; vai — certainly; mahā-bhāgavataḥ — the topmost devotee; mahā-ātmā — expanded intelligence; mahā-anubhāvaḥ — expanded influence; mahatām — of the great souls; mahiṣṭhaḥ — the greatest; pravṛddha — well matured; bhaktyā — by devotional service; hi — certainly; anubhāvita — being situated in the anubhāva stage of ecstasy; āśaye — in the mind; niveśya — entering; vaikuṇṭham — in the spiritual sky; imam — this (material world); vihāsyati — will quit.

Translation
That topmost devotee of the Lord will have expanded intelligence and expanded influence and will be the greatest of the great souls. Due to matured devotional service, he will certainly be situated in transcendental ecstasy and will enter the spiritual sky after quitting this material world.

Text 49
अलम्पट: शीलधरो गुणाकरो
हृष्ट: परर्द्ध्या व्यथितो दु:खितेषु ।
अभूतशत्रुर्जगत: शोकहर्ता
नैदाघिकं तापमिवोडुराज: ॥ ४९ ॥
alampaṭaḥ śīla-dharo guṇākaro
hṛṣṭaḥ pararddhyā vyathito duḥkhiteṣu
abhūta-śatrur jagataḥ śoka-hartā
naidāghikaṁ tāpam ivoḍurājaḥ
Synonyms
alampaṭaḥ — virtuous; śīla-dharaḥ — qualified; guṇa-ākaraḥ — reservoir of all good qualities; hṛṣṭaḥ — jolly; para-ṛddhyā — by others’ happiness; vyathitaḥ — distressed; duḥkhiteṣu — in others’ unhappiness; abhūta-śatruḥ — without enemies; jagataḥ — of all the universe; śoka-hartā — destroyer of lamentation; naidāghikam — due to the summer sun; tāpam — distress; iva — likened; uḍu-rājaḥ — the moon.

Translation
He will be a virtuously qualified reservoir of all good qualities; he will be jolly and happy in others’ happiness, distressed in others’ distress, and will have no enemies. He will be a destroyer of the lamentation of all the universes, like the pleasant moon after the summer sun.

Text 50
अन्तर्बहिश्चामलमब्जनेत्रं
स्वपूरुषेच्छानुगृहीतरूपम् ।
पौत्रस्तव श्रीललनाललामं
द्रष्टा स्फुरत्कुण्डलमण्डिताननम् ॥ ५० ॥
antar bahiś cāmalam abja-netraṁ
sva-pūruṣecchānugṛhīta-rūpam
pautras tava śrī-lalanā-lalāmaṁ
draṣṭā sphurat-kuṇḍala-maṇḍitānanam
Synonyms
antaḥ — within; bahiḥ — without; ca — also; amalam — spotless; abja-netram — lotus eyes; sva-pūruṣa — own devotee; icchā-anugṛhīta-rūpam — accepting form according to desire; pautraḥ — grandchild; tava — your; śrī-lalanā — beautiful goddess of fortune; lalāmam — decorated; draṣṭā — will see; sphurat-kuṇḍala — with brilliant earrings; maṇḍita — decorated; ānanam — face.

Translation
Your grandson will be able to see, inside and outside, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose wife is the beautiful goddess of fortune. The Lord can assume the form desired by the devotee, and His face is always beautifully decorated with earrings.

Text 51
मैत्रेय उवाच
श्रुत्वा भागवतं पौत्रममोदत दितिर्भृशम् ।
पुत्रयोश्च वधं कृष्णाद्विदित्वासीन्महामना: ॥ ५१ ॥
maitreya uvāca
śrutvā bhāgavataṁ pautram
amodata ditir bhṛśam
putrayoś ca vadhaṁ kṛṣṇād
viditvāsīn mahā-manāḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the sage Maitreya said; śrutvā — by hearing; bhāgavatam — to be a great devotee of the Lord; pautram — grandson; amodata — took pleasure; ditiḥ — Diti; bhṛśam — very greatly; putrayoḥ — of two sons; ca — also; vadham — the killing; kṛṣṇāt — by Kṛṣṇa; viditvā — knowing this; āsīt — became; mahā-manāḥ — highly pleased in mind.

Translation
The sage Maitreya said: Hearing that her grandson would be a great devotee and that her sons would be killed by Kṛṣṇa, Diti was highly pleased in mind.