Text 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
प्रजापत्यं तु तत्तेज: परतेजोहनं दिति: ।
दधार वर्षाणि शतं शङ्कमाना सुरार्दनात् ॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvāca
prājāpatyaṁ tu tat tejaḥ
para-tejo-hanaṁ ditiḥ
dadhāra varṣāṇi śataṁ
śaṅkamānā surārdanāt
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the sage Maitreya said; prājāpatyam — of the great Prajāpati; tu — but; tat tejaḥ — his powerful semen; para-tejaḥ — others’ prowess; hanam — troubling; ditiḥ — Diti (Kaśyapa’s wife); dadhāra — bore; varṣāṇi — years; śatam — hundred; śaṅkamānā — being doubtful; sura-ardanāt — disturbing to the demigods.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya said: My dear Vidura, Diti, the wife of the sage Kaśyapa, could understand that the sons within her womb would be a cause of disturbance to the demigods. As such, she continuously bore the powerful semen of Kaśyapa Muni, which was meant to give trouble to others, for one hundred years.

Text 2
लोके तेनाहतालोके लोकपाला हतौजस: ।
न्यवेदयन् विश्वसृजे ध्वान्तव्यतिकरं दिशाम् ॥ २ ॥
loke tenāhatāloke
loka-pālā hataujasaḥ
nyavedayan viśva-sṛje
dhvānta-vyatikaraṁ diśām
Synonyms
loke — within this universe; tena — by the force of the pregnancy of Diti; āhata — being devoid of; āloke — light; loka-pālāḥ — the demigods of various planets; hata-ojasaḥ — whose prowess was diminished; nyavedayan — asked; viśva-sṛje — Brahmā; dhvānta-vyatikaram — expansion of darkness; diśām — in all directions.

Translation
By the force of the pregnancy of Diti, the light of the sun and moon was impaired in all the planets, and the demigods of various planets, being disturbed by that force, asked the creator of the universe, Brahmā, “What is this expansion of darkness in all directions?”

Text 3
देवा ऊचु:
तम एतद्विभो वेत्थ संविग्ना यद्वयं भृशम् ।
न ह्यव्यक्तं भगवत: कालेनास्पृष्टवर्त्मन: ॥ ३ ॥
devā ūcuḥ
tama etad vibho vettha
saṁvignā yad vayaṁ bhṛśam
na hy avyaktaṁ bhagavataḥ
kālenāspṛṣṭa-vartmanaḥ
Synonyms
devāḥ ūcuḥ — the demigods said; tamaḥ — darkness; etat — this; vibho — O great one; vettha — you know; saṁvignāḥ — very anxious; yat — because; vayam — we; bhṛśam — very much; na — not; hi — because; avyaktam — unmanifest; bhagavataḥ — of You (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); kālena — by time; aspṛṣṭa — untouched; vartmanaḥ — whose way.

Translation
The fortunate demigods said: O great one, just see this darkness, which you know very well and which is causing us anxieties. Because the influence of time cannot touch you, there is nothing unmanifest before you.

Text 4
देवदेव जगद्धातर्लोकनाथशिखामणे ।
परेषामपरेषां त्वं भूतानामसि भाववित् ॥ ४ ॥
deva-deva jagad-dhātar
lokanātha-śikhāmaṇe
pareṣām apareṣāṁ tvaṁ
bhūtānām asi bhāva-vit
Synonyms
deva-deva — O god of the demigods; jagat-dhātaḥ — O sustainer of the universe; lokanātha-śikhāmaṇe — O head jewel of all the demigods in other planets; pareṣām — of the spiritual world; apareṣām — of the material world; tvam — you; bhūtānām — of all living entities; asi — are; bhāva-vit — knowing the intentions.

Translation
O god of the demigods, sustainer of the universe, head jewel of all the demigods in other planets, you know the intentions of all living entities, in both the spiritual and material worlds.

Text 5
नमो विज्ञानवीर्याय माययेदमुपेयुषे ।
गृहीतगुणभेदाय नमस्तेऽव्यक्तयोनये ॥ ५ ॥
namo vijñāna-vīryāya
māyayedam upeyuṣe
gṛhīta-guṇa-bhedāya
namas te ’vyakta-yonaye
Synonyms
namaḥ — respectful obeisances; vijñāna-vīryāya — O original source of strength and scientific knowledge; māyayā — by the external energy; idam — this body of Brahmā; upeyuṣe — having obtained; gṛhīta — accepting; guṇa-bhedāya — the differentiated mode of passion; namaḥ te — offering obeisances unto you; avyakta — unmanifested; yonaye — source.

Translation
O original source of strength and scientific knowledge, all obeisances unto you! You have accepted the differentiated mode of passion from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. With the help of external energy you are born of the unmanifested source. All obeisances unto you!

Text 6
ये त्वानन्येन भावेन भावयन्त्यात्मभावनम् ।
आत्मनि प्रोतभुवनं परं सदसदात्मकम् ॥ ६ ॥
ye tvānanyena bhāvena
bhāvayanty ātma-bhāvanam
ātmani prota-bhuvanaṁ
paraṁ sad-asad-ātmakam
Synonyms
ye — those who; tvā — on you; ananyena — without deviation; bhāvena — with devotion; bhāvayanti — meditate; ātma-bhāvanam — who generates all living entities; ātmani — within your self; prota — linked; bhuvanam — all the planets; param — the supreme; sat — effect; asat — cause; ātmakam — generator.

Translation
O lord, all these planets exist within your self, and all the living entities are generated from you. Therefore you are the cause of this universe, and anyone who meditates upon you without deviation attains devotional service.

Text 7
तेषां सुपक्‍वयोगानां जितश्वासेन्द्रियात्मनाम् ।
लब्धयुष्मत्प्रसादानां न कुतश्चित्पराभव: ॥ ७ ॥
teṣāṁ supakva-yogānāṁ
jita-śvāsendriyātmanām
labdha-yuṣmat-prasādānāṁ
na kutaścit parābhavaḥ
Synonyms
teṣām — of them; su-pakva-yogānām — who are mature mystics; jita — controlled; śvāsa — breath; indriya — the senses; ātmanām — the mind; labdha — attained; yuṣmat — your; prasādānām — mercy; na — not; kutaścit — anywhere; parābhavaḥ — defeat.

Translation
There is no defeat in this material world for persons who control the mind and senses by controlling the breathing process and who are therefore experienced, mature mystics. This is because by such perfection in yoga they have attained your mercy.

Text 8
यस्य वाचा प्रजा: सर्वा गावस्तन्त्येव यन्त्रिता: ।
हरन्ति बलिमायत्तास्तस्मै मुख्याय ते नम: ॥ ८ ॥
yasya vācā prajāḥ sarvā
gāvas tantyeva yantritāḥ
haranti balim āyattās
tasmai mukhyāya te namaḥ
Synonyms
yasya — of whom; vācā — by the Vedic directions; prajāḥ — living entities; sarvāḥ — all; gāvaḥ — bulls; tantyā — by a rope; iva — as; yantritāḥ — are directed; haranti — offer, take away; balim — presentation, ingredients for worship; āyattāḥ — under control; tasmai — unto him; mukhyāya — unto the chief person; te — unto you; namaḥ — respectful obeisances.

Translation
All the living entities within the universe are conducted by the Vedic directions, as a bull is directed by the rope attached to its nose. No one can violate the rules laid down in the Vedic literatures. To the chief person, who has contributed the Vedas, we offer our respect!

Text 9
स त्वं विधत्स्व शं भूमंस्तमसा लुप्तकर्मणाम् ।
अदभ्रदयया द‍ृष्टय‍ा आपन्नानर्हसीक्षितुम् ॥ ९ ॥
sa tvaṁ vidhatsva śaṁ bhūmaṁs
tamasā lupta-karmaṇām
adabhra-dayayā dṛṣṭyā
āpannān arhasīkṣitum
Synonyms
saḥ — he; tvam — you; vidhatsva — perform; śam — good fortune; bhūman — O great lord; tamasā — by the darkness; lupta — have been suspended; karmaṇām — of prescribed duties; adabhra — magnanimous, without reservation; dayayā — mercy; dṛṣṭyā — by your glance; āpannān — us, the surrendered; arhasi — are able; īkṣitum — to see.

Translation
The demigods prayed to Brahmā: Please look upon us mercifully, for we have fallen into a miserable condition; because of the darkness, all our work has been suspended.

Text 10
एष देव दितेर्गर्भ ओज: काश्यपमर्पितम् ।
दिशस्तिमिरयन् सर्वा वर्धतेऽग्निरिवैधसि ॥ १० ॥
eṣa deva diter garbha
ojaḥ kāśyapam arpitam
diśas timirayan sarvā
vardhate ’gnir ivaidhasi
Synonyms
eṣaḥ — this; deva — O lord; diteḥ — of Diti; garbhaḥ — womb; ojaḥ — semen; kāśyapam — of Kaśyapa; arpitam — deposited; diśaḥ — directions; timirayan — causing complete darkness; sarvāḥ — all; vardhate — overloads; agniḥ — fire; iva — as; edhasi — fuel.

Translation
As fuel overloads a fire, so the embryo created by the semen of Kaśyapa in the womb of Diti has caused complete darkness throughout the universe.

Text 11
मैत्रेय उवाच
स प्रहस्य महाबाहो भगवान् शब्दगोचर: ।
प्रत्याचष्टात्मभूर्देवान् प्रीणन् रुचिरया गिरा ॥ ११ ॥
maitreya uvāca
sa prahasya mahā-bāho
bhagavān śabda-gocaraḥ
pratyācaṣṭātma-bhūr devān
prīṇan rucirayā girā
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; saḥ — he; prahasya — smiling; mahā-bāho — O mighty-armed (Vidura); bhagavān — the possessor of all opulences; śabda-gocaraḥ — who is understood by transcendental sound vibration; pratyācaṣṭa — replied; ātma-bhūḥ — Lord Brahmā; devān — the demigods; prīṇan — satisfying; rucirayā — with sweet; girā — words.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya said: Thus Lord Brahmā, who is understood by transcendental vibration, tried to satisfy the demigods, being pleased with their words of prayer.

Text 12
ब्रह्मोवाच
मानसा मे सुता युष्मत्पूर्वजा: सनकादय: ।
चेरुर्विहायसा लोकाल्लोकेषु विगतस्पृहा: ॥ १२ ॥
brahmovāca
mānasā me sutā yuṣmat-
pūrvajāḥ sanakādayaḥ
cerur vihāyasā lokāl
lokeṣu vigata-spṛhāḥ
Synonyms
brahmā uvāca — Lord Brahmā said; mānasāḥ — born from the mind; me — my; sutāḥ — sons; yuṣmat — than you; pūrva-jāḥ — born previously; sanaka-ādayaḥ — headed by Sanaka; ceruḥ — traveled; vihāyasā — by traveling in outer space or flying in the sky; lokān — to the material and spiritual worlds; lokeṣu — among the people; vigata-spṛhāḥ — without any desire.

Translation
Lord Brahmā said: My four sons Sanaka, Sanātana, Sanandana and Sanat-kumāra, who were born from my mind, are your predecessors. Sometimes they travel throughout the material and spiritual skies without any definite desire.

Text 13
त एकदा भगवतो वैकुण्ठस्यामलात्मन: ।
ययुर्वैकुण्ठनिलयं सर्वलोकनमस्कृतम् ॥ १३ ॥
ta ekadā bhagavato
vaikuṇṭhasyāmalātmanaḥ
yayur vaikuṇṭha-nilayaṁ
sarva-loka-namaskṛtam
Synonyms
te — they; ekadā — once upon a time; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vaikuṇṭhasya — of Lord Viṣṇu; amala-ātmanaḥ — being freed from all material contamination; yayuḥ — entered; vaikuṇṭha-nilayam — the abode named Vaikuṇṭha; sarva-loka — by the residents of all the material planets; namaskṛtam — worshiped.

Translation
After thus traveling all over the universes, they also entered into the spiritual sky, for they were freed from all material contamination. In the spiritual sky there are spiritual planets known as Vaikuṇṭhas, which are the residence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His pure devotees and are worshiped by the residents of all the material planets.

Text 14
वसन्ति यत्र पुरुषा: सर्वे वैकुण्ठमूर्तय: ।
येऽनिमित्तनिमित्तेन धर्मेणाराधयन् हरिम् ॥ १४ ॥
vasanti yatra puruṣāḥ
sarve vaikuṇṭha-mūrtayaḥ
ye ’nimitta-nimittena
dharmeṇārādhayan harim
Synonyms
vasanti — they live; yatra — where; puruṣāḥ — persons; sarve — all; vaikuṇṭha-mūrtayaḥ — having a four-handed form similar to that of the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu; ye — those Vaikuṇṭha persons; animitta — without desire for sense gratification; nimittena — caused by; dharmeṇa — by devotional service; ārādhayan — continuously worshiping; harim — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
In the Vaikuṇṭha planets all the residents are similar in form to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. They all engage in devotional service to the Lord without desires for sense gratification.

Text 15
यत्र चाद्य: पुमानास्ते भगवान् शब्दगोचर: ।
सत्त्वं विष्टभ्य विरजं स्वानां नो मृडयन् वृष: ॥ १५ ॥
yatra cādyaḥ pumān āste
bhagavān śabda-gocaraḥ
sattvaṁ viṣṭabhya virajaṁ
svānāṁ no mṛḍayan vṛṣaḥ
Synonyms
yatra — in the Vaikuṇṭha planets; ca — and; ādyaḥ — original; pumān — person; āste — is there; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śabda-gocaraḥ — understood through the Vedic literature; sattvam — the mode of goodness; viṣṭabhya — accepting; virajam — uncontaminated; svānām — of His own associates; naḥ — us; mṛḍayan — increasing happiness; vṛṣaḥ — the personification of religious principles.

Translation
In the Vaikuṇṭha planets is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the original person and who can be understood through the Vedic literature. He is full of the uncontaminated mode of goodness, with no place for passion or ignorance. He contributes religious progress for the devotees.

Text 16
यत्र नै:श्रेयसं नाम वनं कामदुघैर्द्रुमै: ।
सर्वर्तुश्रीभिर्विभ्राजत्कैवल्यमिव मूर्तिमत् ॥ १६ ॥
yatra naiḥśreyasaṁ nāma
vanaṁ kāma-dughair drumaiḥ
sarvartu-śrībhir vibhrājat
kaivalyam iva mūrtimat
Synonyms
yatra — in the Vaikuṇṭha planets; naiḥśreyasam — auspicious; nāma — named; vanam — forests; kāma-dughaiḥ — yielding desire; drumaiḥ — with trees; sarva — all; ṛtu — seasons; śrībhiḥ — with flowers and fruits; vibhrājat — splendid; kaivalyam — spiritual; iva — as; mūrtimat — personal.

Translation
In those Vaikuṇṭha planets there are many forests which are very auspicious. In those forests the trees are desire trees, and in all seasons they are filled with flowers and fruits because everything in the Vaikuṇṭha planets is spiritual and personal.

Text 17
वैमानिका: सललनाश्चरितानि शश्वद्
गायन्ति यत्र शमलक्षपणानि भर्तु: ।
अन्तर्जलेऽनुविकसन्मधुमाधवीनां
गन्धेन खण्डितधियोऽप्यनिलं क्षिपन्त: ॥ १७ ॥
vaimānikāḥ sa-lalanāś caritāni śaśvad
gāyanti yatra śamala-kṣapaṇāni bhartuḥ
antar-jale ’nuvikasan-madhu-mādhavīnāṁ
gandhena khaṇḍita-dhiyo ’py anilaṁ kṣipantaḥ
Synonyms
vaimānikāḥ — flying in their airplanes; sa-lalanāḥ — along with their wives; caritāni — activities; śaśvat — eternally; gāyanti — sing; yatra — in those Vaikuṇṭha planets; śamala — all inauspicious qualities; kṣapaṇāni — devoid of; bhartuḥ — of the Supreme Lord; antaḥ-jale — in the midst of the water; anuvikasat — blossoming; madhu — fragrant, laden with honey; mādhavīnām — of the mādhavī flowers; gandhena — by the fragrance; khaṇḍita — disturbed; dhiyaḥ — minds; api — even though; anilam — breeze; kṣipantaḥ — deriding.

Translation
In the Vaikuṇṭha planets the inhabitants fly in their airplanes, accompanied by their wives and consorts, and eternally sing of the character and activities of the Lord, which are always devoid of all inauspicious qualities. While singing the glories of the Lord, they deride even the presence of the blossoming mādhavī flowers, which are fragrant and laden with honey.

Text 18
पारावतान्यभृतसारसचक्रवाक-
दात्यूहहंसशुकतित्तिरिबर्हिणां य: ।
कोलाहलो विरमतेऽचिरमात्रमुच्चै
र्भृङ्गाधिपे हरिकथामिव गायमाने ॥ १८ ॥
pārāvatānyabhṛta-sārasa-cakravāka-
dātyūha-haṁsa-śuka-tittiri-barhiṇāṁ yaḥ
kolāhalo viramate ’cira-mātram uccair
bhṛṅgādhipe hari-kathām iva gāyamāne
Synonyms
pārāvata — pigeons; anyabhṛta — cuckoo; sārasa — crane; cakravāka — cakravāka; dātyūha — gallinule; haṁsa — swan; śuka — parrot; tittiri — partridge; barhiṇām — of the peacock; yaḥ — which; kolāhalaḥ — tumult; viramate — stops; acira-mātram — temporarily; uccaiḥ — loudly; bhṛṅga-adhipe — king of the bumblebees; hari-kathām — the glories of the Lord; iva — as; gāyamāne — while singing.

Translation
When the king of bees hums in a high pitch, singing the glories of the Lord, there is a temporary lull in the noise of the pigeon, the cuckoo, the crane, the cakravāka, the swan, the parrot, the partridge and the peacock. Such transcendental birds stop their own singing simply to hear the glories of the Lord.

Text 19
मन्दारकुन्दकुरबोत्पलचम्पकार्ण-
पुन्नागनागबकुलाम्बुजपारिजाता: ।
गन्धेऽर्चिते तुलसिकाभरणेन तस्या
यस्मिंस्तप: सुमनसो बहु मानयन्ति ॥ १९ ॥
mandāra-kunda-kurabotpala-campakārṇa-
punnāga-nāga-bakulāmbuja-pārijātāḥ
gandhe ’rcite tulasikābharaṇena tasyā
yasmiṁs tapaḥ sumanaso bahu mānayanti
Synonyms
mandāra — mandāra flower; kunda — kunda flower; kuraba — kuraba; utpala — utpala; campaka — campaka; arṇa — arṇa; punnāga — punnāga; nāga — nāgakeśara; bakula — bakula; ambuja — lily; pārijātāḥ — pārijāta; gandhe — fragrance; arcite — being worshiped; tulasikā — tulasī; ābharaṇena — with a garland; tasyāḥ — of her; yasmin — in which Vaikuṇṭha; tapaḥ — austerity; su-manasaḥ — good-minded, Vaikuṇṭha-minded; bahu — very much; mānayanti — glorify.

Translation
Although flowering plants like the mandāra, kunda, kurabaka, utpala, campaka, arṇa, punnāga, nāgakeśara, bakula, lily and pārijāta are full of transcendental fragrance, they are still conscious of the austerities performed by tulasī, for tulasī is given special preference by the Lord, who garlands Himself with tulasī leaves.

Text 20
यत्संकुलं हरिपदानतिमात्रद‍ृष्टै-
र्वैदूर्यमारकतहेममयैर्विमानै: ।
येषां बृहत्कटितटा: स्मितशोभिमुख्य:
कृष्णात्मनां न रज आदधुरुत्स्मयाद्यै: ॥ २० ॥
yat saṅkulaṁ hari-padānati-mātra-dṛṣṭair
vaidūrya-mārakata-hema-mayair vimānaiḥ
yeṣāṁ bṛhat-kaṭi-taṭāḥ smita-śobhi-mukhyaḥ
kṛṣṇātmanāṁ na raja ādadhur utsmayādyaiḥ
Synonyms
yat — that Vaikuṇṭha abode; saṅkulam — is pervaded; hari-pada — at the two lotus feet of Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ānati — by obeisances; mātra — simply; dṛṣṭaiḥ — are obtained; vaidūrya — lapis lazuli; mārakata — emeralds; hema — gold; mayaiḥ — made of; vimānaiḥ — with airplanes; yeṣām — of those passengers; bṛhat — large; kaṭi-taṭāḥ — hips; smita — smiling; śobhi — beautiful; mukhyaḥ — faces; kṛṣṇa — in Kṛṣṇa; ātmanām — whose minds are absorbed; na — not; rajaḥ — sex desire; ādadhuḥ — stimulate; utsmaya-ādyaiḥ — by intimate friendly dealings, laughing and joking.

Translation
The inhabitants of Vaikuṇṭha travel in their airplanes made of lapis lazuli, emerald and gold. Although crowded by their consorts, who have large hips and beautiful smiling faces, they cannot be stimulated to passion by their mirth and beautiful charms.

Text 21
श्री रूपिणी क्‍वणयती चरणारविन्दं
लीलाम्बुजेन हरिसद्मनि मुक्तदोषा ।
संलक्ष्यते स्फटिककुड्य उपेतहेम्नि
सम्मार्जतीव यदनुग्रहणेऽन्ययत्न: ॥ २१ ॥
śrī rūpiṇī kvaṇayatī caraṇāravindaṁ
līlāmbujena hari-sadmani mukta-doṣā
saṁlakṣyate sphaṭika-kuḍya upeta-hemni
sammārjatīva yad-anugrahaṇe ’nya-yatnaḥ
Synonyms
śrī — Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune; rūpiṇī — assuming a beautiful form; kvaṇayatī — tinkling; caraṇa-aravindam — lotus feet; līlā-ambujena — playing with a lotus flower; hari-sadmani — the house of the Supreme Personality; mukta-doṣā — freed from all faults; saṁlakṣyate — becomes visible; sphaṭika — crystal; kuḍye — walls; upeta — mixed; hemni — gold; sammārjatī iva — appearing like a sweeper; yat-anugrahaṇe — to receive her favor; anya — others’; yatnaḥ — very much careful.

Translation
The ladies in the Vaikuṇṭha planets are as beautiful as the goddess of fortune herself. Such transcendentally beautiful ladies, their hands playing with lotuses and their leg bangles tinkling, are sometimes seen sweeping the marble walls, which are bedecked at intervals with golden borders, in order to receive the grace of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 22
वापीषु विद्रुमतटास्वमलामृताप्सु
प्रेष्यान्विता निजवने तुलसीभिरीशम् ।
अभ्यर्चती स्वलकमुन्नसमीक्ष्य वक्त्र-
मुच्छेषितं भगवतेत्यमताङ्ग यच्छ्री: ॥ २२ ॥
vāpīṣu vidruma-taṭāsv amalāmṛtāpsu
preṣyānvitā nija-vane tulasībhir īśam
abhyarcatī svalakam unnasam īkṣya vaktram
uccheṣitaṁ bhagavatety amatāṅga yac-chrīḥ
Synonyms
vāpīṣu — in the ponds; vidruma — made of coral; taṭāsu — banks; amala — transparent; amṛta — nectarean; apsu — water; preṣyā-anvitā — surrounded by maidservants; nija-vane — in her own garden; tulasībhiḥ — with tulasī; īśam — the Supreme Lord; abhyarcatī — worship; su-alakam — with her face decorated with tilaka; unnasam — raised nose; īkṣya — by seeing; vaktram — face; uccheṣitam — being kissed; bhagavatā — by the Supreme Lord; iti — thus; amata — thought; aṅga — O demigods; yat-śrīḥ — whose beauty.

Translation
The goddesses of fortune worship the Lord in their own gardens by offering tulasī leaves on the coral-paved banks of transcendental reservoirs of water. While offering worship to the Lord, they can see on the water the reflection of their beautiful faces with raised noses, and it appears that they have become more beautiful because of the Lord’s kissing their faces.

Text 23
यन्न व्रजन्त्यघभिदो रचनानुवादा-
च्छृण्वन्ति येऽन्यविषया: कुकथा मतिघ्नी: ।
यास्तु श्रुता हतभगैर्नृभिरात्तसारा-
स्तांस्तान् क्षिपन्त्यशरणेषु तम:सु हन्त ॥ २३ ॥
yan na vrajanty agha-bhido racanānuvādāc
chṛṇvanti ye ’nya-viṣayāḥ kukathā mati-ghnīḥ
yās tu śrutā hata-bhagair nṛbhir ātta-sārās
tāṁs tān kṣipanty aśaraṇeṣu tamaḥsu hanta
Synonyms
yat — Vaikuṇṭha; na — never; vrajanti — approach; agha-bhidaḥ — of the vanquisher of all kinds of sins; racanā — of the creation; anuvādāt — than narrations; śṛṇvanti — hear; ye — those who; anya — other; viṣayāḥ — subject matter; ku-kathāḥ — bad words; mati-ghnīḥ — killing intelligence; yāḥ — which; tu — but; śrutāḥ — are heard; hata-bhagaiḥ — unfortunate; nṛbhiḥ — by men; ātta — taken away; sārāḥ — values of life; tān tān — such persons; kṣipanti — are thrown; aśaraṇeṣu — devoid of all shelter; tamaḥsu — in the darkest part of material existence; hanta — alas.

Translation
It is very much regrettable that unfortunate people do not discuss the description of the Vaikuṇṭha planets but engage in topics which are unworthy to hear and which bewilder one’s intelligence. Those who give up the topics of Vaikuṇṭha and take to talk of the material world are thrown into the darkest region of ignorance.

Text 24
येऽभ्यर्थितामपि च तो नृगतिं प्रपन्ना
ज्ञानं च तत्त्वविषयं सहधर्मं यत्र ।
नाराधनं भगवतो वितरन्त्यमुष्य
सम्मोहिता विततया बत मायया ते ॥ २४ ॥
ye ’bhyarthitām api ca no nṛ-gatiṁ prapannā
jñānaṁ ca tattva-viṣayaṁ saha-dharmaṁ yatra
nārādhanaṁ bhagavato vitaranty amuṣya
sammohitā vitatayā bata māyayā te
Synonyms
ye — those persons; abhyarthitām — desired; api — certainly; ca — and; naḥ — by us (Brahmā and the other demigods); nṛ-gatim — the human form of life; prapannāḥ — have attained; jñānam — knowledge; ca — and; tattva-viṣayam — subject matter about the Absolute Truth; saha-dharmam — along with religious principles; yatra — where; na — not; ārādhanam — worship; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vitaranti — perform; amuṣya — of the Supreme Lord; sammohitāḥ — being bewildered; vitatayā — all-pervading; bata — alas; māyayā — by the influence of the illusory energy; te — they.

Translation
Lord Brahmā said: My dear demigods, the human form of life is of such importance that we also desire to have such life, for in the human form one can attain perfect religious truth and knowledge. If one in this human form of life does not understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His abode, it is to be understood that he is very much affected by the influence of external nature.

Text 25
यच्च व्रजन्त्यनिमिषामृषभानुवृत्त्या
दूरेयमा ह्युपरि न: स्पृहणीयशीला: ।
भर्तुर्मिथ: सुयशस: कथनानुराग-
वैक्लव्यबाष्पकलया पुलकीकृताङ्गा: ॥ २५ ॥
yac ca vrajanty animiṣām ṛṣabhānuvṛttyā
dūre yamā hy upari naḥ spṛhaṇīya-śīlāḥ
bhartur mithaḥ suyaśasaḥ kathanānurāga-
vaiklavya-bāṣpa-kalayā pulakī-kṛtāṅgāḥ
Synonyms
yat — Vaikuṇṭha; ca — and; vrajanti — go; animiṣām — of the demigods; ṛṣabha — chief; anuvṛttyā — following in the footsteps; dūre — keeping at a distance; yamāḥ — regulative principles; hi — certainly; upari — above; naḥ — us; spṛhaṇīya — to be desired; śīlāḥ — good qualities; bhartuḥ — of the Supreme Lord; mithaḥ — for one another; suyaśasaḥ — glories; kathana — by discussions, discourses; anurāga — attraction; vaiklavya — ecstasy; bāṣpa-kalayā — tears in the eyes; pulakī-kṛta — shivering; aṅgāḥ — bodies.

Translation
Persons whose bodily features change in ecstasy and who breathe heavily and perspire due to hearing the glories of the Lord are promoted to the kingdom of God, even though they do not care for meditation and other austerities. The kingdom of God is above the material universes, and it is desired by Brahmā and other demigods.

Text 26
तद्विश्वगुर्वधिकृतं भुवनैकवन्द्यं
दिव्यं विचित्रविबुधाग्र्यविमानशोचि: ।
आपु: परां मुदमपूर्वमुपेत्य योग-
मायाबलेन मुनयस्तदथो विकुण्ठम् ॥ २६ ॥
tad viśva-gurv-adhikṛtaṁ bhuvanaika-vandyaṁ
divyaṁ vicitra-vibudhāgrya-vimāna-śociḥ
āpuḥ parāṁ mudam apūrvam upetya yoga-
māyā-balena munayas tad atho vikuṇṭham
Synonyms
tat — then; viśva-guru — by the teacher of the universe, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhikṛtam — predominated; bhuvana — of the planets; eka — alone; vandyam — worthy to be worshiped; divyam — spiritual; vicitra — highly decorated; vibudha-agrya — of the devotees (who are the best of the learned); vimāna — of the airplanes; śociḥ — illuminated; āpuḥ — attained; parām — the highest; mudam — happiness; apūrvam — unprecedented; upetya — having attained; yoga-māyā — by spiritual potency; balena — by the influence; munayaḥ — the sages; tat — Vaikuṇṭha; atho — that; vikuṇṭham — Viṣṇu.

Translation
Thus the great sages Sanaka, Sanātana, Sanandana and Sanat-kumāra, upon reaching the above-mentioned Vaikuṇṭha in the spiritual world by dint of their mystic yoga performance, perceived unprecedented happiness. They found that the spiritual sky was illuminated by highly decorated airplanes piloted by the best devotees of Vaikuṇṭha and was predominated by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 27
तस्मिन्नतीत्य मुनय: षडसज्जमाना:
कक्षा: समानवयसावथ सप्तमायाम् ।
देवावचक्षत गृहीतगदौ परार्ध्य-
केयूरकुण्डलकिरीटविटङ्कवेषौ ॥ २७ ॥
tasminn atītya munayaḥ ṣaḍ asajjamānāḥ
kakṣāḥ samāna-vayasāv atha saptamāyām
devāv acakṣata gṛhīta-gadau parārdhya-
keyūra-kuṇḍala-kirīṭa-viṭaṅka-veṣau
Synonyms
tasmin — in that Vaikuṇṭha; atītya — after passing through; munayaḥ — the great sages; ṣaṭ — six; asajja mānāḥ — without being much attracted; kakṣāḥ — walls; samāna — equal; vayasau — age; atha — thereafter; saptamāyām — at the seventh gate; devau — two Vaikuṇṭha doormen; acakṣata — saw; gṛhīta — carrying; gadau — maces; para-ardhya — most valuable; keyūra — bracelets; kuṇḍala — earrings; kirīṭa — helmets; viṭaṅka — beautiful; veṣau — garments.

Translation
After passing through the six entrances of Vaikuṇṭha-purī, the Lord’s residence, without feeling astonishment at all the decorations, they saw at the seventh gate two shining beings of the same age, armed with maces and adorned with most valuable jewelry, earrings, diamonds, helmets, garments, etc.

Text 28
मत्तद्विरेफवनमालिकया निवीतौ
विन्यस्तयासितचतुष्टयबाहुमध्ये ।
वक्त्रं भ्रुवा कुटिलया स्फुटनिर्गमाभ्यां
रक्तेक्षणेन च मनाग्रभसं दधानौ ॥ २८ ॥
matta-dvirepha-vanamālikayā nivītau
vinyastayāsita-catuṣṭaya-bāhu-madhye
vaktraṁ bhruvā kuṭilayā sphuṭa-nirgamābhyāṁ
raktekṣaṇena ca manāg rabhasaṁ dadhānau
Synonyms
matta — intoxicated; dvi-repha — bees; vana-mālikayā — with a garland of fresh flowers; nivītau — hanging on the neck; vinyastayā — placed around; asita — blue; catuṣṭaya — four; bāhu — hands; madhye — between; vaktram — face; bhruvā — with their eyebrows; kuṭilayā — arched; sphuṭa — snorting; nirgamābhyām — breathing; rakta — reddish; īkṣaṇena — with eyes; ca — and; manāk — somewhat; rabhasam — agitated; dadhānau — glanced over.

Translation
The two doormen were garlanded with fresh flowers which attracted intoxicated bees and which were placed around their necks and between their four blue arms. From their arched eyebrows, discontented nostrils and reddish eyes, they appeared somewhat agitated.

Text 29
द्वार्येतयोर्निविविशुर्मिषतोरपृष्ट्वा
पूर्वा यथा पुरटवज्रकपाटिका या: ।
सर्वत्र तेऽविषमया मुनय: स्वद‍ृष्टय‍ा
ये सञ्चरन्त्यविहता विगताभिशङ्का: ॥ २९ ॥
dvāry etayor niviviśur miṣator apṛṣṭvā
pūrvā yathā puraṭa-vajra-kapāṭikā yāḥ
sarvatra te ’viṣamayā munayaḥ sva-dṛṣṭyā
ye sañcaranty avihatā vigatābhiśaṅkāḥ
Synonyms
dvāri — in the door; etayoḥ — both doorkeepers; niviviśuḥ — entered; miṣatoḥ — while seeing; apṛṣṭvā — without asking; pūrvāḥ — as before; yathā — as; puraṭa — made of gold; vajra — and diamond; kapāṭikāḥ — the doors; yāḥ — which; sarvatra — everywhere; te — they; aviṣa-mayā — without any sense of discrimination; munayaḥ — the great sages; sva-dṛṣṭyā — out of their own will; ye — who; sañcaranti — move; avihatāḥ — without being checked; vigata — without; abhiśaṅkāḥ — doubt.

Translation
The great sages, headed by Sanaka, had opened doors everywhere. They had no idea of “ours” and “theirs.” With open minds, they entered the seventh door out of their own will, just as they had passed through the six other doors, which were made of gold and diamonds.

Text 30
तान् वीक्ष्य वातारशनांश्चतुर: कुमारान्
वृद्धान्दशार्धवयसो विदितात्मतत्त्वान् ।
वेत्रेण चास्खलयतामतदर्हणांस्तौ
तेजो विहस्य भगवत्प्रतिकूलशीलौ ॥ ३० ॥
tān vīkṣya vāta-raśanāṁś caturaḥ kumārān
vṛddhān daśārdha-vayaso viditātma-tattvān
vetreṇa cāskhalayatām atad-arhaṇāṁs tau
tejo vihasya bhagavat-pratikūla-śīlau
Synonyms
tān — them; vīkṣya — after seeing; vāta-raśanān — naked; caturaḥ — four; kumārān — boys; vṛddhān — aged; daśa-ardha — five years; vayasaḥ — appearing as of the age; vidita — had realized; ātma-tattvān — the truth of the self; vetreṇa — with their staffs; ca — also; askhalayatām — forbade; a-tat-arhaṇān — not deserving such from them; tau — those two porters; tejaḥ — glories; vihasya — disregarding the etiquette; bhagavat-pratikūla-śīlau — having a nature displeasing to the Lord.

Translation
The four boy-sages, who had nothing to cover their bodies but the atmosphere, looked only five years old, even though they were the oldest of all living creatures and had realized the truth of the self. But when the porters, who happened to possess a disposition quite unpalatable to the Lord, saw the sages, they blocked their way with their staffs, despising their glories, although the sages did not deserve such treatment at their hands.

Text 31
ताभ्यां मिषत्स्वनिमिषेषु निषिध्यमाना:
स्वर्हत्तमा ह्यपि हरे: प्रतिहारपाभ्याम् ।
ऊचु: सुहृत्तमदिद‍ृक्षितभङ्ग ईष-
त्कामानुजेन सहसा त उपप्लुताक्षा: ॥ ३१ ॥
tābhyāṁ miṣatsv animiṣeṣu niṣidhyamānāḥ
svarhattamā hy api hareḥ pratihāra-pābhyām
ūcuḥ suhṛttama-didṛkṣita-bhaṅga īṣat
kāmānujena sahasā ta upaplutākṣāḥ
Synonyms
tābhyām — by those two porters; miṣatsu — while looking on; animiṣeṣu — demigods living in Vaikuṇṭha; niṣidhyamānāḥ — being forbidden; su-arhattamāḥ — by far the fittest persons; hi api — although; hareḥ — of Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pratihāra-pābhyām — by the two doorkeepers; ūcuḥ — said; suhṛt-tama — most beloved; didṛkṣita — eagerness to see; bhaṅge — hindrance; īṣat — slight; kāma-anujena — by the younger brother of lust (anger); sahasā — suddenly; te — those great sages; upapluta — agitated; akṣāḥ — eyes.

Translation
When the Kumāras, although by far the fittest persons, were thus forbidden entrance by the two chief doorkeepers of Śrī Hari while other divinities looked on, their eyes suddenly turned red because of anger due to their great eagerness to see their most beloved master, Śrī Hari, the Personality of Godhead.

Text 32
मुनय ऊचु:
को वामिहैत्य भगवत्परिचर्ययोच्चै-
स्तद्धर्मिणां निवसतां विषम: स्वभाव: ।
तस्मिन् प्रशान्तपुरुषे गतविग्रहे वां
को वात्मवत्कुहकयो: परिशङ्कनीय: ॥ ३२ ॥
munaya ūcuḥ
ko vām ihaitya bhagavat-paricaryayoccais
tad-dharmiṇāṁ nivasatāṁ viṣamaḥ svabhāvaḥ
tasmin praśānta-puruṣe gata-vigrahe vāṁ
ko vātmavat kuhakayoḥ pariśaṅkanīyaḥ
Synonyms
munayaḥ — the great sages; ūcuḥ — said; kaḥ — who; vām — you two; iha — in Vaikuṇṭha; etya — having attained; bhagavat — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; paricaryayā — by the service; uccaiḥ — having been developed by past pious actions; tat-dharmiṇām — of the devotees; nivasatām — dwelling in Vaikuṇṭha; viṣamaḥ — discordant; svabhāvaḥ — mentality; tasmin — in the Supreme Lord; praśānta-puruṣe — without anxieties; gata-vigrahe — without any enemy; vām — of you two; kaḥ — who; vā — or; ātma-vat — like yourselves; kuhakayoḥ — maintaining duplicity; pariśaṅkanīyaḥ — not becoming trustworthy.

Translation
The sages said: Who are these two persons who have developed such a discordant mentality even though they are posted in the service of the Lord in the highest position and are expected to have developed the same qualities as the Lord? How are these two persons living in Vaikuṇṭha? Where is the possibility of an enemy’s coming into this kingdom of God? The Supreme Personality of Godhead has no enemy. Who could be envious of Him? Probably these two persons are imposters; therefore they suspect others to be like themselves.

Text 33
न ह्यन्तरं भगवतीह समस्तकुक्षा-
वात्मानमात्मनि नभो नभसीव धीरा: ।
पश्यन्ति यत्र युवयो: सुरलिङ्गिनो: किं
व्युत्पादितं ह्युदरभेदि भयं यतोऽस्य ॥ ३३ ॥
na hy antaraṁ bhagavatīha samasta-kukṣāv
ātmānam ātmani nabho nabhasīva dhīrāḥ
paśyanti yatra yuvayoḥ sura-liṅginoḥ kiṁ
vyutpāditaṁ hy udara-bhedi bhayaṁ yato ’sya
Synonyms
na — not; hi — because; antaram — distinction; bhagavati — in the Supreme Personality of Godhead; iha — here; samasta-kukṣau — everything is within the abdomen; ātmānam — the living entity; ātmani — in the Supersoul; nabhaḥ — the small quantity of air; nabhasi — within the whole air; iva — as; dhīrāḥ — the learned; paśyanti — see; yatra — in whom; yuvayoḥ — of you two; sura-liṅginoḥ — dressed like inhabitants of Vaikuṇṭha; kim — how; vyutpāditam — awakened, developed; hi — certainly; udara-bhedi — distinction between the body and the soul; bhayam — fearfulness; yataḥ — wherefrom; asya — of the Supreme Lord.

Translation
In the Vaikuṇṭha world there is complete harmony between the residents and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, just as there is complete harmony within space between the big and the small skies. Why then is there a seed of fear in this field of harmony? These two persons are dressed like inhabitants of Vaikuṇṭha, but wherefrom can their disharmony come into existence?

Text 34
तद्वाममुष्य परमस्य विकुण्ठभर्तु:
कर्तुं प्रकृष्टमिह धीमहि मन्दधीभ्याम् ।
लोकानितो व्रजतमन्तरभावद‍ृष्टय‍ा
पापीयसस्त्रय इमे रिपवोऽस्य यत्र ॥ ३४ ॥
tad vām amuṣya paramasya vikuṇṭha-bhartuḥ
kartuṁ prakṛṣṭam iha dhīmahi manda-dhībhyām
lokān ito vrajatam antara-bhāva-dṛṣṭyā
pāpīyasas traya ime ripavo ’sya yatra
Synonyms
tat — therefore; vām — unto these two; amuṣya — of Him; paramasya — the Supreme; vikuṇṭha-bhartuḥ — the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha; kartum — to bestow; prakṛṣṭam — benefit; iha — in the matter of this offense; dhīmahi — let us consider; manda-dhībhyām — those whose intelligence is not very nice; lokān — to the material world; itaḥ — from this place (Vaikuṇṭha); vrajatam — go; antara-bhāva — duality; dṛṣṭyā — on account of seeing; pāpīyasaḥ — sinful; trayaḥ — three; ime — these; ripavaḥ — enemies; asya — of a living entity; yatra — where.

Translation
Therefore let us consider how these two contaminated persons should be punished. The punishment should be apt, for thus benefit can eventually be bestowed upon them. Since they find duality in the existence of Vaikuṇṭha life, they are contaminated and should be removed from this place to the material world, where the living entities have three kinds of enemies.

Text 35
तेषामितीरितमुभाववधार्य घोरं
तं ब्रह्मदण्डमनिवारणमस्त्रपूगै: ।
सद्यो हरेरनुचरावुरु बिभ्यतस्तत्-
पादग्रहावपततामतिकातरेण ॥ ३५ ॥
teṣām itīritam ubhāv avadhārya ghoraṁ
taṁ brahma-daṇḍam anivāraṇam astra-pūgaiḥ
sadyo harer anucarāv uru bibhyatas tat-
pāda-grahāv apatatām atikātareṇa
Synonyms
teṣām — of the four Kumāras; iti — thus; īritam — uttered; ubhau — both doorkeepers; avadhārya — understanding; ghoram — terrible; tam — that; brahma-daṇḍam — curse of a brāhmaṇa; anivāraṇam — not able to be counteracted; astra-pūgaiḥ — by any kind of weapon; sadyaḥ — at once; hareḥ — of the Supreme Lord; anucarau — devotees; uru — very much; bibhyataḥ — became fearful; tat-pāda-grahau — grasping their feet; apatatām — fell down; ati-kātareṇa — in great anxiety.

Translation
When the doormen of Vaikuṇṭhaloka, who were certainly devotees of the Lord, found that they were going to be cursed by the brāhmaṇas, they at once became very much afraid and fell down at the feet of the brāhmaṇas in great anxiety, for a brāhmaṇa’s curse cannot be counteracted by any kind of weapon.

Text 36
भूयादघोनि भगवद्‍‌भिरकारि दण्डो
यो नौ हरेत सुरहेलनमप्यशेषम् ।
मा वोऽनुतापकलया भगवत्स्मृतिघ्नो
मोहो भवेदिह तु नौ व्रजतोरधोऽध: ॥ ३६ ॥
bhūyād aghoni bhagavadbhir akāri daṇḍo
yo nau hareta sura-helanam apy aśeṣam
mā vo ’nutāpa-kalayā bhagavat-smṛti-ghno
moho bhaved iha tu nau vrajator adho ’dhaḥ
Synonyms
bhūyāt — let it be; aghoni — for the sinful; bhagavadbhiḥ — by you; akāri — was done; daṇḍaḥ — punishment; yaḥ — that which; nau — in relation to us; hareta — should destroy; sura-helanam — disobeying great demigods; api — certainly; aśeṣam — unlimited; mā — not; vaḥ — of you; anutāpa — repentance; kalayā — by a little; bhagavat — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; smṛti-ghnaḥ — destroying the memory of; mohaḥ — illusion; bhavet — should be; iha — in the foolish species of life; tu — but; nau — of us; vrajatoḥ — who are going; adhaḥ adhaḥ — down to the material world.

Translation
After being cursed by the sages, the doormen said: It is quite apt that you have punished us for neglecting to respect sages like you. But we pray that due to your compassion at our repentance, the illusion of forgetting the Supreme Personality of Godhead will not come upon us as we go progressively downward.

Text 37
एवं तदैव भगवानरविन्दनाभ:
स्वानां विबुध्य सदतिक्रममार्यहृद्य: ।
तस्मिन् ययौ परमहंसमहामुनीना-
मन्वेषणीयचरणौ चलयन् सहश्री: ॥ ३७ ॥
evaṁ tadaiva bhagavān aravinda-nābhaḥ
svānāṁ vibudhya sad-atikramam ārya-hṛdyaḥ
tasmin yayau paramahaṁsa-mahā-munīnām
anveṣaṇīya-caraṇau calayan saha-śrīḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; tadā eva — at that very moment; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aravinda-nābhaḥ — with a lotus growing from His navel; svānām — of His own servants; vibudhya — learned about; sat — to the great sages; atikramam — the insult; ārya — of the righteous; hṛdyaḥ — the delight; tasmin — there; yayau — went; paramahaṁsa — recluses; mahā-munīnām — by the great sages; anveṣaṇīya — which are worthy to be sought; caraṇau — the two lotus feet; calayan — walking; saha-śrīḥ — with the goddess of fortune.

Translation
At that very moment, the Lord, who is called Padmanābha because of the lotus grown from His navel and who is the delight of the righteous, learned about the insult offered by His own servants to the saints. Accompanied by His spouse, the goddess of fortune, He went to the spot on those very feet sought for by recluses and great sages.

Text 38
तं त्वागतं प्रतिहृतौपयिकं स्वपुम्भि-
स्तेऽचक्षताक्षविषयं स्वसमाधिभाग्यम् ।
हंसश्रियोर्व्यजनयो: शिववायुलोल-
च्छुभ्रातपत्रशशिकेसरशीकराम्बुम् ॥ ३८ ॥
taṁ tv āgataṁ pratihṛtaupayikaṁ sva-pumbhis
te ’cakṣatākṣa-viṣayaṁ sva-samādhi-bhāgyam
haṁsa-śriyor vyajanayoḥ śiva-vāyu-lolac-
chubhrātapatra-śaśi-kesara-śīkarāmbum
Synonyms
tam — Him; tu — but; āgatam — coming forward; pratihṛta — carried; aupayikam — the paraphernalia; sva-pumbhiḥ — by His own associates; te — the great sages (the Kumāras); acakṣata — saw; akṣa-viṣayam — now a subject matter for seeing; sva-samādhi-bhāgyam — visible simply by ecstatic trance; haṁsa-śriyoḥ — as beautiful as white swans; vyajanayoḥ — the cāmaras (bunches of white hair); śiva-vāyu — favorable winds; lolat — moving; śubhra-ātapatra — the white umbrella; śaśi — the moon; kesara — pearls; śīkara — drops; ambum — water.

Translation
The sages, headed by Sanaka Ṛṣi, saw that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, who was formerly visible only within their hearts in ecstatic trance, had now actually become visible to their eyes. As He came forward, accompanied by His own associates bearing all paraphernalia, such as an umbrella and a cāmara fan, the white bunches of hair moved very gently, like two swans, and due to their favorable breeze the pearls garlanding the umbrella also moved, like drops of nectar falling from the white full moon or ice melting due to a gust of wind.

Text 39
कृत्‍स्‍नप्रसादसुमुखं स्पृहणीयधाम
स्‍नेहावलोककलया हृदि संस्पृशन्तम् ।
श्यामे पृथावुरसि शोभितया श्रिया स्व-
श्चूडामणिं सुभगयन्तमिवात्मधिष्ण्यम् ॥ ३९ ॥
kṛtsna-prasāda-sumukhaṁ spṛhaṇīya-dhāma
snehāvaloka-kalayā hṛdi saṁspṛśantam
śyāme pṛthāv urasi śobhitayā śriyā svaś-
cūḍāmaṇiṁ subhagayantam ivātma-dhiṣṇyam
Synonyms
kṛtsna-prasāda — blessing everyone; su-mukham — auspicious face; spṛhaṇīya — desirable; dhāma — shelter; sneha — affection; avaloka — looking upon; kalayā — by expansion; hṛdi — within the heart; saṁspṛśantam — touching; śyāme — unto the Lord with blackish color; pṛthau — broad; urasi — chest; śobhitayā — being decorated; śriyā — goddess of fortune; svaḥ — heavenly planets; cūḍā-maṇim — summit; subhagayantam — spreading good fortune; iva — like; ātma — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dhiṣṇyam — abode.

Translation
The Lord is the reservoir of all pleasure. His auspicious presence is meant for everyone’s benediction, and His affectionate smiling and glancing touch the core of the heart. The Lord’s beautiful bodily color is blackish, and His broad chest is the resting place of the goddess of fortune, who glorifies the entire spiritual world, the summit of all heavenly planets. Thus it appeared that the Lord was personally spreading the beauty and good fortune of the spiritual world.

Text 40
पीतांशुके पृथुनितम्बिनि विस्फुरन्त्या
काञ्‍च्यालिभिर्विरुतया वनमालया च ।
वल्गुप्रकोष्ठवलयं विनतासुतांसे
विन्यस्तहस्तमितरेण धुनानमब्जम् ॥ ४० ॥
pītāṁśuke pṛthu-nitambini visphurantyā
kāñcyālibhir virutayā vana-mālayā ca
valgu-prakoṣṭha-valayaṁ vinatā-sutāṁse
vinyasta-hastam itareṇa dhunānam abjam
Synonyms
pīta-aṁśuke — covered with a yellow cloth; pṛthu-nitambini — on His large hips; visphurantyā — shining brightly; kāñcyā — with a girdle; alibhiḥ — by the bees; virutayā — humming; vana-mālayā — with a garland of fresh flowers; ca — and; valgu — lovely; prakoṣṭha — wrists; valayam — bracelets; vinatā-suta — of Garuḍa, the son of Vinatā; aṁse — on the shoulder; vinyasta — rested; hastam — one hand; itareṇa — with another hand; dhunānam — being twirled; abjam — a lotus flower.

Translation
He was adorned with a girdle that shone brightly on the yellow cloth covering His large hips, and He wore a garland of fresh flowers which was distinguished by humming bees. His lovely wrists were graced with bracelets, and He rested one of His hands on the shoulder of Garuḍa, His carrier, and twirled a lotus with another hand.

Text 41
विद्युत्क्षिपन्मकरकुण्डलमण्डनार्ह-
गण्डस्थलोन्नसमुखं मणिमत्किरीटम् ।
दोर्दण्डषण्डविवरे हरता परार्ध्य-
हारेण कन्धरगतेन च कौस्तुभेन ॥ ४१ ॥
vidyut-kṣipan-makara-kuṇḍala-maṇḍanārha-
gaṇḍa-sthalonnasa-mukhaṁ maṇimat-kirīṭam
dor-daṇḍa-ṣaṇḍa-vivare haratā parārdhya-
hāreṇa kandhara-gatena ca kaustubhena
Synonyms
vidyut — lightning; kṣipat — outshining; makara — alligator shaped; kuṇḍala — earrings; maṇḍana — decoration; arha — as it fits; gaṇḍa-sthala — cheeks; unnasa — prominent nose; mukham — countenance; maṇi-mat — gem-studded; kirīṭam — crown; doḥ-daṇḍa — of His four stout arms; ṣaṇḍa — group; vivare — between; haratā — charming; para-ardhya — by the most precious; hāreṇa — necklace; kandhara-gatena — adorning His neck; ca — and; kaustubhena — by the Kaustubha jewel.

Translation
His countenance was distinguished by cheeks that enhanced the beauty of His alligator-shaped pendants, which outshone lightning. His nose was prominent, and His head was covered with a gem-studded crown. A charming necklace hung between His stout arms, and His neck was adorned with the gem known by the name Kaustubha.

Text 42
अत्रोपसृष्टमिति चोत्स्मितमिन्दिराया:
स्वानां धिया विरचितं बहुसौष्ठवाढ्यम् ।
मह्यं भवस्य भवतां च भजन्तमङ्गं
नेमुर्निरीक्ष्य नवितृप्तद‍ृशो मुदा कै: ॥ ४२ ॥
atropasṛṣṭam iti cotsmitam indirāyāḥ
svānāṁ dhiyā viracitaṁ bahu-sauṣṭhavāḍhyam
mahyaṁ bhavasya bhavatāṁ ca bhajantam aṅgaṁ
nemur nirīkṣya na vitṛpta-dṛśo mudā kaiḥ
Synonyms
atra — here, in the matter of the beauty; upasṛṣṭam — curbed down; iti — thus; ca — and; utsmitam — the pride of her beauty; indirāyāḥ — of the goddess of fortune; svānām — of His own devotees; dhiyā — by intelligence; viracitam — meditated on; bahu-sauṣṭhava-āḍhyam — very beautifully decorated; mahyam — of me; bhavasya — of Lord Śiva; bhavatām — of all of you; ca — and; bhajantam — worshiped; aṅgam — the figure; nemuḥ — bowed down; nirīkṣya — after seeing; na — not; vitṛpta — satiated; dṛśaḥ — eyes; mudā — joyously; kaiḥ — by their heads.

Translation
The exquisite beauty of Nārāyaṇa, being many times magnified by the intelligence of His devotees, was so attractive that it defeated the pride of the goddess of fortune in being the most beautiful. My dear demigods, the Lord who thus manifested Himself is worshipable by me, by Lord Śiva and by all of you. The sages regarded Him with unsated eyes and joyously bowed their heads at His lotus feet.

Text 43
तस्यारविन्दनयनस्य पदारविन्द-
किञ्जल्कमिश्रतुलसीमकरन्दवायु: ।
अन्तर्गत: स्वविवरेण चकार तेषां
सङ्‌क्षोभमक्षरजुषामपि चित्ततन्वो: ॥ ४३ ॥
tasyāravinda-nayanasya padāravinda-
kiñjalka-miśra-tulasī-makaranda-vāyuḥ
antar-gataḥ sva-vivareṇa cakāra teṣāṁ
saṅkṣobham akṣara-juṣām api citta-tanvoḥ
Synonyms
tasya — of Him; aravinda-nayanasya — of the lotus-eyed Lord; pada-aravinda — of the lotus feet; kiñjalka — with the toes; miśra — mixed; tulasī — the tulasī leaves; makaranda — fragrance; vāyuḥ — breeze; antaḥ-gataḥ — entered within; sva-vivareṇa — through their nostrils; cakāra — made; teṣām — of the Kumāras; saṅkṣobham — agitation for change; akṣara-juṣām — attached to impersonal Brahman realization; api — even though; citta-tanvoḥ — in both mind and body.

Translation
When the breeze carrying the aroma of tulasī leaves from the toes of the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead entered the nostrils of those sages, they experienced a change both in body and in mind, even though they were attached to the impersonal Brahman understanding.

Text 44
ते वा अमुष्य वदनासितपद्मकोश-
मुद्वीक्ष्य सुन्दरतराधरकुन्दहासम् ।
लब्धाशिष: पुनरवेक्ष्य तदीयमङ्‌घ्रि-
द्वन्द्वं नखारुणमणिश्रयणं निदध्यु: ॥ ४४ ॥
te vā amuṣya vadanāsita-padma-kośam
udvīkṣya sundaratarādhara-kunda-hāsam
labdhāśiṣaḥ punar avekṣya tadīyam aṅghri-
dvandvaṁ nakhāruṇa-maṇi-śrayaṇaṁ nidadhyuḥ
Synonyms
te — those sages; vai — certainly; amuṣya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vadana — face; asita — blue; padma — lotus; kośam — inside; udvīkṣya — after looking up; sundara-tara — more beautiful; adhara — lips; kunda — jasmine flower; hāsam — smiling; labdha — achieved; āśiṣaḥ — aims of life; punaḥ — again; avekṣya — looking down; tadīyam — His; aṅghri-dvandvam — pair of lotus feet; nakha — nails; aruṇa — red; maṇi — rubies; śrayaṇam — shelter; nidadhyuḥ — meditated.

Translation
The Lord’s beautiful face appeared to them like the inside of a blue lotus, and the Lord’s smile appeared to be a blossoming jasmine flower. After seeing the face of the Lord, the sages were fully satisfied, and when they wanted to see Him further, they looked upon the nails of His lotus feet, which resembled rubies. Thus they viewed the Lord’s transcendental body again and again, and so they finally achieved meditation on the Lord’s personal feature.

Text 45
पुंसां गतिं मृगयतामिह योगमार्गै-
र्ध्यानास्पदं बहु मतं नयनाभिरामम् ।
पौंस्‍नं वपुर्दर्शयानमनन्यसिद्धै-
रौत्पत्तिकै: समगृणन् युतमष्टभोगै: ॥ ४५ ॥
puṁsāṁ gatiṁ mṛgayatām iha yoga-mārgair
dhyānāspadaṁ bahu-mataṁ nayanābhirāmam
pauṁsnaṁ vapur darśayānam ananya-siddhair
autpattikaiḥ samagṛṇan yutam aṣṭa-bhogaiḥ
Synonyms
puṁsām — of those persons; gatim — liberation; mṛgayatām — who are searching; iha — here in this world; yoga-mārgaiḥ — by the process of aṣṭāṅga-yoga; dhyāna-āspadam — object of meditation; bahu — by the great yogis; matam — approved; nayana — eyes; abhirāmam — pleasing; pauṁsnam — human; vapuḥ — form; darśayānam — displaying; ananya — not by others; siddhaiḥ — perfected; autpattikaiḥ — eternally present; samagṛṇan — praised; yutam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is endowed; aṣṭa-bhogaiḥ — with eight kinds of achievement.

Translation
This is the form of the Lord which is meditated upon by the followers of the yoga process, and it is pleasing to the yogīs in meditation. It is not imaginary but factual, as proved by great yogīs. The Lord is full in eight kinds of achievement, but for others these achievements are not possible in full perfection.

Text 46
कुमारा ऊचु:
योऽन्तर्हितो हृदि गतोऽपि दुरात्मनां त्वं
सोऽद्यैव नो नयनमूलमनन्त राद्ध: ।
यर्ह्येव कर्णविवरेण गुहां गतो न:
पित्रानुवर्णितरहा भवदुद्भवेन ॥ ४६ ॥
kumārā ūcuḥ
yo ’ntarhito hṛdi gato ’pi durātmanāṁ tvaṁ
so ’dyaiva no nayana-mūlam ananta rāddhaḥ
yarhy eva karṇa-vivareṇa guhāṁ gato naḥ
pitrānuvarṇita-rahā bhavad-udbhavena
Synonyms
kumārāḥ ūcuḥ — the Kumāras said; yaḥ — He who; antarhitaḥ — not manifested; hṛdi — in the heart; gataḥ — is seated; api — even though; durātmanām — to the rascals; tvam — You; saḥ — He; adya — today; eva — certainly; naḥ — of us; nayana-mūlam — face to face; ananta — O unlimited one; rāddhaḥ — attained; yarhi — when; eva — certainly; karṇa-vivareṇa — through the ears; guhām — intelligence; gataḥ — have attained; naḥ — our; pitrā — by our father; anuvarṇita — described; rahāḥ — mysteries; bhavat-udbhavena — by Your appearance.

Translation
The Kumāras said: Our dear Lord, You are not manifested to rascals, even though You are seated within the heart of everyone. But as far as we are concerned, we see You face to face, although You are unlimited. The statements we have heard about You from our father, Brahmā, through the ears have now been actually realized by Your kind appearance.

Text 47
तं त्वां विदाम भगवन् परमात्मतत्त्वं
सत्त्वेन सम्प्रति रतिं रचयन्तमेषाम् ।
यत्तेऽनुतापविदितैर्दृढभक्तियोगै-
रुद्ग्रन्थयो हृदि विदुर्मुनयो विरागा: ॥ ४७ ॥
taṁ tvāṁ vidāma bhagavan param ātma-tattvaṁ
sattvena samprati ratiṁ racayantam eṣām
yat te ’nutāpa-viditair dṛḍha-bhakti-yogair
udgranthayo hṛdi vidur munayo virāgāḥ
Synonyms
tam — Him; tvām — You; vidāma — we know; bhagavan — O Supreme Personality of Godhead; param — the Supreme; ātma-tattvam — Absolute Truth; sattvena — by Your form of pure goodness; samprati — now; ratim — love of God; racayantam — creating; eṣām — of all of them; yat — which; te — Your; anutāpa — mercy; viditaiḥ — understood; dṛḍha — unflinching; bhakti-yogaiḥ — through devotional service; udgranthayaḥ — without attachment, free from material bondage; hṛdi — in the heart; viduḥ — understood; munayaḥ — great sages; virāgāḥ — not interested in material life.

Translation
We know that You are the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, who manifests His transcendental form in the uncontaminated mode of pure goodness. This transcendental, eternal form of Your personality can be understood only by Your mercy, through unflinching devotional service, by great sages whose hearts have been purified in the devotional way.

Text 48
नात्यन्तिकं विगणयन्त्यपि ते प्रसादं
किम्वन्यदर्पितभयं भ्रुव उन्नयैस्ते ।
येऽङ्ग त्वदङ्‌घ्रि शरणा भवत: कथाया:
कीर्तन्यतीर्थयशस: कुशला रसज्ञा: ॥ ४८ ॥
nātyantikaṁ vigaṇayanty api te prasādaṁ
kimv anyad arpita-bhayaṁ bhruva unnayais te
ye ’ṅga tvad-aṅghri-śaraṇā bhavataḥ kathāyāḥ
kīrtanya-tīrtha-yaśasaḥ kuśalā rasa-jñāḥ
Synonyms
na — not; ātyantikam — liberation; vigaṇayanti — care for; api — even; te — those; prasādam — benedictions; kim u — what to speak; anyat — other material happinesses; arpita — given; bhayam — fearfulness; bhruvaḥ — of the eyebrows; unnayaiḥ — by the raising; te — Your; ye — those devotees; aṅga — O Supreme Personality of Godhead; tvat — Your; aṅghri — lotus feet; śaraṇāḥ — who have taken shelter; bhavataḥ — Your; kathāyāḥ — narrations; kīrtanya — worth chanting; tīrtha — pure; yaśasaḥ — glories; kuśalāḥ — very expert; rasa-jñāḥ — knowers of the mellows or humors.

Translation
Persons who are very expert and most intelligent in understanding things as they are engage in hearing narrations of the auspicious activities and pastimes of the Lord, which are worth chanting and worth hearing. Such persons do not care even for the highest material benediction, namely liberation, to say nothing of other less important benedictions like the material happiness of the heavenly kingdom.

Text 49
कामं भव: स्ववृजिनैर्निरयेषु न: स्ता-
च्चेतोऽलिवद्यदि नु ते पदयो रमेत ।
वाचश्च नस्तुलसिवद्यदि तेऽङ्‌घ्रि शोभा:
पूर्येत ते गुणगणैर्यदि कर्णरन्ध्र: ॥ ४९ ॥
kāmaṁ bhavaḥ sva-vṛjinair nirayeṣu naḥ stāc
ceto ’livad yadi nu te padayo rameta
vācaś ca nas tulasivad yadi te ’ṅghri-śobhāḥ
pūryeta te guṇa-gaṇair yadi karṇa-randhraḥ
Synonyms
kāmam — as much as deserved; bhavaḥ — birth; sva-vṛjinaiḥ — by our own sinful activities; nirayeṣu — in low births; naḥ — our; stāt — let it be; cetaḥ — minds; ali-vat — like bees; yadi — if; nu — may be; te — Your; padayoḥ — at Your lotus feet; rameta — are engaged; vācaḥ — words; ca — and; naḥ — our; tulasi-vat — like the tulasī leaves; yadi — if; te — Your; aṅghri — at Your lotus feet; śobhāḥ — beautified; pūryeta — are filled; te — Your; guṇa-gaṇaiḥ — by transcendental qualities; yadi — if; karṇa-randhraḥ — the holes of the ears.

Translation
O Lord, we pray that You let us be born in any hellish condition of life, just as long as our hearts and minds are always engaged in the service of Your lotus feet, our words are made beautiful [by speaking of Your activities] just as tulasī leaves are beautified when offered unto Your lotus feet, and as long as our ears are always filled with the chanting of Your transcendental qualities.

Text 50
प्रादुश्चकर्थ यदिदं पुरुहूत रूपं
तेनेश निर्वृतिमवापुरलं द‍ृशो न: ।
तस्मा इदं भगवते नम इद्विधेम
योऽनात्मनां दुरुदयो भगवान् प्रतीत: ॥ ५० ॥
prāduścakartha yad idaṁ puruhūta rūpaṁ
teneśa nirvṛtim avāpur alaṁ dṛśo naḥ
tasmā idaṁ bhagavate nama id vidhema
yo ’nātmanāṁ durudayo bhagavān pratītaḥ
Synonyms
prāduścakartha — You have manifested; yat — which; idam — this; puruhūta — O greatly worshiped; rūpam — eternal form; tena — by that form; īśa — O Lord; nirvṛtim — satisfaction; avāpuḥ — obtained; alam — so much; dṛśaḥ — vision; naḥ — our; tasmai — unto Him; idam — this; bhagavate — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaḥ — obeisances; it — only; vidhema — let us offer; yaḥ — who; anātmanām — of those who are less intelligent; durudayaḥ — cannot be seen; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pratītaḥ — has been seen by us.

Translation
O Lord, we therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto Your eternal form as the Personality of Godhead, which You have so kindly manifested before us. Your supreme, eternal form cannot be seen by unfortunate, less intelligent persons, but we are so much satisfied in our mind and vision to see it.