Text 1
ब्रह्मोवाच
इति तद् गृणतां तेषां मुनीनां योगधर्मिणाम् ।
प्रतिनन्द्य जगादेदं विकुण्ठनिलयो विभु: ॥ १ ॥
brahmovāca
iti tad gṛṇatāṁ teṣāṁ
munīnāṁ yoga-dharmiṇām
pratinandya jagādedaṁ
vikuṇṭha-nilayo vibhuḥ
Synonyms
brahmā uvāca — Lord Brahmā said; iti — thus; tat — speech; gṛṇatām — praising; teṣām — of them; munīnām — those four sages; yoga-dharmiṇām — engaged in linking with the Supreme; pratinandya — after congratulating; jagāda — said; idam — these words; vikuṇṭha-nilayaḥ — whose abode is bereft of anxiety; vibhuḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
Lord Brahmā said: After thus congratulating the sages for their nice words, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose abode is in the kingdom of God, spoke as follows.

Text 2
श्रीभगवानुवाच
एतौ तौ पार्षदौ मह्यं जयो विजय एव च ।
कदर्थीकृत्य मां यद्वो बह्वक्रातामतिक्रमम् ॥ २ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
etau tau pārṣadau mahyaṁ
jayo vijaya eva ca
kadarthī-kṛtya māṁ yad vo
bahv akrātām atikramam
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; etau — these two; tau — they; pārṣadau — attendants; mahyam — of Mine; jayaḥ — named Jaya; vijayaḥ — named Vijaya; eva — certainly; ca — and; kadarthī-kṛtya — by ignoring; mām — Me; yat — which; vaḥ — against you; bahu — great; akrātām — have committed; atikramam — offense.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead said: These attendants of Mine, Jaya and Vijaya by name, have committed a great offense against you because of ignoring Me.

Text 3
यस्त्वेतयोर्धृतो दण्डो भवद्‍‌भिर्मामनुव्रतै: ।
स एवानुमतोऽस्माभिर्मुनयो देवहेलनात् ॥ ३ ॥
yas tv etayor dhṛto daṇḍo
bhavadbhir mām anuvrataiḥ
sa evānumato ’smābhir
munayo deva-helanāt
Synonyms
yaḥ — which; tu — but; etayoḥ — regarding both Jaya and Vijaya; dhṛtaḥ — has been given; daṇḍaḥ — punishment; bhavadbhiḥ — by you; mām — Me; anuvrataiḥ — devoted to; saḥ — that; eva — certainly; anumataḥ — is approved; asmābhiḥ — by Me; munayaḥ — O great sages; deva — against you; helanāt — because of an offense.

Translation
O great sages, I approve of the punishment that you who are devoted to Me have meted out to them.

Text 4
तद्व: प्रसादयाम्यद्य ब्रह्म दैवं परं हि मे ।
तद्धीत्यात्मकृतं मन्ये यत्स्वपुम्भिरसत्कृता: ॥ ४ ॥
tad vaḥ prasādayāmy adya
brahma daivaṁ paraṁ hi me
tad dhīty ātma-kṛtaṁ manye
yat sva-pumbhir asat-kṛtāḥ
Synonyms
tat — therefore; vaḥ — you sages; prasādayāmi — I am seeking your forgiveness; adya — just now; brahma — the brāhmaṇas; daivam — most beloved personalities; param — highest; hi — because; me — My; tat — that offense; hi — because; iti — thus; ātma-kṛtam — done by Me; manye — I consider; yat — which; sva-pumbhiḥ — by My own attendants; asat-kṛtāḥ — having been disrespected.

Translation
To Me, the brāhmaṇa is the highest and most beloved personality. The disrespect shown by My attendants has actually been displayed by Me because the doormen are My servitors. I take this to be an offense by Myself; therefore I seek your forgiveness for the incident that has arisen.

Text 5
यन्नामानि च गृह्णाति लोको भृत्ये कृतागसि ।
सोऽसाधुवादस्तत्कीर्तिं हन्ति त्वचमिवामय: ॥ ५ ॥
yan-nāmāni ca gṛhṇāti
loko bhṛtye kṛtāgasi
so ’sādhu-vādas tat-kīrtiṁ
hanti tvacam ivāmayaḥ
Synonyms
yat — of whom; nāmāni — the names; ca — and; gṛhṇāti — take; lokaḥ — people in general; bhṛtye — when a servant; kṛta-āgasi — has committed something wrong; saḥ — that; asādhu-vādaḥ — blame; tat — of that person; kīrtim — the reputation; hanti — destroys; tvacam — the skin; iva — as; āmayaḥ — leprosy.

Translation
A wrong act committed by a servant leads people in general to blame his master, just as a spot of white leprosy on any part of the body pollutes all of the skin.

Text 6
यस्यामृतामलयश:श्रवणावगाह:
सद्य: पुनाति जगदाश्वपचाद्विकुण्ठ: ।
सोऽहं भवद्भय उपलब्धसुतीर्थकीर्ति-
श्छिन्द्यां स्वबाहुमपि व: प्रतिकूलवृत्तिम् ॥ ६ ॥
yasyāmṛtāmala-yaśaḥ-śravaṇāvagāhaḥ
sadyaḥ punāti jagad āśvapacād vikuṇṭhaḥ
so ’haṁ bhavadbhya upalabdha-sutīrtha-kīrtiś
chindyāṁ sva-bāhum api vaḥ pratikūla-vṛttim
Synonyms
yasya — of whom; amṛta — nectar; amala — uncontaminated; yaśaḥ — glories; śravaṇa — hearing; avagāhaḥ — entering into; sadyaḥ — immediately; punāti — purifies; jagat — the universe; āśva-pacāt — including even the dog-eaters; vikuṇṭhaḥ — without anxiety; saḥ — that person; aham — I am; bhavadbhyaḥ — from you; upalabdha — obtained; su-tīrtha — the best place of pilgrimage; kīrtiḥ — the fame; chindyām — would cut off; sva-bāhum — My own arm; api — even; vaḥ — towards you; pratikūla-vṛttim — acting inimically.

Translation
Anyone in the entire world, even down to the caṇḍāla, who lives by cooking and eating the flesh of the dog, is immediately purified if he takes bath in hearing through the ear the glorification of My name, fame, etc. Now you have realized Me without doubt; therefore I will not hesitate to lop off My own arm if its conduct is found hostile to you.

Text 7
यत्सेवया चरणपद्मपवित्ररेणुं
सद्य:क्षताखिलमलं प्रतिलब्धशीलम् ।
न श्रीर्विरक्तमपि मां विजहाति यस्या:
प्रेक्षालवार्थ इतरे नियमान् वहन्ति ॥ ७ ॥
yat-sevayā caraṇa-padma-pavitra-reṇuṁ
sadyaḥ kṣatākhila-malaṁ pratilabdha-śīlam
na śrīr viraktam api māṁ vijahāti yasyāḥ
prekṣā-lavārtha itare niyamān vahanti
Synonyms
yat — of whom; sevayā — by the service; caraṇa — feet; padma — lotus; pavitra — sacred; reṇum — the dust; sadyaḥ — immediately; kṣata — wiped out; akhila — all; malam — sins; pratilabdha — acquired; śīlam — disposition; na — not; śrīḥ — the goddess of fortune; viraktam — have no attachment; api — even though; mām — Me; vijahāti — leave; yasyāḥ — of the goddess of fortune; prekṣā-lava-arthaḥ — for obtaining a slight favor; itare — others, like Lord Brahmā; niyamān — sacred vows; vahanti — observe.

Translation
The Lord continued: Because I am the servitor of My devotees, My lotus feet have become so sacred that they immediately wipe out all sin and I have acquired such a disposition that the goddess of fortune does not leave Me, even though I have no attachment for her, while others praise her beauty and observe sacred vows to secure from her even a slight favor.

Text 8
नाहं तथाद्मि यजमानहविर्विताने
श्‍च्योतद्‍घृतप्लुतमदन् हुतभुङ्‍मुखेन ।
यद्ब्राह्मणस्य मुखतश्चरतोऽनुघासं
तुष्टस्य मय्यवहितैर्निजकर्मपाकै: ॥ ८ ॥
nāhaṁ tathādmi yajamāna-havir vitāne
ścyotad-ghṛta-plutam adan huta-bhuṅ-mukhena
yad brāhmaṇasya mukhataś carato ’nughāsaṁ
tuṣṭasya mayy avahitair nija-karma-pākaiḥ
Synonyms
na — not; aham — I; tathā — on the other hand; admi — I eat; yajamāna — by the sacrificer; haviḥ — the oblations; vitāne — in the sacrificial fire; ścyotat — pouring; ghṛta — ghee; plutam — mixed; adan — eating; huta-bhuk — the sacrificial fire; mukhena — by the mouth; yat — as; brāhmaṇasya — of the brāhmaṇa; mukhataḥ — from the mouth; carataḥ — acting; anughāsam — morsels; tuṣṭasya — satisfied; mayi — to Me; avahitaiḥ — offered; nija — own; karma — activities; pākaiḥ — by the results.

Translation
I do not enjoy the oblations offered by the sacrificers in the sacrificial fire, which is one of My own mouths, with the same relish as I do the delicacies overflowing with ghee which are offered to the mouths of the brāhmaṇas who have dedicated to Me the results of their activities and who are ever satisfied with My prasāda.

Text 9
येषां बिभर्म्यहमखण्डविकुण्ठयोग-
मायाविभूतिरमलाङ्‌घ्रि रज: किरीटै: ।
विप्रांस्तु को न विषहेत यदर्हणाम्भ:
सद्य: पुनाति सहचन्द्रललामलोकान् ॥ ९ ॥
yeṣāṁ bibharmy aham akhaṇḍa-vikuṇṭha-yoga-
māyā-vibhūtir amalāṅghri-rajaḥ kirīṭaiḥ
viprāṁs tu ko na viṣaheta yad-arhaṇāmbhaḥ
sadyaḥ punāti saha-candra-lalāma-lokān
Synonyms
yeṣām — of the brāhmaṇas; bibharmi — I bear; aham — I; akhaṇḍa — unbroken; vikuṇṭha — unobstructed; yoga-māyā — internal energy; vibhūtiḥ — opulence; amala — pure; aṅghri — of the feet; rajaḥ — the dust; kirīṭaiḥ — on My helmet; viprān — the brāhmaṇas; tu — then; kaḥ — who; na — not; viṣaheta — carry; yat — of the Supreme Lord; arhaṇa-ambhaḥ — water which has washed the feet; sadyaḥ — at once; punāti — sanctifies; saha — along with; candra-lalāma — Lord Śiva; lokān — the three worlds.

Translation
I am the master of My unobstructed internal energy, and the water of the Ganges is the remnant left after My feet are washed. That water sanctifies the three worlds, along with Lord Śiva, who bears it on his head. If I can take the dust of the feet of the Vaiṣṇava on My head, who will refuse to do the same?

Text 10
ये मे तनूर्द्विजवरान्दुहतीर्मदीया
भूतान्यलब्धशरणानि च भेदबुद्ध्या ।
द्रक्ष्यन्त्यघक्षतद‍ृशो ह्यहिमन्यवस्तान्
गृध्रा रुषा मम कुषन्त्यधिदण्डनेतु: ॥ १० ॥
ye me tanūr dvija-varān duhatīr madīyā
bhūtāny alabdha-śaraṇāni ca bheda-buddhyā
drakṣyanty agha-kṣata-dṛśo hy ahi-manyavas tān
gṛdhrā ruṣā mama kuṣanty adhidaṇḍa-netuḥ
Synonyms
ye — which persons; me — My; tanūḥ — body; dvija-varān — the best of the brāhmaṇas; duhatīḥ — cows; madīyāḥ — relating to Me; bhūtāni — living entities; alabdha-śaraṇāni — defenseless; ca — and; bheda-buddhyā — considering as different; drakṣyanti — see; agha — by sin; kṣata — is impaired; dṛśaḥ — whose faculty of judgment; hi — because; ahi — like a snake; manyavaḥ — angry; tān — those same persons; gṛdhrāḥ — the vulturelike messengers; ruṣā — angrily; mama — My; kuṣanti — tear; adhidaṇḍa-netuḥ — of the superintendent of punishment, Yamarāja.

Translation
The brāhmaṇas, the cows and the defenseless creatures are My own body. Those whose faculty of judgment has been impaired by their own sin look upon these as distinct from Me. They are just like furious serpents, and they are angrily torn apart by the bills of the vulturelike messengers of Yamarāja, the superintendent of sinful persons.

Text 11
ये ब्राह्मणान्मयि धिया क्षिपतोऽर्चयन्त-
स्तुष्यद्‍धृद: स्मितसुधोक्षितपद्मवक्त्रा: ।
वाण्यानुरागकलयात्मजवद् गृणन्त:
सम्बोधयन्त्यहमिवाहमुपाहृतस्तै: ॥ ११ ॥
ye brāhmaṇān mayi dhiyā kṣipato ’rcayantas
tuṣyad-dhṛdaḥ smita-sudhokṣita-padma-vaktrāḥ
vāṇyānurāga-kalayātmajavad gṛṇantaḥ
sambodhayanty aham ivāham upāhṛtas taiḥ
Synonyms
ye — which persons; brāhmaṇān — the brāhmaṇas; mayi — in Me; dhiyā — with intelligence; kṣipataḥ — uttering harsh words; arcayantaḥ — respecting; tuṣyat — gladdened; hṛdaḥ — hearts; smita — smiling; sudhā — nectar; ukṣita — wet; padma — lotuslike; vaktrāḥ — faces; vāṇyā — with words; anurāga-kalayā — loving; ātmaja-vat — like a son; gṛṇantaḥ — praising; sambodhayanti — pacify; aham — I; iva — as; aham — I; upāhṛtaḥ — being controlled; taiḥ — by them.

Translation
On the other hand, they captivate My heart who are gladdened in heart and who, their lotus faces enlightened by nectarean smiles, respect the brāhmaṇas, even though the brāhmaṇas utter harsh words. They look upon the brāhmaṇas as My own Self and pacify them by praising them in loving words, even as a son would appease an angry father or as I am pacifying you.

Text 12
तन्मे स्वभर्तुरवसायमलक्षमाणौ
युष्मद्वय‍‌तिक्रमगतिं प्रतिपद्य सद्य: ।
भूयो ममान्तिकमितां तदनुग्रहो मे
यत्कल्पतामचिरतो भृतयोर्विवास: ॥ १२ ॥
tan me sva-bhartur avasāyam alakṣamāṇau
yuṣmad-vyatikrama-gatiṁ pratipadya sadyaḥ
bhūyo mamāntikam itāṁ tad anugraho me
yat kalpatām acirato bhṛtayor vivāsaḥ
Synonyms
tat — therefore; me — My; sva-bhartuḥ — of their master; avasāyam — the intention; alakṣamāṇau — not knowing; yuṣmat — against you; vyatikrama — offense; gatim — result; pratipadya — reaping; sadyaḥ — immediately; bhūyaḥ — again; mama antikam — near Me; itām — obtain; tat — that; anugrahaḥ — a favor; me — to Me; yat — which; kalpatām — let it be arranged; acirataḥ — not long; bhṛtayoḥ — of these two servants; vivāsaḥ — exile.

Translation
These servants of Mine have transgressed against you, not knowing the mind of their master. I shall therefore deem it a favor done to Me if you order that, although reaping the fruit of their transgression, they may return to My presence soon and the time of their exile from My abode may expire before long.

Text 13
बह्मोवाच
अथ तस्योशतीं देवीमृषिकुल्यां सरस्वतीम् ।
नास्वाद्य मन्युदष्टानां तेषामात्माप्यतृप्यत ॥ १३ ॥
brahmovāca
atha tasyośatīṁ devīm
ṛṣi-kulyāṁ sarasvatīm
nāsvādya manyu-daṣṭānāṁ
teṣām ātmāpy atṛpyata
Synonyms
brahmā — Lord Brahmā; uvāca — said; atha — now; tasya — of the Supreme Lord; uśatīm — lovely; devīm — shining; ṛṣi-kulyām — like a series of Vedic hymns; sarasvatīm — speech; na — not; āsvādya — hearing; manyu — anger; daṣṭānām — bitten; teṣām — of those sages; ātmā — the mind; api — even though; atṛpyata — satiated.

Translation
Brahmā continued: Even though the sages had been bitten by the serpent of anger, their souls were not satiated with hearing the Lord’s lovely and illuminating speech, which was like a series of Vedic hymns.

Text 14
सतीं व्यादाय श‍ृण्वन्तो लघ्वीं गुर्वर्थगह्वराम् ।
विगाह्यागाधगम्भीरां न विदुस्तच्चिकीर्षितम् ॥ १४ ॥
satīṁ vyādāya śṛṇvanto
laghvīṁ gurv-artha-gahvarām
vigāhyāgādha-gambhīrāṁ
na vidus tac-cikīrṣitam
Synonyms
satīm — excellent; vyādāya — with attentive aural reception; śṛṇvantaḥ — hearing; laghvīm — properly composed; guru — momentous; artha — import; gahvarām — difficult to understand; vigāhya — pondering; agādha — deep; gambhīrām — grave; na — not; viduḥ — understand; tat — of the Supreme Lord; cikīrṣitam — the intention.

Translation
The Lord’s excellent speech was difficult to comprehend because of its momentous import and its most profound significance. The sages heard it with wide-open ears and pondered it as well. But although hearing, they could not understand what He intended to do.

Text 15
ते योगमाययारब्धपारमेष्ठ्यमहोदयम् ।
प्रोचु: प्राञ्जलयो विप्रा: प्रहृष्टा: क्षुभितत्वच: ॥ १५ ॥
te yoga-māyayārabdha-
pārameṣṭhya-mahodayam
procuḥ prāñjalayo viprāḥ
prahṛṣṭāḥ kṣubhita-tvacaḥ
Synonyms
te — those; yoga-māyayā — through His internal potency; ārabdha — had been revealed; pārameṣṭhya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahā-udayam — multiglories; procuḥ — spoke; prāñjalayaḥ — with folded hands; viprāḥ — the four brāhmaṇas; prahṛṣṭāḥ — extremely delighted; kṣubhita-tvacaḥ — hair standing on end.

Translation
The four brāhmaṇa sages were nevertheless extremely delighted to behold Him, and they experienced a thrill throughout their bodies. They then spoke as follows to the Lord, who had revealed the multiglories of the Supreme Personality through His internal potency, yoga-māyā.

Text 16
ऋषय ऊचु:
न वयं भगवन् विद्मस्तव देव चिकीर्षितम् ।
कृतो मेऽनुग्रहश्चेति यदध्यक्ष: प्रभाषसे ॥ १६ ॥
ṛṣaya ūcuḥ
na vayaṁ bhagavan vidmas
tava deva cikīrṣitam
kṛto me ’nugrahaś ceti
yad adhyakṣaḥ prabhāṣase
Synonyms
ṛṣayaḥ — the sages; ūcuḥ — said; na — not; vayam — we; bhagavan — O Supreme Personality of Godhead; vidmaḥ — did know; tava — Your; deva — O Lord; cikīrṣitam — wish for us to do; kṛtaḥ — has been done; me — unto Me; anugrahaḥ — favor; ca — and; iti — thus; yat — which; adhyakṣaḥ — the supreme ruler; prabhāṣase — You say.

Translation
The sages said: O Supreme Personality of Godhead, we are unable to know what You intend for us to do, for even though You are the supreme ruler of all, You speak in our favor as if we had done something good for You.

Text 17
ब्रह्मण्यस्य परं दैवं ब्राह्मणा: किल ते प्रभो ।
विप्राणां देवदेवानां भगवानात्मदैवतम् ॥ १७ ॥
brahmaṇyasya paraṁ daivaṁ
brāhmaṇāḥ kila te prabho
viprāṇāṁ deva-devānāṁ
bhagavān ātma-daivatam
Synonyms
brahmaṇyasya — of the supreme director of the brahminical culture; param — the highest; daivam — position; brāhmaṇāḥ — the brāhmaṇas; kila — for the teaching of others; te — Your; prabho — O Lord; viprāṇām — of the brāhmaṇas; deva-devānām — to be worshiped by the demigods; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ātma — the self; daivatam — worshipable Deity.

Translation
O Lord, You are the supreme director of the brahminical culture. Your considering the brāhmaṇas to be in the highest position is Your example for teaching others. Actually You are the supreme worshipable Deity, not only for the gods but for the brāhmaṇas also.

Text 18
त्वत्त: सनातनो धर्मो रक्ष्यते तनुभिस्तव ।
धर्मस्य परमो गुह्यो निर्विकारो भवान्मत: ॥ १८ ॥
tvattaḥ sanātano dharmo
rakṣyate tanubhis tava
dharmasya paramo guhyo
nirvikāro bhavān mataḥ
Synonyms
tvattaḥ — from You; sanātanaḥ — eternal; dharmaḥ — occupation; rakṣyate — is protected; tanubhiḥ — by multimanifestations; tava — Your; dharmasya — of religious principles; paramaḥ — the supreme; guhyaḥ — objective; nirvikāraḥ — unchangeable; bhavān — You; mataḥ — in our opinion.

Translation
You are the source of the eternal occupation of all living entities, and by Your multimanifestations of Personalities of Godhead, You have always protected religion. You are the supreme objective of religious principles, and in our opinion You are inexhaustible and unchangeable eternally.

Text 19
तरन्ति ह्यञ्जसा मृत्युं निवृत्ता यदनुग्रहात् ।
योगिन: स भवान् किंस्विदनुगृह्येत यत्परै: ॥ १९ ॥
taranti hy añjasā mṛtyuṁ
nivṛttā yad-anugrahāt
yoginaḥ sa bhavān kiṁ svid
anugṛhyeta yat paraiḥ
Synonyms
taranti — cross over; hi — because; añjasā — easily; mṛtyum — birth and death; nivṛttāḥ — ceasing all material desires; yat — Your; anugrahāt — by mercy; yoginaḥ — transcendentalists; saḥ — the Supreme Lord; bhavān — You; kim svit — never possible; anugṛhyeta — may be favored; yat — which; paraiḥ — by others.

Translation
Mystics and transcendentalists, by the mercy of the Lord, cross beyond nescience by ceasing all material desires. It is not possible, therefore, that the Supreme Lord can be favored by others.

Text 20
यं वै विभूतिरुपयात्यनुवेलमन्यै-
रर्थार्थिभि: स्वशिरसा धृतपादरेणु: ।
धन्यार्पिताङ्‌घ्रितुलसीनवदामधाम्नो
लोकं मधुव्रतपतेरिव कामयाना ॥ २० ॥
yaṁ vai vibhūtir upayāty anuvelam anyair
arthārthibhiḥ sva-śirasā dhṛta-pāda-reṇuḥ
dhanyārpitāṅghri-tulasī-nava-dāma-dhāmno
lokaṁ madhuvrata-pater iva kāma-yānā
Synonyms
yam — whom; vai — certainly; vibhūtiḥ — Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune; upayāti — waits upon; anuvelam — occasionally; anyaiḥ — by others; artha — material facility; arthibhiḥ — by those who desire; sva-śirasā — on their own heads; dhṛta — accepting; pāda — of the feet; reṇuḥ — the dust; dhanya — by the devotees; arpita — offered; aṅghri — at Your feet; tulasī — of tulasī leaves; nava — fresh; dāma — on the garland; dhāmnaḥ — having a place; lokam — the place; madhu-vrata-pateḥ — of the king of the bees; iva — like; kāma-yānā — is anxious to secure.

Translation
The goddess of fortune, Lakṣmī, the dust of whose feet is worn on the head by others, waits upon You, as appointed, for she is anxious to secure a place in the abode of the king of bees, who hovers on the fresh wreath of tulasī leaves offered at Your feet by some blessed devotee.

Text 21
यस्तां विविक्तचरितैरनुवर्तमानां
नात्याद्रियत्परमभागवतप्रसङ्ग: ।
स त्वं द्विजानुपथपुण्यरज: पुनीत:
श्रीवत्सलक्ष्म किमगा भगभाजनस्त्वम् ॥ २१ ॥
yas tāṁ vivikta-caritair anuvartamānāṁ
nātyādriyat parama-bhāgavata-prasaṅgaḥ
sa tvaṁ dvijānupatha-puṇya-rajaḥ-punītaḥ
śrīvatsa-lakṣma kim agā bhaga-bhājanas tvam
Synonyms
yaḥ — who; tām — Lakṣmī; vivikta — completely pure; caritaiḥ — devotional services; anuvartamānām — serving; na — not; atyādriyat — attached; parama — the highest; bhāgavata — devotees; prasaṅgaḥ — attached; saḥ — the Supreme Lord; tvam — You; dvija — of the brāhmaṇas; anupatha — on the path; puṇya — sanctified; rajaḥ — dust; punītaḥ — purified; śrīvatsa — of Śrīvatsa; lakṣma — the mark; kim — what; agāḥ — You obtained; bhaga — all opulences or all good qualities; bhājanaḥ — the reservoir; tvam — You.

Translation
O Lord, You are exceedingly attached to the activities of Your pure devotees, yet You are never attached to the goddesses of fortune who constantly engage in Your transcendental loving service. How can You be purified, therefore, by the dust of the path traversed by the brāhmaṇas, and how can You be glorified or made fortunate by the marks of Śrīvatsa on Your chest?

Text 22
धर्मस्य ते भगवतस्त्रियुग त्रिभि: स्वै:
पद्‍‌भिश्चराचरमिदं द्विजदेवतार्थम् ।
नूनं भृतं तदभिघाति रजस्तमश्च
सत्त्वेन नो वरदया तनुवा निरस्य ॥ २२ ॥
dharmasya te bhagavatas tri-yuga tribhiḥ svaiḥ
padbhiś carācaram idaṁ dvija-devatārtham
nūnaṁ bhṛtaṁ tad-abhighāti rajas tamaś ca
sattvena no varadayā tanuvā nirasya
Synonyms
dharmasya — of the personification of all religion; te — of You; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tri-yuga — You who are manifest in all three millenniums; tribhiḥ — by three; svaiḥ — Your own; padbhiḥ — feet; cara-acaram — animate and inanimate; idam — this universe; dvija — the twice-born; devatā — the demigods; artham — for the sake of; nūnam — however; bhṛtam — protected; tat — those feet; abhighāti — destroying; rajaḥ — the mode of passion; tamaḥ — the mode of ignorance; ca — and; sattvena — of pure goodness; naḥ — unto us; vara-dayā — bestowing all blessings; tanuvā — by Your transcendental form; nirasya — driving away.

Translation
O Lord, You are the personification of all religion. Therefore You manifest Yourself in three millenniums, and thus You protect this universe, which consists of animate and inanimate beings. By Your grace, which is of pure goodness and is the bestower of all blessings, kindly drive away the elements of rajas and tamas for the sake of the demigods and twice-born.

Text 23
न त्वं द्विजोत्तमकुलं यदिहात्मगोपं
गोप्ता वृष: स्वर्हणेन ससूनृतेन ।
तर्ह्येव नङ्‌क्ष्यति शिवस्तव देव पन्था
लोकोऽग्रहीष्यद‍ृषभस्य हितत्प्रमाणम् ॥ २३ ॥
na tvaṁ dvijottama-kulaṁ yadi hātma-gopaṁ
goptā vṛṣaḥ svarhaṇena sa-sūnṛtena
tarhy eva naṅkṣyati śivas tava deva panthā
loko ’grahīṣyad ṛṣabhasya hi tat pramāṇam
Synonyms
na — not; tvam — You; dvija — of the twice-born; uttama-kulam — the highest class; yadi — if; ha — indeed; ātma-gopam — worthy to be protected by You; goptā — the protector; vṛṣaḥ — the best; su-arhaṇena — by worship; sa-sūnṛtena — along with mild words; tarhi — then; eva — certainly; naṅkṣyati — will be lost; śivaḥ — auspicious; tava — Your; deva — O Lord; panthāḥ — the path; lokaḥ — the people in general; agrahīṣyat — would accept; ṛṣabhasya — of the best; hi — because; tat — that; pramāṇam — authority.

Translation
O Lord, You are the protector of the highest of the twice-born. If You do not protect them by offering worship and mild words, then certainly the auspicious path of worship will be rejected by people in general, who act on the strength and authority of Your Lordship.

Text 24
तत्तेऽनभीष्टमिव सत्त्वनिधेर्विधित्सो:
क्षेमं जनाय निजशक्तिभिरुद्‍धृतारे: ।
नैतावता त्र्यधिपतेर्बत विश्वभर्तु-
स्तेज: क्षतं त्ववनतस्य स ते विनोद: ॥ २४ ॥
tat te ’nabhīṣṭam iva sattva-nidher vidhitsoḥ
kṣemaṁ janāya nija-śaktibhir uddhṛtāreḥ
naitāvatā try-adhipater bata viśva-bhartus
tejaḥ kṣataṁ tv avanatasya sa te vinodaḥ
Synonyms
tat — that destruction of the path of auspiciousness; te — by You; anabhīṣṭam — is not liked; iva — as; sattva-nidheḥ — the reservoir of all goodness; vidhitsoḥ — desiring to do; kṣemam — good; janāya — for the people in general; nija-śaktibhiḥ — by Your own potencies; uddhṛta — destroyed; areḥ — the opposite element; na — not; etāvatā — by this; tri-adhipateḥ — of the proprietor of the three kinds of creations; bata — O Lord; viśva-bhartuḥ — the maintainer of the universe; tejaḥ — potency; kṣatam — reduced; tu — but; avanatasya — submissive; saḥ — that; te — Your; vinodaḥ — pleasure.

Translation
Dear Lord, You never want the auspicious path to be destroyed, for You are the reservoir of all goodness. Just to benefit people in general, You destroy the evil element by Your mighty potency. You are the proprietor of the three creations and the maintainer of the entire universe. Therefore Your potency is not reduced by Your submissive behavior. Rather, by submission You exhibit Your transcendental pastimes.

Text 25
यं वानयोर्दममधीश भवान् विधत्ते
वृत्तिं नु वा तदनुमन्महि निर्व्यलीकम् ।
अस्मासु वा य उचितो ध्रियतां स दण्डो
येऽनागसौ वयमयुङ्‌क्ष्महि किल्बिषेण ॥ २५ ॥
yaṁ vānayor damam adhīśa bhavān vidhatte
vṛttiṁ nu vā tad anumanmahi nirvyalīkam
asmāsu vā ya ucito dhriyatāṁ sa daṇḍo
ye ’nāgasau vayam ayuṅkṣmahi kilbiṣeṇa
Synonyms
yam — which; vā — or; anayoḥ — of both of them; damam — punishment; adhīśa — O Lord; bhavān — Your Lordship; vidhatte — awards; vṛttim — better existence; nu — certainly; vā — or; tat — that; anumanmahi — we accept; nirvyalīkam — without duplicity; asmāsu — to us; vā — or; yaḥ — whichever; ucitaḥ — is proper; dhriyatām — may be awarded; saḥ — that; daṇḍaḥ — punishment; ye — who; anāgasau — sinless; vayam — we; ayuṅkṣmahi — allotted; kilbiṣeṇa — with a curse.

Translation
O Lord, whatever punishment You wish to award to these two innocent persons, or also to us, we shall accept without duplicity. We understand that we have cursed two faultless persons.

Text 26
श्रीभगवानुवाच
एतौ सुरेतरगतिं प्रतिपद्य सद्य:
संरम्भसम्भृतसमाध्यनुबद्धयोगौ ।
भूय: सकाशमुपयास्यत आशु यो व:
शापो मयैव निमितस्तदवेत विप्रा: ॥ २६ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
etau suretara-gatiṁ pratipadya sadyaḥ
saṁrambha-sambhṛta-samādhy-anubaddha-yogau
bhūyaḥ sakāśam upayāsyata āśu yo vaḥ
śāpo mayaiva nimitas tad aveta viprāḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead replied; etau — these two doorkeepers; sura-itara — demoniac; gatim — the womb; pratipadya — obtaining; sadyaḥ — quickly; saṁrambha — by anger; sambhṛta — intensified; samādhi — concentration of mind; anubaddha — firmly; yogau — united with Me; bhūyaḥ — again; sakāśam — to My presence; upayāsyataḥ — shall return; āśu — shortly; yaḥ — which; vaḥ — of you; śāpaḥ — curse; mayā — by Me; eva — alone; nimitaḥ — ordained; tat — that; aveta — know; viprāḥ — O brāhmaṇas.

Translation
The Lord replied: O brāhmaṇas, know that the punishment you inflicted on them was originally ordained by Me, and therefore they will fall to a birth in a demoniac family. But they will be firmly united with Me in thought through mental concentration intensified by anger, and they will return to My presence shortly.

Text 27
ब्रह्मोवाच
अथ ते मुनयो दृष्ट्वा नयनानन्दभाजनम् ।
वैकुण्ठं तदधिष्ठानं विकुण्ठं च स्वयंप्रभम् ॥ २७ ॥
brahmovāca
atha te munayo dṛṣṭvā
nayanānanda-bhājanam
vaikuṇṭhaṁ tad-adhiṣṭhānaṁ
vikuṇṭhaṁ ca svayaṁ-prabham
Synonyms
brahmā uvāca — Lord Brahmā said; atha — now; te — those; munayaḥ — sages; dṛṣṭvā — after seeing; nayana — of the eyes; ānanda — pleasure; bhājanam — producing; vaikuṇṭham — the Vaikuṇṭha planet; tat — of Him; adhiṣṭhānam — the abode; vikuṇṭham — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ca — and; svayam-prabham — self-illuminating.

Translation
Lord Brahmā said: After seeing the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in the self-illuminated Vaikuṇṭha planet, the sages left that transcendental abode.

Text 28
भगवन्तं परिक्रम्य प्रणिपत्यानुमान्य च ।
प्रतिजग्मु: प्रमुदिता: शंसन्तो वैष्णवीं श्रियम् ॥ २८ ॥
bhagavantaṁ parikramya
praṇipatyānumānya ca
pratijagmuḥ pramuditāḥ
śaṁsanto vaiṣṇavīṁ śriyam
Synonyms
bhagavantam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parikramya — after circumambulating; praṇipatya — after offering obeisances; anumānya — after learning; ca — and; pratijagmuḥ — returned; pramuditāḥ — extremely delighted; śaṁsantaḥ — glorifying; vaiṣṇavīm — of the Vaiṣṇavas; śriyam — opulence.

Translation
The sages circumambulated the Supreme Lord, offered their obeisances and returned, extremely delighted at learning of the divine opulences of the Vaiṣṇava.

Text 29
भगवाननुगावाह यातं मा भैष्टमस्तु शम् ।
ब्रह्मतेज: समर्थोऽपि हन्तुं नेच्छे मतं तु मे ॥ २९ ॥
bhagavān anugāv āha
yātaṁ mā bhaiṣṭam astu śam
brahma-tejaḥ samartho ’pi
hantuṁ necche mataṁ tu me
Synonyms
bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anugau — to His two attendants; āha — said; yātam — depart from this place; mā — let there not be; bhaiṣṭam — fear; astu — let there be; śam — happiness; brahma — of a brāhmaṇa; tejaḥ — the curse; samarthaḥ — being able; api — even; hantum — to nullify; na icche — do not desire; matam — approved; tu — on the contrary; me — by Me.

Translation
The Lord then said to His attendants, Jaya and Vijaya: Depart this place, but fear not. All glories unto you. Though I am capable of nullifying the brāhmaṇas’ curse, I would not do so. On the contrary, it has My approval.

Text 30
एतत्पुरैव निर्दिष्टं रमया क्रुद्धया यदा ।
पुरापवारिता द्वारि विशन्ती मय्युपारते ॥ ३० ॥
etat puraiva nirdiṣṭaṁ
ramayā kruddhayā yadā
purāpavāritā dvāri
viśantī mayy upārate
Synonyms
etat — this departure; purā — formerly; eva — certainly; nirdiṣṭam — foretold; ramayā — by Lakṣmī; kruddhayā — furious; yadā — when; purā — previously; apavāritā — prevented; dvāri — at the gate; viśantī — entering; mayi — as I; upārate — was resting.

Translation
This departure from Vaikuṇṭha was foretold by Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune. She was very angry because when she left My abode and then returned, you stopped her at the gate while I was sleeping.

Text 31
मयि संरम्भयोगेन निस्तीर्य ब्रह्महेलनम् ।
प्रत्येष्यतं निकाशं मे कालेनाल्पीयसा पुन: ॥ ३१ ॥
mayi saṁrambha-yogena
nistīrya brahma-helanam
pratyeṣyataṁ nikāśaṁ me
kālenālpīyasā punaḥ
Synonyms
mayi — unto Me; saṁrambha-yogena — by practice of mystic yoga in anger; nistīrya — being liberated from; brahma-helanam — the result of disobedience to the brāhmaṇas; pratyeṣyatam — will come back; nikāśam — near; me — Me; kālena — in due course of time; alpīyasā — very short; punaḥ — again.

Translation
The Lord assured the two Vaikuṇṭha inhabitants, Jaya and Vijaya: By practicing the mystic yoga system in anger, you will be cleansed of the sin of disobeying the brāhmaṇas and within a very short time return to Me.

Text 32
द्वा:स्थावादिश्य भगवान् विमानश्रेणिभूषणम् ।
सर्वातिशयया लक्ष्म्या जुष्टं स्वं धिष्ण्यमाविशत् ॥ ३२ ॥
dvāḥsthāv ādiśya bhagavān
vimāna-śreṇi-bhūṣaṇam
sarvātiśayayā lakṣmyā
juṣṭaṁ svaṁ dhiṣṇyam āviśat
Synonyms
dvāḥ-sthau — to the doorkeepers; ādiśya — just directing them; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vimāna-śreṇi-bhūṣaṇam — always decorated with first-class airplanes; sarva-atiśayayā — in every respect extensively opulent; lakṣmyā — opulences; juṣṭam — bedecked with; svam — His own; dhiṣṇyam — abode; āviśat — went back.

Translation
After thus speaking at the door of Vaikuṇṭha, the Lord returned to His abode, where there are many celestial airplanes and all-surpassing wealth and splendor.

Text 33
तौ तु गीर्वाणऋषभौ दुस्तराद्धरिलोकत: ।
हतश्रियौ ब्रह्मशापादभूतां विगतस्मयौ ॥ ३३ ॥
tau tu gīrvāṇa-ṛṣabhau
dustarād dhari-lokataḥ
hata-śriyau brahma-śāpād
abhūtāṁ vigata-smayau
Synonyms
tau — those two gatekeepers; tu — but; gīrvāṇa-ṛṣabhau — the best of the demigods; dustarāt — unable to be avoided; hari-lokataḥ — from Vaikuṇṭha, the abode of Lord Hari; hata-śriyau — diminished in beauty and luster; brahma-śāpāt — from the curse of a brāhmaṇa; abhūtām — became; vigata-smayau — morose.

Translation
But those two gatekeepers, the best of the demigods, their beauty and luster diminished by the curse of the brāhmaṇas, became morose and fell from Vaikuṇṭha, the abode of the Supreme Lord.

Text 34
तदा विकुण्ठधिषणात्तयोर्निपतमानयो: ।
हाहाकारो महानासीद्विमानाग्र्येषु पुत्रका: ॥ ३४ ॥
tadā vikuṇṭha-dhiṣaṇāt
tayor nipatamānayoḥ
hāhā-kāro mahān āsīd
vimānāgryeṣu putrakāḥ
Synonyms
tadā — then; vikuṇṭha — of the Supreme Lord; dhiṣaṇāt — from the abode; tayoḥ — as both of them; nipatamānayoḥ — were falling; hāhā-kāraḥ — roaring in disappointment; mahān — great; āsīt — occurred; vimāna-agryeṣu — in the best of airplanes; putrakāḥ — O demigods.

Translation
Then, as Jaya and Vijaya fell from the Lord’s abode, a great roar of disappointment arose from all the demigods, who were sitting in their splendid airplanes.

Text 35
तावेव ह्यधुना प्राप्तौ पार्षदप्रवरौ हरे: ।
दितेर्जठरनिर्विष्टं काश्यपं तेज उल्बणम् ॥ ३५ ॥
tāv eva hy adhunā prāptau
pārṣada-pravarau hareḥ
diter jaṭhara-nirviṣṭaṁ
kāśyapaṁ teja ulbaṇam
Synonyms
tau — those two doorkeepers; eva — certainly; hi — addressed; adhunā — now; prāptau — having gotten; pārṣada-pravarau — important associates; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; diteḥ — of Diti; jaṭhara — womb; nirviṣṭam — entering; kāśyapam — of Kaśyapa Muni; tejaḥ — semen; ulbaṇam — very strong.

Translation
Lord Brahmā continued: Those two principal doorkeepers of the Personality of Godhead have now entered the womb of Diti, the powerful semen of Kaśyapa Muni having covered them.

Text 36
तयोरसुरयोरद्य तेजसा यमयोर्हि व: ।
आक्षिप्तं तेज एतर्हि भगवांस्तद्विधित्सति ॥ ३६ ॥
tayor asurayor adya
tejasā yamayor hi vaḥ
ākṣiptaṁ teja etarhi
bhagavāṁs tad vidhitsati
Synonyms
tayoḥ — of them; asurayoḥ — of the two asuras; adya — today; tejasā — by the prowess; yamayoḥ — of the twins; hi — certainly; vaḥ — of all you demigods; ākṣiptam — agitated; tejaḥ — power; etarhi — thus certainly; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat — that; vidhitsati — desires to do.

Translation
It is the prowess of these twin asuras [demons] that has disturbed you, for it has minimized your power. There is no remedy within my power, however, for it is the Lord Himself who desires to do all this.

Text 37
विश्वस्य य: स्थितिलयोद्भवहेतुराद्यो
योगेश्वरैरपि दुरत्यययोगमाय: ।
क्षेमं विधास्यति स नो भगवांस्त्र्यधीश-
स्तत्रास्मदीयविमृशेन कियानिहार्थ: ॥ ३७ ॥
viśvasya yaḥ sthiti-layodbhava-hetur ādyo
yogeśvarair api duratyaya-yogamāyaḥ
kṣemaṁ vidhāsyati sa no bhagavāṁs tryadhīśas
tatrāsmadīya-vimṛśena kiyān ihārthaḥ
Synonyms
viśvasya — of the universe; yaḥ — who; sthiti — maintenance; laya — destruction; udbhava — creation; hetuḥ — the cause; ādyaḥ — the most ancient person; yoga-īśvaraiḥ — by the masters of yoga; api — even; duratyaya — cannot be easily understood; yoga-māyaḥ — His yoga-māyā potency; kṣemam — good; vidhāsyati — will do; saḥ — He; naḥ — of us; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tri-adhīśaḥ — the controller of the three modes of material nature; tatra — there; asmadīya — by our; vimṛśena — deliberation; kiyān — what; iha — on this subject; arthaḥ — purpose.

Translation
My dear sons, the Lord is the controller of the three modes of nature and is responsible for the creation, preservation and dissolution of the universe. His wonderful creative power, yoga-māyā, cannot be easily understood even by the masters of yoga. That most ancient person, the Personality of Godhead, will alone come to our rescue. What purpose can we serve on His behalf by deliberating on the subject?