Text 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
तदेवमाकर्ण्य जलेशभाषितं
महामनास्तद्विगणय्य दुर्मद: ।
हरेर्विदित्वा गतिमङ्ग नारदाद्
रसातलं निर्विविशे त्वरान्वित: ॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvāca
tad evam ākarṇya jaleśa-bhāṣitaṁ
mahā-manās tad vigaṇayya durmadaḥ
harer viditvā gatim aṅga nāradād
rasātalaṁ nirviviśe tvarānvitaḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ — the great sage Maitreya; uvāca — said; tat — that; evam — thus; ākarṇya — hearing; jala-īśa — of the controller of water, Varuṇa; bhāṣitam — words; mahā-manāḥ — proud; tat — those words; vigaṇayya — having paid little heed to; durmadaḥ — vainglorious; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viditvā — having learned; gatim — the whereabouts; aṅga — O dear Vidura; nāradāt — from Nārada; rasātalam — to the depths of the ocean; nirviviśe — entered; tvarā-anvitaḥ — with great speed.

Translation
Maitreya continued: The proud and falsely glorious Daitya paid little heed to the words of Varuṇa. O dear Vidura, he learned from Nārada the whereabouts of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and hurriedly betook himself to the depths of the ocean.

Text 2
ददर्श तत्राभिजितं धराधरं
प्रोन्नीयमानावनिमग्रदंष्ट्रया ।
मुष्णन्तमक्ष्णा स्वरुचोऽरुणश्रिया
जहास चाहो वनगोचरो मृग: ॥ २ ॥
dadarśa tatrābhijitaṁ dharā-dharaṁ
pronnīyamānāvanim agra-daṁṣṭrayā
muṣṇantam akṣṇā sva-ruco ’ruṇa-śriyā
jahāsa cāho vana-gocaro mṛgaḥ
Synonyms
dadarśa — he saw; tatra — there; abhijitam — the victorious; dharā — the earth; dharam — bearing; pronnīyamāna — being raised upward; avanim — the earth; agra-daṁṣṭrayā — by the tip of His tusk; muṣṇantam — who was diminishing; akṣṇā — with His eyes; sva-rucaḥ — Hiraṇyākṣa’s own splendor; aruṇa — reddish; śriyā — radiant; jahāsa — he laughed; ca — and; aho — oh; vana-gocaraḥ — amphibious; mṛgaḥ — beast.

Translation
He saw there the all-powerful Personality of Godhead in His boar incarnation, bearing the earth upward on the ends of His tusks and robbing him of his splendor with His reddish eyes. The demon laughed: Oh, an amphibious beast!

Text 3
आहैनमेह्यज्ञ महीं विमुञ्च नो
रसौकसां विश्वसृजेयमर्पिता ।
न स्वस्ति यास्यस्यनया ममेक्षत:
सुराधमासादितसूकराकृते ॥ ३ ॥
āhainam ehy ajña mahīṁ vimuñca no
rasaukasāṁ viśva-sṛjeyam arpitā
na svasti yāsyasy anayā mamekṣataḥ
surādhamāsādita-sūkarākṛte
Synonyms
āha — Hiraṇyākṣa said; enam — to the Lord; ehi — come and fight; ajña — O fool; mahīm — the earth; vimuñca — give up; naḥ — to us; rasā-okasām — of the inhabitants of the lower regions; viśva-sṛjā — by the creator of the universe; iyam — this earth; arpitā — entrusted; na — not; svasti — well-being; yāsyasi — You will go; anayā — with this; mama īkṣataḥ — while I am seeing; sura-adhama — O lowest of the demigods; āsādita — having taken; sūkara-ākṛte — the form of a boar.

Translation
The demon addressed the Lord: O best of the demigods, dressed in the form of a boar, just hear me. This earth is entrusted to us, the inhabitants of the lower regions, and You cannot take it from my presence and not be hurt by me.

Text 4
त्वं न: सपत्नैरभवाय किं भृतो
यो मायया हन्त्यसुरान् परोक्षजित् ।
त्वां योगमायाबलमल्पपौरुषं
संस्थाप्य मूढ प्रमृजे सुहृच्छुच: ॥ ४ ॥
tvaṁ naḥ sapatnair abhavāya kiṁ bhṛto
yo māyayā hanty asurān parokṣa-jit
tvāṁ yoga-māyā-balam alpa-pauruṣaṁ
saṁsthāpya mūḍha pramṛje suhṛc-chucaḥ
Synonyms
tvam — You; naḥ — us; sapatnaiḥ — by our enemies; abhavāya — for killing; kim — is it that; bhṛtaḥ — maintained; yaḥ — He who; māyayā — by deception; hanti — kills; asurān — the demons; parokṣa-jit — who conquered by remaining invisible; tvām — You; yoga-māyā-balam — whose strength is bewildering power; alpa-pauruṣam — whose power is meager; saṁsthāpya — after killing; mūḍha — fool; pramṛje — I shall wipe out; suhṛt-śucaḥ — the grief of my kinsmen.

Translation
You rascal, You have been nourished by our enemies to kill us, and You have killed some demons by remaining invisible. O fool, Your power is only mystic, so today I shall enliven my kinsmen by killing You.

Text 5
त्वयि संस्थिते गदया शीर्णशीर्ष-
ण्यस्मद्भुजच्युतया ये च तुभ्यम् ।
बलिं हरन्त्यृषयो ये च देवा:
स्वयं सर्वे न भविष्यन्त्यमूला: ॥ ५ ॥
tvayi saṁsthite gadayā śīrṇa-śīrṣaṇy
asmad-bhuja-cyutayā ye ca tubhyam
baliṁ haranty ṛṣayo ye ca devāḥ
svayaṁ sarve na bhaviṣyanty amūlāḥ
Synonyms
tvayi — when You; saṁsthite — are killed; gadayā — by the mace; śīrṇa — smashed; śīrṣaṇi — skull; asmat-bhuja — from my hand; cyutayā — released; ye — those who; ca — and; tubhyam — to You; balim — presentations; haranti — offer; ṛṣayaḥ — sages; ye — those who; ca — and; devāḥ — demigods; svayam — automatically; sarve — all; na — not; bhaviṣyanti — will exist; amūlāḥ — without roots.

Translation
The demon continued: When You fall dead with Your skull smashed by the mace hurled by my arms, the demigods and sages who offer You oblations and sacrifice in devotional service will also automatically cease to exist, like trees without roots.

Text 6
स तुद्यमानोऽरिदुरुक्ततोमरै-
र्दंष्ट्राग्रगां गामुपलक्ष्य भीताम् ।
तोदं मृषन्निरगादम्बुमध्याद्
ग्राहाहत: सकरेणुर्यथेभ: ॥ ६ ॥
sa tudyamāno ’ri-durukta-tomarair
daṁṣṭrāgra-gāṁ gām upalakṣya bhītām
todaṁ mṛṣan niragād ambu-madhyād
grāhāhataḥ sa-kareṇur yathebhaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — He; tudyamānaḥ — being pained; ari — of the enemy; durukta — by the abusive words; tomaraiḥ — by the weapons; daṁṣṭra-agra — on the ends of His tusks; gām — situated; gām — the earth; upalakṣya — seeing; bhītām — frightened; todam — the pain; mṛṣan — bearing; niragāt — He came out; ambu-madhyāt — from the midst of the water; grāha — by a crocodile; āhataḥ — attacked; sa-kareṇuḥ — along with a she-elephant; yathā — as; ibhaḥ — an elephant.

Translation
Although the Lord was pained by the shaftlike abusive words of the demon, He bore the pain. But seeing that the earth on the ends of His tusks was frightened, He rose out of the water just as an elephant emerges with its female companion when assailed by an alligator.

Text 7
तं नि:सरन्तं सलिलादनुद्रुतो
हिरण्यकेशो द्विरदं यथा झष: ।
करालदंष्ट्रोऽशनिनिस्वनोऽब्रवीद्
गतह्रियां किं त्वसतां विगर्हितम् ॥ ७ ॥
taṁ niḥsarantaṁ salilād anudruto
hiraṇya-keśo dviradaṁ yathā jhaṣaḥ
karāla-daṁṣṭro ’śani-nisvano ’bravīd
gata-hriyāṁ kiṁ tv asatāṁ vigarhitam
Synonyms
tam — Him; niḥsarantam — coming out; salilāt — from the water; anudrutaḥ — chased; hiraṇya-keśaḥ — having golden hair; dviradam — an elephant; yathā — as; jhaṣaḥ — a crocodile; karāla-daṁṣṭraḥ — having fearful teeth; aśani-nisvanaḥ — roaring like thunder; abravīt — he said; gata-hriyām — for those who are shameless; kim — what; tu — indeed; asatām — for the wretches; vigarhitam — reproachable.

Translation
The demon, who had golden hair on his head and fearful tusks, gave chase to the Lord while He was rising from the water, even as an alligator would chase an elephant. Roaring like thunder, he said: Are You not ashamed of running away before a challenging adversary? There is nothing reproachable for shameless creatures!

Text 8
स गामुदस्तात्सलिलस्य गोचरे
विन्यस्य तस्यामदधात्स्वसत्त्वम् ।
अभिष्टुतो विश्वसृजा प्रसूनै-
रापूर्यमाणो विबुधै: पश्यतोऽरे: ॥ ८ ॥
sa gām udastāt salilasya gocare
vinyasya tasyām adadhāt sva-sattvam
abhiṣṭuto viśva-sṛjā prasūnair
āpūryamāṇo vibudhaiḥ paśyato ’reḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — the Lord; gām — the earth; udastāt — on the surface; salilasya — of the water; gocare — within His sight; vinyasya — having placed; tasyām — to the earth; adadhāt — He invested; sva — His own; sattvam — existence; abhiṣṭutaḥ — praised; viśva-sṛjā — by Brahmā (the creator of the universe); prasūnaiḥ — by flowers; āpūryamāṇaḥ — becoming satisfied; vibudhaiḥ — by the demigods; paśyataḥ — while looking on; areḥ — the enemy.

Translation
The Lord placed the earth within His sight on the surface of the water and transferred to her His own energy in the form of the ability to float on the water. While the enemy stood looking on, Brahmā, the creator of the universe, extolled the Lord, and the other demigods rained flowers on Him.

Text 9
परानुषक्तं तपनीयोपकल्पं
महागदं काञ्चनचित्रदंशम् ।
मर्माण्यभीक्ष्णं प्रतुदन्तं दुरुक्तै:
प्रचण्डमन्यु: प्रहसंस्तं बभाषे ॥ ९ ॥
parānuṣaktaṁ tapanīyopakalpaṁ
mahā-gadaṁ kāñcana-citra-daṁśam
marmāṇy abhīkṣṇaṁ pratudantaṁ duruktaiḥ
pracaṇḍa-manyuḥ prahasaṁs taṁ babhāṣe
Synonyms
parā — from behind; anuṣaktam — who followed very closely; tapanīya-upakalpam — who had a considerable amount of gold ornaments; mahā-gadam — with a great mace; kāñcana — golden; citra — beautiful; daṁśam — armor; marmāṇi — the core of the heart; abhīkṣṇam — constantly; pratudantam — piercing; duruktaiḥ — by abusive words; pracaṇḍa — terrible; manyuḥ — anger; prahasan — laughing; tam — to him; babhāṣe — He said.

Translation
The demon, who had a wealth of ornaments, bangles and beautiful golden armor on his body, chased the Lord from behind with a great mace. The Lord tolerated his piercing ill words, but in order to reply to him, He expressed His terrible anger.

Text 10
श्रीभगवानुवाच
सत्यं वयं भो वनगोचरा मृगा
युष्मद्विधान्मृगये ग्रामसिंहान् ।
न मृत्युपाशै: प्रतिमुक्तस्य वीरा
विकत्थनं तव गृह्णन्त्यभद्र ॥ १० ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
satyaṁ vayaṁ bho vana-gocarā mṛgā
yuṣmad-vidhān mṛgaye grāma-siṁhān
na mṛtyu-pāśaiḥ pratimuktasya vīrā
vikatthanaṁ tava gṛhṇanty abhadra
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; satyam — indeed; vayam — We; bhoḥ — O; vana-gocarāḥ — dwelling in the forest; mṛgāḥ — creatures; yuṣmat-vidhān — like you; mṛgaye — I am searching to kill; grāma-siṁhān — dogs; na — not; mṛtyu-pāśaiḥ — by the bonds of death; pratimuktasya — of one who is bound; vīrāḥ — the heroes; vikatthanam — loose talk; tava — your; gṛhṇanti — take notice of; abhadra — O mischievous one.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead said: Indeed, We are creatures of the jungle, and We are searching after hunting dogs like you. One who is freed from the entanglement of death has no fear from the loose talk in which you are indulging, for you are bound up by the laws of death.

Text 11
एते वयं न्यासहरा रसौकसां
गतह्रियो गदया द्रावितास्ते ।
तिष्ठामहेऽथापि कथञ्चिदाजौ
स्थेयं क्‍व यामो बलिनोत्पाद्य वैरम् ॥ ११ ॥
ete vayaṁ nyāsa-harā rasaukasāṁ
gata-hriyo gadayā drāvitās te
tiṣṭhāmahe ’thāpi kathañcid ājau
stheyaṁ kva yāmo balinotpādya vairam
Synonyms
ete — Ourselves; vayam — We; nyāsa — of the charge; harāḥ — thieves; rasā-okasām — of the inhabitants of Rasātala; gata-hriyaḥ — shameless; gadayā — by the mace; drāvitāḥ — chased; te — your; tiṣṭhāmahe — We shall stay; atha api — nevertheless; kathañcit — somehow; ājau — on the battlefield; stheyam — We must stay; kva — where; yāmaḥ — can We go; balinā — with a powerful enemy; utpādya — having created; vairam — enmity.

Translation
Certainly We have stolen the charge of the inhabitants of Rasātala and have lost all shame. Although bitten by your powerful mace, I shall stay here in the water for some time because, having created enmity with a powerful enemy, I now have no place to go.

Text 12
त्वं पद्रथानां किल यूथपाधिपो
घटस्व नोऽस्वस्तय आश्वनूह: ।
संस्थाप्य चास्मान् प्रमृजाश्रुस्वकानां
य: स्वां प्रतिज्ञां नातिपिपर्त्यसभ्य: ॥ १२ ॥
tvaṁ pad-rathānāṁ kila yūthapādhipo
ghaṭasva no ’svastaya āśv anūhaḥ
saṁsthāpya cāsmān pramṛjāśru svakānāṁ
yaḥ svāṁ pratijñāṁ nātipiparty asabhyaḥ
Synonyms
tvam — you; pad-rathānām — of foot soldiers; kila — indeed; yūthapa — of the leaders; adhipaḥ — the commander; ghaṭasva — take steps; naḥ — Our; asvastaye — for defeat; āśu — promptly; anūhaḥ — without consideration; saṁsthāpya — having killed; ca — and; asmān — Us; pramṛja — wipe away; aśru — tears; svakānām — of your kith and kin; yaḥ — he who; svām — his own; pratijñām — promised word; na — not; atipiparti — fulfills; asabhyaḥ — not fit to sit in an assembly.

Translation
You are supposed to be the commander of many foot soldiers, and now you may take prompt steps to overthrow Us. Give up all your foolish talk and wipe out the cares of your kith and kin by slaying Us. One may be proud, yet he does not deserve a seat in an assembly if he fails to fulfill his promised word.

Text 13
मैत्रेय उवाचसोऽधिक्षिप्तो भगवता प्रलब्धश्च रुषा भृशम् ।
आजहारोल्बणं क्रोधं क्रीड्यमानोऽहिराडिव ॥ १३ ॥
maitreya uvāca
so ’dhikṣipto bhagavatā
pralabdhaś ca ruṣā bhṛśam
ājahārolbaṇaṁ krodhaṁ
krīḍyamāno ’hi-rāḍ iva
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ — the great sage Maitreya; uvāca — said; saḥ — the demon; adhikṣiptaḥ — having been insulted; bhagavatā — by the Personality of Godhead; pralabdhaḥ — ridiculed; ca — and; ruṣā — angry; bhṛśam — greatly; ājahāra — collected; ulbaṇam — great; krodham — anger; krīḍyamānaḥ — being played with; ahi-rāṭ — a great cobra; iva — like.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya said: The demon, being thus challenged by the Personality of Godhead, became angry and agitated, and he trembled in anger like a challenged cobra.

Text 14
सृजन्नमर्षित: श्वासान्मन्युप्रचलितेन्द्रिय: ।
आसाद्य तरसा दैत्यो गदयान्यहनद्धरिम् ॥ १४ ॥
sṛjann amarṣitaḥ śvāsān
manyu-pracalitendriyaḥ
āsādya tarasā daityo
gadayā nyahanad dharim
Synonyms
sṛjan — giving out; amarṣitaḥ — being angry; śvāsān — breaths; manyu — by wrath; pracalita — agitated; indriyaḥ — whose senses; āsādya — attacking; tarasā — quickly; daityaḥ — the demon; gadayā — with his mace; nyahanat — struck; harim — Lord Hari.

Translation
Hissing indignantly, all his senses shaken by wrath, the demon quickly sprang upon the Lord and dealt Him a blow with his powerful mace.

Text 15
भगवांस्तु गदावेगं विसृष्टं रिपुणोरसि ।
अवञ्चयत्तिरश्चीनो योगारूढ इवान्तकम् ॥ १५ ॥
bhagavāṁs tu gadā-vegaṁ
visṛṣṭaṁ ripuṇorasi
avañcayat tiraścīno
yogārūḍha ivāntakam
Synonyms
bhagavān — the Lord; tu — however; gadā-vegam — the blow of the mace; visṛṣṭam — thrown; ripuṇā — by the enemy; urasi — at His breast; avañcayat — dodged; tiraścīnaḥ — aside; yoga-ārūḍhaḥ — an accomplished yogī; iva — like; antakam — death.

Translation
The Lord, however, by moving slightly aside, dodged the violent mace-blow aimed at His breast by the enemy, just as an accomplished yogī would elude death.

Text 16
पुनर्गदां स्वामादाय भ्रामयन्तमभीक्ष्णश: ।
अभ्यधावद्धरि: क्रुद्ध: संरम्भाद्दष्टदच्छदम् ॥ १६ ॥
punar gadāṁ svām ādāya
bhrāmayantam abhīkṣṇaśaḥ
abhyadhāvad dhariḥ kruddhaḥ
saṁrambhād daṣṭa-dacchadam
Synonyms
punaḥ — again; gadām — mace; svām — his; ādāya — having taken; bhrāmayantam — brandishing; abhīkṣṇaśaḥ — repeatedly; abhyadhāvat — rushed to meet; hariḥ — the Personality of Godhead; kruddhaḥ — angry; saṁrambhāt — in rage; daṣṭa — bitten; dacchadam — his lip.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead now exhibited His anger and rushed to meet the demon, who bit his lip in rage, took up his mace again and began to repeatedly brandish it about.

Text 17
ततश्च गदयारातिं दक्षिणस्यां भ्रुवि प्रभु: ।
आजघ्ने स तु तां सौम्य गदया कोविदोऽहनत् ॥ १७ ॥
tataś ca gadayārātiṁ
dakṣiṇasyāṁ bhruvi prabhuḥ
ājaghne sa tu tāṁ saumya
gadayā kovido ’hanat
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; ca — and; gadayā — with His mace; arātim — the enemy; dakṣiṇasyām — on the right; bhruvi — on the brow; prabhuḥ — the Lord; ājaghne — struck; saḥ — the Lord; tu — but; tām — the mace; saumya — O gentle Vidura; gadayā — with his mace; kovidaḥ — expert; ahanat — he saved himself.

Translation
Then with His mace the Lord struck the enemy on the right of his brow, but since the demon was expert in fighting, O gentle Vidura, he protected himself by a maneuver of his own mace.

Text 18
एवं गदाभ्यां गुर्वीभ्यां हर्यक्षो हरिरेव च ।
जिगीषया सुसंरब्धावन्योन्यमभिजघ्नतु: ॥ १८ ॥
evaṁ gadābhyāṁ gurvībhyāṁ
haryakṣo harir eva ca
jigīṣayā susaṁrabdhāv
anyonyam abhijaghnatuḥ
Synonyms
evam — in this way; gadābhyām — with their maces; gurvībhyām — huge; haryakṣaḥ — the demon Haryakṣa (Hiraṇyākṣa); hariḥ — Lord Hari; eva — certainly; ca — and; jigīṣayā — with a desire for victory; susaṁrabdhau — enraged; anyonyam — each other; abhijaghnatuḥ — they struck.

Translation
In this way, the demon Haryakṣa and the Lord, the Personality of Godhead, struck each other with their huge maces, each enraged and seeking his own victory.

Text 19
तयो: स्पृधोस्तिग्मगदाहताङ्गयो:
क्षतास्रवघ्राणविवृद्धमन्य्वो: ।
विचित्रमार्गांश्चरतोर्जिगीषया
व्यभादिलायामिव शुष्मिणोर्मृध: ॥ १९ ॥
tayoḥ spṛdhos tigma-gadāhatāṅgayoḥ
kṣatāsrava-ghrāṇa-vivṛddha-manyvoḥ
vicitra-mārgāṁś carator jigīṣayā
vyabhād ilāyām iva śuṣmiṇor mṛdhaḥ
Synonyms
tayoḥ — them; spṛdhoḥ — the two combatants; tigma — pointed; gadā — by the maces; āhata — injured; aṅgayoḥ — their bodies; kṣata-āsrava — blood coming out from the injuries; ghrāṇa — smell; vivṛddha — increased; manyvoḥ — anger; vicitra — of various kinds; mārgān — maneuvers; caratoḥ — performing; jigīṣayā — with a desire to win; vyabhāt — it looked like; ilāyām — for the sake of a cow (or the earth); iva — like; śuṣmiṇoḥ — of two bulls; mṛdhaḥ — an encounter.

Translation
There was keen rivalry between the two combatants; both had sustained injuries on their bodies from the blows of each other’s pointed maces, and each grew more and more enraged at the smell of blood on his person. In their eagerness to win, they performed maneuvers of various kinds, and their contest looked like an encounter between two forceful bulls for the sake of a cow.

Text 20
दैत्यस्य यज्ञावयवस्य माया-
गृहीतवाराहतनोर्महात्मन: ।
कौरव्य मह्यां द्विषतोर्विमर्दनं
दिद‍ृक्षुरागाद‍ृषिभिर्वृत: स्वराट् ॥ २० ॥
daityasya yajñāvayavasya māyā-
gṛhīta-vārāha-tanor mahātmanaḥ
kauravya mahyāṁ dviṣator vimardanaṁ
didṛkṣur āgād ṛṣibhir vṛtaḥ svarāṭ
Synonyms
daityasya — of the demon; yajña-avayavasya — of the Personality of Godhead (of whose body yajña is a part); māyā — through His potency; gṛhīta — was assumed; vārāha — of a boar; tanoḥ — whose form; mahā-ātmanaḥ — of the Supreme Lord; kauravya — O Vidura (descendant of Kuru); mahyām — for the sake of the world; dviṣatoḥ — of the two enemies; vimardanam — the fight; didṛkṣuḥ — desirous to see; āgāt — came; ṛṣibhiḥ — by the sages; vṛtaḥ — accompanied; svarāṭ — Brahmā.

Translation
O descendant of Kuru, Brahmā, the most independent demigod of the universe, accompanied by his followers, came to see the terrible fight for the sake of the world between the demon and the Personality of Godhead, who appeared in the form of a boar.

Text 21
आसन्नशौण्डीरमपेतसाध्वसं
कृतप्रतीकारमहार्यविक्रमम् ।
विलक्ष्य दैत्यं भगवान् सहस्रणी-
र्जगाद नारायणमादिसूकरम् ॥ २१ ॥
āsanna-śauṇḍīram apeta-sādhvasaṁ
kṛta-pratīkāram ahārya-vikramam
vilakṣya daityaṁ bhagavān sahasra-ṇīr
jagāda nārāyaṇam ādi-sūkaram
Synonyms
āsanna — attained; śauṇḍīram — power; apeta — devoid of; sādhvasam — fear; kṛta — making; pratīkāram — opposition; ahārya — unopposable; vikramam — having power; vilakṣya — having seen; daityam — the demon; bhagavān — the worshipful Brahmā; sahasra-nīḥ — the leader of thousands of sages; jagāda — addressed; nārāyaṇam — Lord Nārāyaṇa; ādi — the original; sūkaram — having the form of a boar.

Translation
After arriving at the place of combat, Brahmā, the leader of thousands of sages and transcendentalists, saw the demon, who had attained such unprecedented power that no one could fight with him. Brahmā then addressed Nārāyaṇa, who was assuming the form of a boar for the first time.

Texts 22-23
ब्रह्मोवाच
एष ते देव देवानामङ्‌घ्रिमूलमुपेयुषाम् ।
विप्राणां सौरभेयीणां भूतानामप्यनागसाम् ॥ २२ ॥
आगस्कृद्भयकृद्दुष्कृदस्मद्राद्धवरोऽसुर: ।
अन्वेषन्नप्रतिरथो लोकानटति कण्टक: ॥ २३ ॥
brahmovāca
eṣa te deva devānām
aṅghri-mūlam upeyuṣām
viprāṇāṁ saurabheyīṇāṁ
bhūtānām apy anāgasām
āgas-kṛd bhaya-kṛd duṣkṛd
asmad-rāddha-varo ’suraḥ
anveṣann apratiratho
lokān aṭati kaṇṭakaḥ
Synonyms
brahmā uvāca — Lord Brahmā said; eṣaḥ — this demon; te — Your; deva — O Lord; devānām — to the demigods; aṅghri-mūlam — Your feet; upeyuṣām — to those having obtained; viprāṇām — to the brāhmaṇas; saurabheyīṇām — to the cows; bhūtānām — to ordinary living entities; api — also; anāgasām — innocent; āgaḥ-kṛt — an offender; bhaya-kṛt — a source of fear; duṣkṛt — wrongdoer; asmat — from me; rāddha-varaḥ — having attained a boon; asuraḥ — a demon; anveṣan — searching; apratirathaḥ — having no proper combatant; lokān — all over the universe; aṭati — he wanders; kaṇṭakaḥ — being a pinprick for everyone.

Translation
Lord Brahmā said: My dear Lord, this demon has proved to be a constant pinprick to the demigods, the brāhmaṇas, the cows and innocent persons who are spotless and always dependent upon worshiping Your lotus feet. He has become a source of fear by unnecessarily harassing them. Since he has attained a boon from me, he has become a demon, always searching for a proper combatant, wandering all over the universe for this infamous purpose.

Text 24
मैनं मायाविनं द‍ृप्तं निरङ्कुशमसत्तमम् ।
आक्रीड बालवद्देव यथाशीविषमुत्थितम् ॥ २४ ॥
mainaṁ māyāvinaṁ dṛptaṁ
niraṅkuśam asattamam
ākrīḍa bālavad deva
yathāśīviṣam utthitam
Synonyms
mā — do not; enam — him; māyā-vinam — skilled in conjuring tricks; dṛptam — arrogant; niraṅkuśam — self-sufficient; asat-tamam — most wicked; ākrīḍa — play with; bāla-vat — like a child; deva — O Lord; yathā — as; āśīviṣam — a serpent; utthitam — aroused.

Translation
Lord Brahmā continued: My dear Lord, there is no need to play with this serpentine demon, who is always very skilled in conjuring tricks and is arrogant, self-sufficient and most wicked.

Text 25
न यावदेष वर्धेत स्वां वेलां प्राप्य दारुण: ।
स्वां देव मायामास्थाय तावज्जह्यघमच्युत ॥ २५ ॥
na yāvad eṣa vardheta
svāṁ velāṁ prāpya dāruṇaḥ
svāṁ deva māyām āsthāya
tāvaj jahy agham acyuta
Synonyms
na yāvat — before; eṣaḥ — this demon; vardheta — may increase; svām — his own; velām — demoniac hour; prāpya — having reached; dāruṇaḥ — formidable; svām — Your own; deva — O Lord; māyām — internal potency; āsthāya — using; tāvat — at once; jahi — kill; agham — the sinful one; acyuta — O infallible one.

Translation
Brahmā continued: My dear Lord, You are infallible. Please kill this sinful demon before the demoniac hour arrives and he presents another formidable approach favorable to him. You can kill him by Your internal potency without doubt.

Text 26
एषा घोरतमा सन्ध्या लोकच्छम्बट्करी प्रभो ।
उपसर्पति सर्वात्मन् सुराणां जयमावह ॥ २६ ॥
eṣā ghoratamā sandhyā
loka-cchambaṭ-karī prabho
upasarpati sarvātman
surāṇāṁ jayam āvaha
Synonyms
eṣā — this; ghora-tamā — darkest; sandhyā — evening time; loka — the world; chambaṭ-karī — destroying; prabho — O Lord; upasarpati — is approaching; sarva-ātman — O Soul of all souls; surāṇām — to the demigods; jayam — victory; āvaha — bring.

Translation
My Lord, the darkest evening, which covers the world, is fast approaching. Since You are the Soul of all souls, kindly kill him and win victory for the demigods.

Text 27
अधुनैषोऽभिजिन्नाम योगो मौहूर्तिको ह्यगात् ।
शिवाय नस्त्वं सुहृदामाशु निस्तर दुस्तरम् ॥ २७ ॥
adhunaiṣo ’bhijin nāma
yogo mauhūrtiko hy agāt
śivāya nas tvaṁ suhṛdām
āśu nistara dustaram
Synonyms
adhunā — now; eṣaḥ — this; abhijit nāma — called abhijit; yogaḥ — auspicious; mauhūrtikaḥ — moment; hi — indeed; agāt — has almost passed; śivāya — for the welfare; naḥ — of us; tvam — You; suhṛdām — of Your friends; āśu — quickly; nistara — dispose of; dustaram — the formidable foe.

Translation
The auspicious period known as abhijit, which is most opportune for victory, commenced at midday and has all but passed; therefore, in the interest of Your friends, please dispose of this formidable foe quickly.

Text 28
दिष्टय‍ा त्वां विहितं मृत्युसमयमासादित: स्वयम् ।
विक्रम्यैनं मृधे हत्वा लोकानाधेहि शर्मणि ॥ २८ ॥
diṣṭyā tvāṁ vihitaṁ mṛtyum
ayam āsāditaḥ svayam
vikramyainaṁ mṛdhe hatvā
lokān ādhehi śarmaṇi
Synonyms
diṣṭyā — by fortune; tvām — to You; vihitam — ordained; mṛtyum — death; ayam — this demon; āsāditaḥ — has come; svayam — of his own accord; vikramya — exhibiting Your prowess; enam — him; mṛdhe — in the duel; hatvā — killing; lokān — the worlds; ādhehi — establish; śarmaṇi — in peace.

Translation
This demon, luckily for us, has come of his own accord to You, his death ordained by You; therefore, exhibiting Your ways, kill him in the duel and establish the worlds in peace.