Text 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
अवधार्य विरिञ्चस्य निर्व्यलीकामृतं वच: ।
प्रहस्य प्रेमगर्भेण तदपाङ्गेन सोऽग्रहीत् ॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvāca
avadhārya viriñcasya
nirvyalīkāmṛtaṁ vacaḥ
prahasya prema-garbheṇa
tad apāṅgena so ’grahīt
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; avadhārya — after hearing; viriñcasya — of Lord Brahmā; nirvyalīka — free from all sinful purposes; amṛtam — nectarean; vacaḥ — words; prahasya — heartily laughing; prema-garbheṇa — laden with love; tat — those words; apāṅgena — with a glance; saḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; agrahīt — accepted.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya said: After hearing the words of Brahmā, the creator, which were free from all sinful purposes and as sweet as nectar, the Lord heartily laughed and accepted his prayer with a glance laden with love.

Text 2
तत: सपत्नं मुखतश्चरन्तमकुतोभयम् ।
जघानोत्पत्य गदया हनावसुरमक्षज: ॥ २ ॥
tataḥ sapatnaṁ mukhataś
carantam akuto-bhayam
jaghānotpatya gadayā
hanāv asuram akṣajaḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; sapatnam — enemy; mukhataḥ — in front of Him; carantam — stalking; akutaḥ-bhayam — fearlessly; jaghāna — struck; utpatya — after springing up; gadayā — with His mace; hanau — at the chin; asuram — the demon; akṣa-jaḥ — the Lord, who was born from the nostril of Brahmā.

Translation
The Lord, who had appeared from the nostril of Brahmā, sprang and aimed His mace at the chin of His enemy, the Hiraṇyākṣa demon, who was stalking fearlessly before Him.

Text 3
सा हता तेन गदया विहता भगवत्करात् ।
विघूर्णितापतद्रेजे तदद्भुतमिवाभवत् ॥ ३ ॥
sā hatā tena gadayā
vihatā bhagavat-karāt
vighūrṇitāpatad reje
tad adbhutam ivābhavat
Synonyms
sā — that mace; hatā — struck; tena — by Hiraṇyākṣa; gadayā — with his mace; vihatā — slipped; bhagavat — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; karāt — from the hand; vighūrṇitā — whirling; apatat — fell down; reje — was shining; tat — that; adbhutam — miraculous; iva — indeed; abhavat — was.

Translation
Struck by the demon’s mace, however, the Lord’s mace slipped from His hand and looked splendid as it fell down whirling. This was miraculous, for the mace was blazing wonderfully.

Text 4
स तदा लब्धतीर्थोऽपि न बबाधे निरायुधम् ।
मानयन् स मृधे धर्मं विष्वक्सेनं प्रकोपयन् ॥ ४ ॥
sa tadā labdha-tīrtho ’pi
na babādhe nirāyudham
mānayan sa mṛdhe dharmaṁ
viṣvaksenaṁ prakopayan
Synonyms
saḥ — that Hiraṇyākṣa; tadā — then; labdha-tīrthaḥ — having gained an excellent opportunity; api — although; na — not; babādhe — attacked; nirāyudham — having no weapon; mānayan — respecting; saḥ — Hiraṇyākṣa; mṛdhe — in battle; dharmam — the code of combat; viṣvaksenam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prakopayan — making angry.

Translation
Even though the demon had an excellent opportunity to strike his unarmed foe without obstruction, he respected the law of single combat, thereby kindling the fury of the Supreme Lord.

Text 5
गदायामपविद्धायां हाहाकारे विनिर्गते ।
मानयामास तद्धर्मं सुनाभं चास्मरद्विभु: ॥ ५ ॥
gadāyām apaviddhāyāṁ
hāhā-kāre vinirgate
mānayām āsa tad-dharmaṁ
sunābhaṁ cāsmarad vibhuḥ
Synonyms
gadāyām — as His mace; apaviddhāyām — fell; hāhā-kāre — a cry of alarm; vinirgate — arose; mānayām āsa — acknowledged; tat — of Hiraṇyākṣa; dharmam — righteousness; sunābham — the Sudarśana cakra; ca — and; asmarat — remembered; vibhuḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
As the Lord’s mace fell to the ground and a cry of alarm arose from the witnessing crowd of gods and ṛṣis, the Personality of Godhead acknowledged the demon’s love of righteousness and therefore invoked His Sudarśana discus.

Text 6
तं व्यग्रचक्रं दितिपुत्राधमेन
स्वपार्षदमुख्येन विषज्जमानम् ।
चित्रा वाचोऽतद्विदां खेचराणां
तत्र स्मासन् स्वस्ति तेऽमुं जहीति ॥ ६ ॥
taṁ vyagra-cakraṁ diti-putrādhamena
sva-pārṣada-mukhyena viṣajjamānam
citrā vāco ’tad-vidāṁ khe-carāṇāṁ
tatra smāsan svasti te ’muṁ jahīti
Synonyms
tam — unto the Personality of Godhead; vyagra — revolving; cakram — whose discus; diti-putra — son of Diti; adhamena — vile; sva-pārṣada — of His associates; mukhyena — with the chief; viṣajjamānam — playing; citrāḥ — various; vācaḥ — expressions; a-tat-vidām — of those who did not know; khe-carāṇām — flying in the sky; tatra — there; sma āsan — occurred; svasti — fortune; te — unto You; amum — him; jahi — please kill; iti — thus.

Translation
As the discus began to revolve in the Lord’s hands and the Lord contended at close quarters with the chief of His Vaikuṇṭha attendants, who had been born as Hiraṇyākṣa, a vile son of Diti, there issued from every direction strange expressions uttered by those who were witnessing from airplanes. They had no knowledge of the Lord’s reality, and they cried, “May victory attend You! Pray dispatch him. Play no more with him.”

Text 7
स तं निशाम्यात्तरथाङ्गमग्रतो
व्यवस्थितं पद्मपलाशलोचनम् ।
विलोक्य चामर्षपरिप्लुतेन्द्रियो
रुषा स्वदन्तच्छदमादशच्छ्‌वसन् ॥ ७ ॥
sa taṁ niśāmyātta-rathāṅgam agrato
vyavasthitaṁ padma-palāśa-locanam
vilokya cāmarṣa-pariplutendriyo
ruṣā sva-danta-cchadam ādaśac chvasan
Synonyms
saḥ — that demon; tam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; niśāmya — after seeing; ātta-rathāṅgam — armed with the Sudarśana disc; agrataḥ — before him; vyavasthitam — standing in position; padma — lotus flower; palāśa — petals; locanam — eyes; vilokya — after seeing; ca — and; amarṣa — by indignation; paripluta — overpowered; indriyaḥ — his senses; ruṣā — with great resentment; sva-danta-chadam — his own lip; ādaśat — bit; śvasan — hissing.

Translation
When the demon saw the Personality of Godhead, who had eyes just like lotus petals, standing in position before him, armed with His Sudarśana discus, his senses were overpowered by indignation. He began to hiss like a serpent, and he bit his lip in great resentment.

Text 8
करालदंष्ट्रश्चक्षुर्भ्यां सञ्चक्षाणो दहन्निव ।
अभिप्लुत्य स्वगदया हतोऽसीत्याहनद्धरिम् ॥ ८ ॥
karāla-daṁṣṭraś cakṣurbhyāṁ
sañcakṣāṇo dahann iva
abhiplutya sva-gadayā
hato ’sīty āhanad dharim
Synonyms
karāla — fearful; daṁṣṭraḥ — having tusks; cakṣurbhyām — with both eyes; sañcakṣāṇaḥ — staring; dahan — burning; iva — as if; abhiplutya — attacking; sva-gadayā — with his own club; hataḥ — slain; asi — You are; iti — thus; āhanat — struck; harim — at Hari.

Translation
The demon, who had fearful tusks, stared at the Personality of Godhead as though to burn Him. Springing into the air, he aimed his mace at the Lord, exclaiming at the same time, “You are slain!”

Text 9
पदा सव्येन तां साधो भगवान् यज्ञसूकर: ।
लीलया मिषत: शत्रो: प्राहरद्वातरंहसम् ॥ ९ ॥
padā savyena tāṁ sādho
bhagavān yajña-sūkaraḥ
līlayā miṣataḥ śatroḥ
prāharad vāta-raṁhasam
Synonyms
padā — with His foot; savyena — left; tām — that mace; sādho — O Vidura; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yajña-sūkaraḥ — in His boar form, the enjoyer of all sacrifices; līlayā — playfully; miṣataḥ — looking on; śatroḥ — of His enemy (Hiraṇyākṣa); prāharat — knocked down; vāta-raṁhasam — having the force of a tempest.

Translation
O saintly Vidura, while His enemy looked on, the Lord in His boar form, the enjoyer of all sacrificial offerings, playfully knocked down the mace with His left foot, even as it came upon Him with the force of a tempest.

Text 10
आह चायुधमाधत्स्व घटस्व त्वं
जिगीषसि ।
इत्युक्त:स तदा भूयस्ताडयन् व्यनदद् भृशम् ॥ १० ॥
āha cāyudham ādhatsva
ghaṭasva tvaṁ jigīṣasi
ity uktaḥ sa tadā bhūyas
tāḍayan vyanadad bhṛśam
Synonyms
āha — He said; ca — and; āyudham — weapon; ādhatsva — take up; ghaṭasva — try; tvam — you; jigīṣasi — are eager to conquer; iti — thus; uktaḥ — challenged; saḥ — Hiraṇyākṣa; tadā — at that time; bhūyaḥ — again; tāḍayan — striking at; vyanadat — roared; bhṛśam — loudly.

Translation
The Lord then said: “Take up your weapon and try again, eager as you are to conquer Me.” Challenged in these words, the demon aimed his mace at the Lord and once more loudly roared.

Text 11
तां स आपततीं वीक्ष्य भगवान्
समवस्थित: ।
जग्राह लीलया प्राप्तां गरुत्मानिव पन्नगीम् ॥ ११ ॥
tāṁ sa āpatatīṁ vīkṣya
bhagavān samavasthitaḥ
jagrāha līlayā prāptāṁ
garutmān iva pannagīm
Synonyms
tām — that mace; saḥ — He; āpatatīm — flying toward; vīkṣya — after seeing; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; samavasthitaḥ — stood firmly; jagrāha — caught; līlayā — easily; prāptām — entered into His presence; garutmān — Garuḍa; iva — as; pannagīm — a serpent.

Translation
When the Lord saw the mace flying toward Him, He stood firmly where He was and caught it with the same ease as Garuḍa, the king of birds, would seize a serpent.

Text 12
स्वपौरुषे प्रतिहते हतमानो
महासुर: ।
नैच्छद्गदां दीयमानां हरिणा विगतप्रभ: ॥ १२ ॥
sva-pauruṣe pratihate
hata-māno mahāsuraḥ
naicchad gadāṁ dīyamānāṁ
hariṇā vigata-prabhaḥ
Synonyms
sva-pauruṣe — his valor; pratihate — frustrated; hata — destroyed; mānaḥ — pride; mahā-asuraḥ — the great demon; na aicchat — desired not (to take); gadām — the mace; dīyamānām — being offered; hariṇā — by Hari; vigata-prabhaḥ — reduced in splendor.

Translation
His valor thus frustrated, the great demon felt humiliated and was put out of countenance. He was reluctant to take back the mace when it was offered by the Personality of Godhead.

Text 13
जग्राह त्रिशिखं शूलं ज्वलज्ज्वलनलोलुपम् ।
यज्ञाय धृतरूपाय विप्रायाभिचरन् यथा ॥ १३ ॥
jagrāha tri-śikhaṁ śūlaṁ
jvalaj-jvalana-lolupam
yajñāya dhṛta-rūpāya
viprāyābhicaran yathā
Synonyms
jagrāha — took up; tri-śikham — three-pointed; śūlam — trident; jvalat — flaming; jvalana — fire; lolupam — rapacious; yajñāya — at the enjoyer of all sacrifices; dhṛta-rūpāya — in the form of Varāha; viprāya — unto a brāhmaṇa; abhicaran — acting malevolently; yathā — as.

Translation
He now took a trident which was as rapacious as a flaming fire and hurled it against the Lord, the enjoyer of all sacrifices, even as one would use penance for a malevolent purpose against a holy brāhmaṇa.

Text 14
तदोजसा दैत्यमहाभटार्पितं
चकासदन्त:ख उदीर्णदीधिति ।
चक्रेण चिच्छेद निशातनेमिना
हरिर्यथा तार्क्ष्यपतत्रमुज्झितम् ॥ १४ ॥
tad ojasā daitya-mahā-bhaṭārpitaṁ
cakāsad antaḥ-kha udīrṇa-dīdhiti
cakreṇa ciccheda niśāta-neminā
harir yathā tārkṣya-patatram ujjhitam
Synonyms
tat — that trident; ojasā — with all his strength; daitya — among the demons; mahā-bhaṭa — by the mighty fighter; arpitam — hurled; cakāsat — shining; antaḥ-khe — in the middle of the sky; udīrṇa — increased; dīdhiti — illumination; cakreṇa — by the Sudarśana disc; ciccheda — He cut to pieces; niśāta — sharpened; neminā — rim; hariḥ — Indra; yathā — as; tārkṣya — of Garuḍa; patatram — the wing; ujjhitam — abandoned.

Translation
Hurled by the mighty demon with all his strength, the flying trident shone brightly in the sky. The Personality of Godhead, however, tore it to pieces with His discus Sudarśana, which had a sharp-edged rim, even as Indra cut off a wing of Garuḍa.

Text 15
वृक्णे स्वशूले बहुधारिणा हरे:
प्रत्येत्य विस्तीर्णमुरो विभूतिमत् ।
प्रवृद्धरोष: स कठोरमुष्टिना
नदन् प्रहृत्यान्तरधीयतासुर: ॥ १५ ॥
vṛkṇe sva-śūle bahudhāriṇā hareḥ
pratyetya vistīrṇam uro vibhūtimat
pravṛddha-roṣaḥ sa kaṭhora-muṣṭinā
nadan prahṛtyāntaradhīyatāsuraḥ
Synonyms
vṛkṇe — when cut; sva-śūle — his trident; bahudhā — to many pieces; ariṇā — by the Sudarśana cakra; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pratyetya — after advancing toward; vistīrṇam — broad; uraḥ — chest; vibhūti-mat — the abode of the goddess of fortune; pravṛddha — having been increased; roṣaḥ — anger; saḥ — Hiraṇyākṣa; kaṭhora — hard; muṣṭinā — with his fist; nadan — roaring; prahṛtya — after striking; antaradhīyata — disappeared; asuraḥ — the demon.

Translation
The demon was enraged when his trident was cut to pieces by the discus of the Personality of Godhead. He therefore advanced toward the Lord and, roaring aloud, struck his hard fist against the Lord’s broad chest, which bore the mark of Śrīvatsa. Then he went out of sight.

Text 16
तेनेत्थमाहत: क्षत्तर्भगवानादिसूकर: ।
नाकम्पत मनाक् क्‍वापि स्रजा हत इव द्विप: ॥ १६ ॥
tenettham āhataḥ kṣattar
bhagavān ādi-sūkaraḥ
nākampata manāk kvāpi
srajā hata iva dvipaḥ
Synonyms
tena — by Hiraṇyākṣa; ittham — thus; āhataḥ — struck; kṣattaḥ — O Vidura; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ādi-sūkaraḥ — the first boar; na akampata — did not feel quaking; manāk — even slightly; kva api — anywhere; srajā — by a garland of flowers; hataḥ — struck; iva — as; dvipaḥ — an elephant.

Translation
Hit in this manner by the demon, O Vidura, the Lord, who had appeared as the first boar, did not feel the least quaking in any part of His body, any more than an elephant would when struck with a wreath of flowers.

Text 17
अथोरुधासृजन्मायां योगमायेश्वरे हरौ ।
यां विलोक्य प्रजास्त्रस्ता मेनिरेऽस्योपसंयमम् ॥ १७ ॥
athorudhāsṛjan māyāṁ
yoga-māyeśvare harau
yāṁ vilokya prajās trastā
menire ’syopasaṁyamam
Synonyms
atha — then; urudhā — in many ways; asṛjat — he cast; māyām — conjuring tricks; yoga-māyā-īśvare — the Lord of yoga-māyā; harau — at Hari; yām — which; vilokya — after seeing; prajāḥ — the people; trastāḥ — fearful; menire — thought; asya — of this universe; upasaṁyamam — the dissolution.

Translation
The demon, however, employed many conjuring tricks against the Personality of Godhead, who is the Lord of yoga-māyā. At the sight of this the people were filled with alarm and thought that the dissolution of the universe was near.

Text 18
प्रववुर्वायवश्चण्डास्तम: पांसवमैरयन् ।
दिग्भ्यो निपेतुर्ग्रावाण: क्षेपणै: प्रहिता इव ॥ १८ ॥
pravavur vāyavaś caṇḍās
tamaḥ pāṁsavam airayan
digbhyo nipetur grāvāṇaḥ
kṣepaṇaiḥ prahitā iva
Synonyms
pravavuḥ — were blowing; vāyavaḥ — winds; caṇḍāḥ — fierce; tamaḥ — darkness; pāṁsavam — caused by dust; airayan — were spreading; digbhyaḥ — from every direction; nipetuḥ — came down; grāvāṇaḥ — stones; kṣepaṇaiḥ — by machine guns; prahitāḥ — thrown; iva — as if.

Translation
Fierce winds began to blow from all directions, spreading darkness occasioned by dust and hail storms; stones came in volleys from every corner, as if thrown by machine guns.

Text 19
द्यौर्नष्टभगणाभ्रौघै: सविद्युत्स्तनयित्नुभि: ।
वर्षद्‌भि: पूयकेशासृग्विण्मूत्रास्थीनि चासकृत् ॥ १९ ॥
dyaur naṣṭa-bhagaṇābhraughaiḥ
sa-vidyut-stanayitnubhiḥ
varṣadbhiḥ pūya-keśāsṛg-
viṇ-mūtrāsthīni cāsakṛt
Synonyms
dyauḥ — the sky; naṣṭa — having disappeared; bha-gaṇa — luminaries; abhra — of clouds; oghaiḥ — by masses; sa — accompanied by; vidyut — lightning; stanayitnubhiḥ — and thunder; varṣadbhiḥ — raining; pūya — pus; keśa — hair; asṛk — blood; viṭ — stool; mūtra — urine; asthīni — bones; ca — and; asakṛt — again and again.

Translation
The luminaries in outer space disappeared due to the sky’s being overcast with masses of clouds, which were accompanied by lightning and thunder. The sky rained pus, hair, blood, stool, urine and bones.

Text 20
गिरय: प्रत्यद‍ृश्यन्त नानायुधमुचोऽनघ ।
दिग्वाससो यातुधान्य: शूलिन्यो मुक्तमूर्धजा: ॥ २० ॥
girayaḥ pratyadṛśyanta
nānāyudha-muco ’nagha
dig-vāsaso yātudhānyaḥ
śūlinyo mukta-mūrdhajāḥ
Synonyms
girayaḥ — mountains; pratyadṛśyanta — appeared; nānā — various; āyudha — weapons; mucaḥ — discharging; anagha — O sinless Vidura; dik-vāsasaḥ — naked; yātudhānyaḥ — demonesses; śūlinyaḥ — armed with tridents; mukta — hanging loose; mūrdhajāḥ — hair.

Translation
O sinless Vidura, mountains discharged weapons of various kinds, and naked demonesses armed with tridents appeared with their hair hanging loose.

Text 21
बहुभिर्यक्षरक्षोभि: पत्त्यश्वरथकुञ्जरै: ।
आततायिभिरुत्सृष्टा हिंस्रा वाचोऽतिवैशसा: ॥ २१ ॥
bahubhir yakṣa-rakṣobhiḥ
patty-aśva-ratha-kuñjaraiḥ
ātatāyibhir utsṛṣṭā
hiṁsrā vāco ’tivaiśasāḥ
Synonyms
bahubhiḥ — by many; yakṣa-rakṣobhiḥ — Yakṣas and Rākṣasas; patti — marching on foot; aśva — on horses; ratha — on chariots; kuñjaraiḥ — or on elephants; ātatāyibhiḥ — ruffians; utsṛṣṭāḥ — were uttered; hiṁsrāḥ — cruel; vācaḥ — words; ati-vaiśasāḥ — murderous.

Translation
Cruel and savage slogans were uttered by hosts of ruffian Yakṣas and Rākṣasas, who all either marched on foot or rode on horses, elephants or chariots.

Text 22
प्रादुष्कृतानां मायानामासुरीणां विनाशयत् ।
सुदर्शनास्त्रं भगवान् प्रायुङ्क्त दयितं त्रिपात् ॥ २२ ॥
prāduṣkṛtānāṁ māyānām
āsurīṇāṁ vināśayat
sudarśanāstraṁ bhagavān
prāyuṅkta dayitaṁ tri-pāt
Synonyms
prāduṣkṛtānām — displayed; māyānām — the magical forces; āsurīṇām — displayed by the demon; vināśayat — desiring to destroy; sudarśana-astram — the Sudarśana weapon; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prāyuṅkta — threw; dayitam — beloved; tri-pāt — the enjoyer of all sacrifices.

Translation
The Lord, the personal enjoyer of all sacrifices, now discharged His beloved Sudarśana, which was capable of dispersing the magical forces displayed by the demon.

Text 23
तदा दिते: समभवत्सहसा हृदि वेपथु: ।
स्मरन्त्या भर्तुरादेशं स्तनाच्चासृक् प्रसुस्रुवे ॥ २३ ॥
tadā diteḥ samabhavat
sahasā hṛdi vepathuḥ
smarantyā bhartur ādeśaṁ
stanāc cāsṛk prasusruve
Synonyms
tadā — at that moment; diteḥ — of Diti; samabhavat — occurred; sahasā — suddenly; hṛdi — in the heart; vepathuḥ — a shudder; smarantyāḥ — recalling; bhartuḥ — of her husband, Kaśyapa; ādeśam — the words; stanāt — from her breast; ca — and; asṛk — blood; prasusruve — flowed.

Translation
At that very moment, a shudder suddenly ran through the heart of Diti, the mother of Hiraṇyākṣa. She recalled the words of her husband, Kaśyapa, and blood flowed from her breasts.

Text 24
विनष्टासु स्वमायासु भूयश्चाव्रज्य केशवम् ।
रुषोपगूहमानोऽमुं दद‍ृशेऽवस्थितं बहि: ॥ २४ ॥
vinaṣṭāsu sva-māyāsu
bhūyaś cāvrajya keśavam
ruṣopagūhamāno ’muṁ
dadṛśe ’vasthitaṁ bahiḥ
Synonyms
vinaṣṭāsu — when dispelled; sva-māyāsu — his magic forces; bhūyaḥ — again; ca — and; āvrajya — after coming into the presence; keśavam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ruṣā — full of rage; upagūhamānaḥ — embracing; amum — the Lord; dadṛśe — saw; avasthitam — standing; bahiḥ — outside.

Translation
When the demon saw his magic forces dispelled, he once again came into the presence of the Personality of Godhead, Keśava, and, full of rage, tried to embrace Him within his arms to crush Him. But to his great amazement he found the Lord standing outside the circle of his arms.

Text 25
तं मुष्टिभिर्विनिघ्नन्तं वज्रसारैरधोक्षज: ।
करेण कर्णमूलेऽहन् यथा त्वाष्ट्रं मरुत्पति: ॥ २५ ॥
taṁ muṣṭibhir vinighnantaṁ
vajra-sārair adhokṣajaḥ
kareṇa karṇa-mūle ’han
yathā tvāṣṭraṁ marut-patiḥ
Synonyms
tam — Hiraṇyākṣa; muṣṭibhiḥ — with his fists; vinighnantam — striking; vajra-sāraiḥ — as hard as a thunderbolt; adhokṣajaḥ — Lord Adhokṣaja; kareṇa — with the hand; karṇa-mūle — at the root of the ear; ahan — struck; yathā — as; tvāṣṭram — the demon Vṛtra (son of Tvaṣṭā); marut-patiḥ — Indra (lord of the Maruts).

Translation
The demon now began to strike the Lord with his hard fists, but Lord Adhokṣaja slapped him in the root of the ear, even as Indra, the lord of the Maruts, hit the demon Vṛtra.

Text 26
स आहतो विश्वजिता ह्यवज्ञया
परिभ्रमद्गात्र उदस्तलोचन: ।
विशीर्णबाह्वङ्‌घ्रिशिरोरुहोऽपतद्
यथा नगेन्द्रो लुलितो नभस्वता ॥ २६ ॥
sa āhato viśva-jitā hy avajñayā
paribhramad-gātra udasta-locanaḥ
viśīrṇa-bāhv-aṅghri-śiroruho ’patad
yathā nagendro lulito nabhasvatā
Synonyms
saḥ — he; āhataḥ — having been struck; viśva-jitā — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hi — though; avajñayā — indifferently; paribhramat — wheeling; gātraḥ — body; udasta — bulged out; locanaḥ — eyes; viśīrṇa — broken; bāhu — arms; aṅghri — legs; śiraḥ-ruhaḥ — hair; apatat — fell down; yathā — like; naga-indraḥ — a gigantic tree; lulitaḥ — uprooted; nabhasvatā — by the wind.

Translation
Though struck indifferently by the Lord, the conqueror of all, the demon’s body began to wheel. His eyeballs bulged out of their sockets. His arms and legs broken and the hair on his head scattered, he fell down dead, like a gigantic tree uprooted by the wind.

Text 27
क्षितौ शयानं तमकुण्ठवर्चसं
करालदंष्ट्रं परिदष्टदच्छदम् ।
अजादयो वीक्ष्य शशंसुरागता
अहो इमां को नु लभेत संस्थितिम् ॥ २७ ॥
kṣitau śayānaṁ tam akuṇṭha-varcasaṁ
karāla-daṁṣṭraṁ paridaṣṭa-dacchadam
ajādayo vīkṣya śaśaṁsur āgatā
aho imaṁ ko nu labheta saṁsthitim
Synonyms
kṣitau — on the ground; śayānam — lying; tam — Hiraṇyākṣa; akuṇṭha — unfaded; varcasam — glow; karāla — fearful; daṁṣṭram — teeth; paridaṣṭa — bitten; dat-chadam — lip; aja-ādayaḥ — Brahmā and others; vīkṣya — having seen; śaśaṁsuḥ — admiringly said; āgatāḥ — arrived; aho — oh; imam — this; kaḥ — who; nu — indeed; labheta — could meet; saṁsthitim — death.

Translation
Aja [Brahmā] and others arrived on the spot to see the fearfully tusked demon lying on the ground, biting his lip. The glow of his face was yet unfaded, and Brahmā admiringly said: Oh, who could meet such blessed death?

Text 28
यं योगिनो योगसमाधिना रहो
ध्यायन्ति लिङ्गादसतो मुमुक्षया ।
तस्यैष दैत्यऋषभ: पदाहतो
मुखं प्रपश्यंस्तनुमुत्ससर्ज ह ॥ २८ ॥
yaṁ yogino yoga-samādhinā raho
dhyāyanti liṅgād asato mumukṣayā
tasyaiṣa daitya-ṛṣabhaḥ padāhato
mukhaṁ prapaśyaṁs tanum utsasarja ha
Synonyms
yam — whom; yoginaḥ — the yogīs; yoga-samādhinā — in mystic trance; rahaḥ — in seclusion; dhyāyanti — meditate upon; liṅgāt — from the body; asataḥ — unreal; mumukṣayā — seeking freedom; tasya — of Him; eṣaḥ — this; daitya — son of Diti; ṛṣabhaḥ — the crest jewel; padā — by a foot; āhataḥ — struck; mukham — countenance; prapaśyan — while gazing on; tanum — the body; utsasarja — he cast off; ha — indeed.

Translation
Brahmā continued: He was struck by a forefoot of the Lord, whom yogīs, seeking freedom from their unreal material bodies, meditate upon in seclusion in mystic trance. While gazing on His countenance, this crest jewel of Diti’s sons has cast off his mortal coil.

Text 29
एतौ तौ पार्षदावस्य शापाद्यातावसद्गतिम् ।
पुन: कतिपयै: स्थानं प्रपत्स्येते ह जन्मभि: ॥ २९ ॥
etau tau pārṣadāv asya
śāpād yātāv asad-gatim
punaḥ katipayaiḥ sthānaṁ
prapatsyete ha janmabhiḥ
Synonyms
etau — these two; tau — both; pārṣadau — personal assistants; asya — of the Personality of Godhead; śāpāt — because of being cursed; yātau — have gone; asat-gatim — to take birth in a demoniac family; punaḥ — again; katipayaiḥ — a few; sthānam — own place; prapatsyete — will get back; ha — indeed; janmabhiḥ — after births.

Translation
These two personal assistants of the Supreme Lord, having been cursed, have been destined to take birth in demoniac families. After a few such births, they will return to their own positions.

Text 30
देवा ऊचु:
नमो नमस्तेऽखिलयज्ञतन्तवे
स्थितौ गृहीतामलसत्त्वमूर्तये ।
दिष्टय‍ा हतोऽयं जगतामरुन्तुद-
स्त्वत्पादभक्त्या वयमीश निर्वृता: ॥ ३० ॥
devā ūcuḥ
namo namas te ’khila-yajña-tantave
sthitau gṛhītāmala-sattva-mūrtaye
diṣṭyā hato ’yaṁ jagatām aruntudas
tvat-pāda-bhaktyā vayam īśa nirvṛtāḥ
Synonyms
devāḥ — the demigods; ūcuḥ — said; namaḥ — obeisances; namaḥ — obeisances; te — unto You; akhila-yajña-tantave — the enjoyer of all sacrifices; sthitau — for the purpose of maintaining; gṛhīta — assumed; amala — pure; sattva — goodness; mūrtaye — form; diṣṭyā — fortunately; hataḥ — slain; ayam — this; jagatām — to the worlds; aruntudaḥ — causing torment; tvat-pāda — to Your feet; bhaktyā — with devotion; vayam — we; īśa — O Lord; nirvṛtāḥ — have attained happiness.

Translation
The demigods addressed the Lord: All obeisances unto You! You are the enjoyer of all sacrifices, and You have assumed the form of a boar, in pure goodness, for the purpose of maintaining the world. Fortunately for us, this demon, who was a torment to the worlds, has been slain by You, and we too, O Lord, are now at ease, in devotion to Your lotus feet.

Text 31
मैत्रेय उवाच
एवं हिरण्याक्षमसह्यविक्रमं
स सादयित्वा हरिरादिसूकर: ।
जगाम लोकं स्वमखण्डितोत्सवं
समीडित: पुष्करविष्टरादिभि: ॥ ३१ ॥
maitreya uvāca
evaṁ hiraṇyākṣam asahya-vikramaṁ
sa sādayitvā harir ādi-sūkaraḥ
jagāma lokaṁ svam akhaṇḍitotsavaṁ
samīḍitaḥ puṣkara-viṣṭarādibhiḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Śrī Maitreya said; evam — thus; hiraṇyākṣam — Hiraṇyākṣa; asahya-vikramam — very powerful; saḥ — the Lord; sādayitvā — after killing; hariḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ādi-sūkaraḥ — the origin of the boar species; jagāma — returned; lokam — to His abode; svam — own; akhaṇḍita — uninterrupted; utsavam — festival; samīḍitaḥ — being praised; puṣkara-viṣṭara — lotus seat (by Lord Brahmā, whose seat is a lotus); ādibhiḥ — and the others.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya continued: After thus killing the most formidable demon Hiraṇyākṣa, the Supreme Lord Hari, the origin of the boar species, returned to His own abode, where there is always an uninterrupted festival. The Lord was praised by all the demigods, headed by Brahmā.

Text 32
मया यथानूक्तमवादि ते हरे:
कृतावतारस्य सुमित्र चेष्टितम् ।
यथा हिरण्याक्ष उदारविक्रमो
महामृधे क्रीडनवन्निराकृत: ॥ ३२ ॥
mayā yathānūktam avādi te hareḥ
kṛtāvatārasya sumitra ceṣṭitam
yathā hiraṇyākṣa udāra-vikramo
mahā-mṛdhe krīḍanavan nirākṛtaḥ
Synonyms
mayā — by me; yathā — as; anūktam — told; avādi — was explained; te — to you; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kṛta-avatārasya — who assumed the incarnation; sumitra — O dear Vidura; ceṣṭitam — the activities; yathā — as; hiraṇyākṣaḥ — Hiraṇyākṣa; udāra — very extensive; vikramaḥ — prowess; mahā-mṛdhe — in a great fight; krīḍana-vat — like a plaything; nirākṛtaḥ — was killed.

Translation
Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, I have explained to you the Personality of Godhead’s coming down as the first boar incarnation and killing in a great fight a demon of unprecedented prowess as if he were just a plaything. This has been narrated by me as I heard it from my predecessor spiritual master.

Text 33
सूत उवाच
इति कौषारवाख्यातामाश्रुत्य भगवत्कथाम् ।
क्षत्तानन्दं परं लेभे महाभागवतो द्विज ॥ ३३ ॥
sūta uvāca
iti kauṣāravākhyātām
āśrutya bhagavat-kathām
kṣattānandaṁ paraṁ lebhe
mahā-bhāgavato dvija
Synonyms
sūtaḥ — Sūta Gosvāmī; uvāca — said; iti — thus; kauṣārava — from Maitreya (son of Kuṣāru); ākhyātām — told; āśrutya — having heard; bhagavat-kathām — the narration about the Lord; kṣattā — Vidura; ānandam — bliss; param — transcendental; lebhe — achieved; mahā-bhāgavataḥ — the great devotee; dvija — O brāhmaṇa (Śaunaka).

Translation
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī continued: My dear brāhmaṇa, Kṣattā [Vidura] the great devotee of the Lord achieved transcendental bliss by hearing the narration of the pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead from the authoritative source of the sage Kauṣārava [Maitreya], and he was very pleased.

Text 34
अन्येषां पुण्यश्लोकानामुद्दामयशसां
सताम् ।
उपश्रुत्य भवेन्मोद: श्रीवत्साङ्कस्य किं पुन: ॥ ३४ ॥
anyeṣāṁ puṇya-ślokānām
uddāma-yaśasāṁ satām
upaśrutya bhaven modaḥ
śrīvatsāṅkasya kiṁ punaḥ
Synonyms
anyeṣām — of others; puṇya-ślokānām — of pious reputation; uddāma-yaśasām — whose fame is spread everywhere; satām — of the devotees; upaśrutya — by hearing; bhavet — may arise; modaḥ — pleasure; śrīvatsa-aṅkasya — of the Lord, who bears the mark Śrīvatsa; kim punaḥ — what to speak of.

Translation
What to speak of hearing the pastimes of the Lord, whose chest is marked with Śrīvatsa, people may take transcendental pleasure even in hearing of the works and deeds of the devotees, whose fame is immortal.

Text 35
यो गजेन्द्र झषग्रस्तं ध्यायन्तं
चरणाम्बुजम् । क्रोशन्तीनां करेणूनां कृच्छ्रतोऽमोचयद् द्रुतम् ॥ ३५ ॥
yo gajendraṁ jhaṣa-grastaṁ
dhyāyantaṁ caraṇāmbujam
krośantīnāṁ kareṇūnāṁ
kṛcchrato ’mocayad drutam
Synonyms
yaḥ — He who; gaja-indram — the king of elephants; jhaṣa — an alligator; grastam — attacked by; dhyāyantam — meditating upon; caraṇa — feet; ambujam — lotus; krośantīnām — while crying; kareṇūnām — the female elephants; kṛcchrataḥ — from danger; amocayat — delivered; drutam — quickly.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead delivered the king of the elephants, who was attacked by an alligator and who meditated upon the lotus feet of the Lord. At that time the female elephants who accompanied him were crying, and the Lord saved them from the impending danger.

Text 36
तं
सुखाराध्यमृजुभिरनन्यशरणैर्नृभि: ।
कृतज्ञ: को न सेवेत
दुराराध्यमसाधुभि: ॥ ३६ ॥
taṁ sukhārādhyam ṛjubhir
ananya-śaraṇair nṛbhiḥ
kṛtajñaḥ ko na seveta
durārādhyam asādhubhiḥ
Synonyms
tam — unto Him; sukha — easily; ārādhyam — worshiped; ṛjubhiḥ — by the unpretentious; ananya — no other; śaraṇaiḥ — who take shelter; nṛbhiḥ — by men; kṛta-jñaḥ — grateful soul; kaḥ — what; na — not; seveta — would render service; durārādhyam — impossible to be worshiped; asādhubhiḥ — by the nondevotees.

Translation
What grateful soul is there who would not render his loving service to such a great master as the Personality of Godhead? The Lord can be easily pleased by spotless devotees who resort exclusively to Him for protection, though the unrighteous man finds it difficult to propitiate Him.

Text 37
यो वै हिरण्याक्षवधं
महाद्भुतं
विक्रीडितं कारणसूकरात्मन: ।
श‍ृणोति
गायत्यनुमोदतेऽञ्जसा
विमुच्यते ब्रह्मवधादपि द्विजा: ॥ ३७ ॥
yo vai hiraṇyākṣa-vadhaṁ mahādbhutaṁ
vikrīḍitaṁ kāraṇa-sūkarātmanaḥ
śṛṇoti gāyaty anumodate ’ñjasā
vimucyate brahma-vadhād api dvijāḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — he who; vai — indeed; hiraṇyākṣa-vadham — of the killing of Hiraṇyākṣa; mahā-adbhutam — most wonderful; vikrīḍitam — pastime; kāraṇa — for reasons like raising the earth from the ocean; sūkara — appearing in the form of a boar; ātmanaḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śṛṇoti — hears; gāyati — chants; anumodate — takes pleasure; añjasā — at once; vimucyate — becomes freed; brahma-vadhāt — from the sin of killing a brāhmaṇa; api — even; dvijāḥ — O brāhmaṇas.

Translation
O brāhmaṇas, anyone who hears, chants, or takes pleasure in the wonderful narration of the killing of the Hiraṇyākṣa demon by the Lord, who appeared as the first boar in order to deliver the world, is at once relieved of the results of sinful activities, even the killing of a brāhmaṇa.

Text 38
एतन्महापुण्यमलं पवित्रं
धन्यं यशस्यं पदमायुराशिषाम् ।
प्राणेन्द्रियाणां युधि शौर्यवर्धनं
नारायणोऽन्ते गतिरङ्ग श‍ृण्वताम् ॥ ३८ ॥
etan mahā-puṇyam alaṁ pavitraṁ
dhanyaṁ yaśasyaṁ padam āyur-āśiṣām
prāṇendriyāṇāṁ yudhi śaurya-vardhanaṁ
nārāyaṇo ’nte gatir aṅga śṛṇvatām
Synonyms
etat — this narrative; mahā-puṇyam — conferring great merit; alam — very; pavitram — sacred; dhanyam — conferring wealth; yaśasyam — bearing fame; padam — the receptacle; āyuḥ — of longevity; āśiṣām — of the objects of one’s desire; prāṇa — of the vital organs; indriyāṇām — of the organs of action; yudhi — on the field of battle; śaurya — the strength; vardhanam — increasing; nārāyaṇaḥ — Lord Nārāyaṇa; ante — at the end of life; gatiḥ — shelter; aṅga — O dear Śaunaka; śṛṇvatām — of those who listen.

Translation
This most sacred narrative confers extraordinary merit, wealth, fame, longevity and all the objects of one’s desire. On the field of battle it promotes the strength of one’s vital organs and organs of action. One who listens to it at the last moment of his life is transferred to the supreme abode of the Lord, O dear Śaunaka.