Text 1
श्री शुक उवाच
इति भागवत: पृष्ट: क्षत्‍त्रा वार्तां प्रियाश्रयाम् ।
प्रतिवक्तुं न चोत्सेह औत्कण्ठ्यात्स्मारितेश्वर: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
iti bhāgavataḥ pṛṣṭaḥ
kṣattrā vārtāṁ priyāśrayām
prativaktuṁ na cotseha
autkaṇṭhyāt smāriteśvaraḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva said; iti — thus; bhāgavataḥ — the great devotee; pṛṣṭaḥ — being asked; kṣattrā — by Vidura; vārtām — message; priya-āśrayām — regarding the dearest; prativaktum — to reply; na — not; ca — also; utsehe — became eager; autkaṇṭhyāt — by excessive anxiety; smārita — remembrance; īśvaraḥ — the Lord.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When the great devotee Uddhava was asked by Vidura to speak on the messages of the dearest [Lord Kṛṣṇa], Uddhava was unable to answer immediately due to excessive anxiety at the remembrance of the Lord.

Text 2
य: पञ्चहायनो मात्रा प्रातराशाय याचित: ।
तन्नैच्छद्रचयन् यस्य सपर्यां बाललीलया ॥ २ ॥
yaḥ pañca-hāyano mātrā
prātar-āśāya yācitaḥ
tan naicchad racayan yasya
saparyāṁ bāla-līlayā
Synonyms
yaḥ — one who; pañca — five; hāyanaḥ — years old; mātrā — by his mother; prātaḥ-āśāya — for breakfast; yācitaḥ — called for; tat — that; na — not; aicchat — liked; racayan — playing; yasya — whose; saparyām — service; bāla-līlayā — childhood.

Translation
He was one who even in his childhood, at the age of five years, was so absorbed in the service of Lord Kṛṣṇa that when he was called by his mother for morning breakfast, he did not wish to have it.

Text 3
स कथं सेवया तस्य कालेन जरसं गत: ।
पृष्टो वार्तां प्रतिब्रूयाद्भर्तु: पादावनुस्मरन् ॥ ३ ॥
sa kathaṁ sevayā tasya
kālena jarasaṁ gataḥ
pṛṣṭo vārtāṁ pratibrūyād
bhartuḥ pādāv anusmaran
Synonyms
saḥ — Uddhava; katham — how; sevayā — by such service; tasya — his; kālena — in course of time; jarasam — invalidity; gataḥ — undergone; pṛṣṭaḥ — asked for; vārtām — message; pratibrūyāt — just to reply; bhartuḥ — of the Lord; pādau — His lotus feet; anusmaran — remembering.

Translation
Uddhava thus served the Lord continually from childhood, and in his old age that attitude of service never slackened. As soon as he was asked about the message of the Lord, he at once remembered all about Him.

Text 4
स मुहूर्तमभूत्तूष्णीं कृष्णाङ्‌घ्रि सुधया भृशम् ।
तीव्रेण भक्तियोगेन निमग्न: साधु निर्वृत: ॥ ४ ॥
sa muhūrtam abhūt tūṣṇīṁ
kṛṣṇāṅghri-sudhayā bhṛśam
tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena
nimagnaḥ sādhu nirvṛtaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — Uddhava; muhūrtam — for a moment; abhūt — became; tūṣṇīm — dead silent; kṛṣṇa-aṅghri — the lotus feet of the Lord; sudhayā — by the nectar; bhṛśam — well matured; tīvreṇa — by very strong; bhakti-yogena — devotional service; nimagnaḥ — absorbed in; sādhu — good; nirvṛtaḥ — fully in love.

Translation
For a moment he remained dead silent, and his body did not move. He became absorbed in the nectar of remembering the Lord’s lotus feet in devotional ecstasy, and he appeared to be going increasingly deeper into that ecstasy.

Text 5
पुलकोद्‍‌भिन्नसर्वाङ्गो मुञ्चन्मीलद्‍दृशा शुच: ।
पूर्णार्थो लक्षितस्तेन स्‍नेहप्रसरसंप्लुत: ॥ ५ ॥
pulakodbhinna-sarvāṅgo
muñcan mīlad-dṛśā śucaḥ
pūrṇārtho lakṣitas tena
sneha-prasara-samplutaḥ
Synonyms
pulaka-udbhinna — bodily changes of transcendental ecstasy; sarva-aṅgaḥ — every part of the body; muñcan — smearing; mīlat — opening; dṛśā — by the eyes; śucaḥ — tears of grief; pūrṇa-arthaḥ — complete achievement; lakṣitaḥ — thus observed; tena — by Vidura; sneha-prasara — extensive love; samplutaḥ — thoroughly assimilated.

Translation
It was so observed by Vidura that Uddhava had all the transcendental bodily changes due to total ecstasy, and he was trying to wipe away tears of separation from his eyes. Thus Vidura could understand that Uddhava had completely assimilated extensive love for the Lord.

Text 6
शनकैर्भगवल्लोकान्नृलोकं पुनरागत: ।
विमृज्य नेत्रे विदुरं प्रीत्याहोद्धव उत्स्मयन् ॥ ६ ॥
śanakair bhagaval-lokān
nṛlokaṁ punar āgataḥ
vimṛjya netre viduraṁ
prītyāhoddhava utsmayan
Synonyms
śanakaiḥ — gradually; bhagavat — the Lord; lokāt — from the abode; nṛlokam — the planet of the human beings; punaḥ āgataḥ — coming again; vimṛjya — wiping; netre — eyes; viduram — unto Vidura; prītyā — in affection; āha — said; uddhavaḥ — Uddhava; utsmayan — by all those remembrances.

Translation
The great devotee Uddhava soon came back from the abode of the Lord to the human plane, and wiping his eyes, he awakened his reminiscence of the past and spoke to Vidura in a pleasing mood.

Text 7
उद्धव उवाच
कृष्णद्युमणिनिम्‍लोचे गीर्णेष्वजगरेण ह ।
किं
नु न: कुशलं ब्रूयां गतश्रीषु गृहेष्वहम् ॥ ७ ॥
uddhava uvāca
kṛṣṇa-dyumaṇi nimloce
gīrṇeṣv ajagareṇa ha
kiṁ nu naḥ kuśalaṁ brūyāṁ
gata-śrīṣu gṛheṣv aham
Synonyms
uddhavaḥ uvāca — Śrī Uddhava said; kṛṣṇa-dyumaṇi — the Kṛṣṇa sun; nimloce — having set; gīrṇeṣu — being swallowed; ajagareṇa — by the great snake; ha — in the past; kim — what; nu — else; naḥ — our; kuśalam — welfare; brūyām — may I say; gata-śrīṣu — with good fortune gone away; gṛheṣu — in the house; aham — I.

Translation
Śrī Uddhava said: My dear Vidura, the sun of the world, Lord Kṛṣṇa, has set, and our house has now been swallowed by the great snake of time. What can I say to you about our welfare?

Text 8
दुर्भगो बत लोकोऽयं यदवो नितरामपि ।
ये संवसन्तो न विदुर्हरिं मीना इवोडुपम् ॥ ८ ॥
durbhago bata loko ’yaṁ
yadavo nitarām api
ye saṁvasanto na vidur
hariṁ mīnā ivoḍupam
Synonyms
durbhagaḥ — unfortunate; bata — certainly; lokaḥ — universe; ayam — this; yadavaḥ — the Yadu dynasty; nitarām — more specifically; api — also; ye — those; saṁvasantaḥ — living together; na — did not; viduḥ — understand; harim — the Personality of Godhead; mīnāḥ — the fishes; iva uḍupam — like the moon.

Translation
This universe with all its planets is most unfortunate. And even more unfortunate are the members of the Yadu dynasty because they could not identify Lord Hari as the Personality of Godhead, any more than the fish could identify the moon.

Text 9
इङ्गितज्ञा: पुरुप्रौढा एकारामाश्च सात्वता: ।
सात्वतामृषभं सर्वे भूतावासममंसत ॥ ९ ॥
iṅgita-jñāḥ puru-prauḍhā
ekārāmāś ca sātvatāḥ
sātvatām ṛṣabhaṁ sarve
bhūtāvāsam amaṁsata
Synonyms
iṅgita-jñāḥ — expert in psychic study; puru-prauḍhāḥ — highly experienced; eka — one; ārāmāḥ — relaxation; ca — also; sātvatāḥ — devotees, or own men; sātvatām ṛṣabham — head of the family; sarve — all; bhūta-āvāsam — all-pervading; amaṁsata — could think.

Translation
The Yadus were all experienced devotees, learned and expert in psychic study. Over and above this, they were always with the Lord in all kinds of relaxations, and still they were only able to know Him as the one Supreme who dwells everywhere.

Text 10
देवस्य मायया स्पृष्टा ये चान्यदसदाश्रिता: ।
भ्राम्यते धीर्न तद्वाक्यैरात्मन्युप्तात्मनो हरौ ॥ १० ॥
devasya māyayā spṛṣṭā
ye cānyad asad-āśritāḥ
bhrāmyate dhīr na tad-vākyair
ātmany uptātmano harau
Synonyms
devasya — of the Personality of Godhead; māyayā — by the influence of external energy; spṛṣṭāḥ — infected; ye — all those; ca — and; anyat — others; asat — illusory; āśritāḥ — being taken to; bhrāmyate — bewilder; dhīḥ — intelligence; na — not; tat — of them; vākyaiḥ — by those words; ātmani — in the Supreme Self; upta-ātmanaḥ — surrendered souls; harau — unto the Lord.

Translation
Under no circumstances can the words of persons bewildered by the illusory energy of the Lord deviate the intelligence of those who are completely surrendered souls.

Text 11
प्रदर्श्यातप्ततपसामवितृप्तद‍ृशां नृणाम् ।
आदायान्तरधाद्यस्तु स्वबिम्बं लोकलोचनम् ॥ ११ ॥
pradarśyātapta-tapasām
avitṛpta-dṛśāṁ nṛṇām
ādāyāntar adhād yas tu
sva-bimbaṁ loka-locanam
Synonyms
pradarśya — by exhibiting; atapta — without undergoing; tapasām — penances; avitṛpta-dṛśām — without fulfillment of vision; nṛṇām — of persons; ādāya — taking; antaḥ — disappearance; adhāt — performed; yaḥ — He who; tu — but; sva-bimbam — His own form; loka-locanam — public vision.

Translation
Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who manifested His eternal form before the vision of all on the earth, performed His disappearance by removing His form from the sight of those who were unable to see Him [as He is] due to not executing required penance.

Text 12
यन्मर्त्यलीलौपयिकं स्वयोग-
मायाबलं दर्शयता गृहीतम् ।
विस्मापनं स्वस्य च सौभगर्द्धे:
परं पदं भूषणभूषणाङ्गम् ॥ १२ ॥
yan martya-līlaupayikaṁ sva-yoga-
māyā-balaṁ darśayatā gṛhītam
vismāpanaṁ svasya ca saubhagarddheḥ
paraṁ padaṁ bhūṣaṇa-bhūṣaṇāṅgam
Synonyms
yat — His eternal form which; martya — mortal world; līlā-upayikam — just suitable for the pastimes; sva-yoga-māyā-balam — potency of the internal energy; darśayatā — for manifestation; gṛhītam — discovered; vismāpanam — wonderful; svasya — of His own; ca — and; saubhaga-ṛddheḥ — of the opulent; param — supreme; padam — ultimate stand; bhūṣaṇa — ornament; bhūṣaṇa-aṅgam — of the ornaments.

Translation
The Lord appeared in the mortal world by His internal potency, yoga-māyā. He came in His eternal form, which is just suitable for His pastimes. These pastimes were wonderful for everyone, even for those proud of their own opulence, including the Lord Himself in His form as the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha. Thus His [Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s] transcendental body is the ornament of all ornaments.

Text 13
यद्धर्मसूनोर्बत राजसूये
निरीक्ष्य द‍ृक्स्वस्त्ययनं त्रिलोक: ।
कार्त्स्‍न्येन चाद्येह गतं विधातु-
रर्वाक्सृतौ कौशलमित्यमन्यत ॥ १३ ॥
yad dharma-sūnor bata rājasūye
nirīkṣya dṛk-svastyayanaṁ tri-lokaḥ
kārtsnyena cādyeha gataṁ vidhātur
arvāk-sṛtau kauśalam ity amanyata
Synonyms
yat — the form which; dharma-sūnoḥ — of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira; bata — certainly; rājasūye — in the arena of the rājasūya sacrifice; nirīkṣya — by observing; dṛk — sight; svastyayanam — pleasing; tri-lokaḥ — the three worlds; kārtsnyena — in sum total; ca — thus; adya — today; iha — within the universe; gatam — surpassed; vidhātuḥ — of the creator (Brahmā); arvāk — recent mankind; sṛtau — in the material world; kauśalam — dexterity; iti — thus; amanyata — contemplated.

Translation
All the demigods from the upper, lower and middle universal planetary systems assembled at the altar of the rājasūya sacrifice performed by Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira. After seeing the beautiful bodily features of Lord Kṛṣṇa, they all contemplated that He was the ultimate dexterous creation of Brahmā, the creator of human beings.

Text 14
यस्यानुरागप्लुतहासरास-
लीलावलोकप्रतिलब्धमाना: ।
व्रजस्त्रियो द‍ृग्भिरनुप्रवृत्त-
धियोऽवतस्थु: किल कृत्यशेषा: ॥ १४ ॥
yasyānurāga-pluta-hāsa-rāsa-
līlāvaloka-pratilabdha-mānāḥ
vraja-striyo dṛgbhir anupravṛtta-
dhiyo ’vatasthuḥ kila kṛtya-śeṣāḥ
Synonyms
yasya — whose; anurāga — attachment; pluta — enhanced by; hāsa — laughter; rāsa — humors; līlā — pastimes; avaloka — glancing; pratilabdha — obtained thereof; mānāḥ — anguished; vraja-striyaḥ — damsels of Vraja; dṛgbhiḥ — with the eyes; anupravṛtta — following; dhiyaḥ — by intelligence; avatasthuḥ — sat silently; kila — indeed; kṛtya-śeṣāḥ — without finishing household duties.

Translation
The damsels of Vraja, after pastimes of laughter, humor and exchanges of glances, were anguished when Kṛṣṇa left them. They used to follow Him with their eyes, and thus they sat down with stunned intelligence and could not finish their household duties.

Text 15
स्वशान्तरूपेष्वितरै: स्वरूपै-
रभ्यर्द्यमानेष्वनुकम्पितात्मा ।
परावरेशो महदंशयुक्तो
ह्यजोऽपि जातो भगवान् यथाग्नि: ॥ १५ ॥
sva-śānta-rūpeṣv itaraiḥ sva-rūpair
abhyardyamāneṣv anukampitātmā
parāvareśo mahad-aṁśa-yukto
hy ajo ’pi jāto bhagavān yathāgniḥ
Synonyms
sva-śānta-rūpeṣu — unto the peaceful devotees of the Lord; itaraiḥ — others, nondevotees; sva-rūpaiḥ — according to their own modes of nature; abhyardyamāneṣu — being harassed by; anukampita-ātmā — the all-compassionate Lord; para-avara — spiritual and material; īśaḥ — controller; mahat-aṁśa-yuktaḥ — accompanied by the plenary portion of mahat-tattva; hi — certainly; ajaḥ — the unborn; api — although; jātaḥ — is born; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; yathā — as if; agniḥ — the fire.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead, the all-compassionate controller of both the spiritual and material creations, is unborn, but when there is friction between His peaceful devotees and persons who are in the material modes of nature, He takes birth just like fire, accompanied by the mahat-tattva.

Text 16
मां खेदयत्येतदजस्य जन्म-
विडम्बनं यद्वसुदेवगेहे ।
व्रजे च वासोऽरिभयादिव स्वयं
पुराद् व्यवात्सीद्यदनन्तवीर्य: ॥ १६ ॥
māṁ khedayaty etad ajasya janma-
viḍambanaṁ yad vasudeva-gehe
vraje ca vāso ’ri-bhayād iva svayaṁ
purād vyavātsīd yad-ananta-vīryaḥ
Synonyms
mām — to me; khedayati — gives me distress; etat — this; ajasya — of the unborn; janma — birth; viḍambanam — bewildering; yat — that; vasudeva-gehe — in the home of Vasudeva; vraje — in Vṛndāvana; ca — also; vāsaḥ — inhabitation; ari — enemy; bhayāt — because of fear; iva — as if; svayam — Himself; purāt — from Mathurā Purī; vyavātsīt — fled; yat — one who is; ananta-vīryaḥ — unlimitedly powerful.

Translation
When I think of Lord Kṛṣṇa — how He was born in the prison house of Vasudeva although He is unborn, how He went away from His father’s protection to Vraja and lived there incognito out of fear of the enemy, and how, although unlimitedly powerful, He fled from Mathurā in fear — all these bewildering incidents give me distress.

Text 17
दुनोति चेत: स्मरतो ममैतद्
यदाह पादावभिवन्द्य पित्रो: ।
ताताम्ब कंसादुरुशङ्कितानां
प्रसीदतं नोऽकृतनिष्कृतीनाम् ॥ १७ ॥
dunoti cetaḥ smarato mamaitad
yad āha pādāv abhivandya pitroḥ
tātāmba kaṁsād uru-śaṅkitānāṁ
prasīdataṁ no ’kṛta-niṣkṛtīnām
Synonyms
dunoti — it gives me pain; cetaḥ — heart; smarataḥ — while thinking of; mama — my; etat — this; yat — as much as; āha — said; pādau — feet; abhivandya — worshiping; pitroḥ — of the parents; tāta — My dear father; amba — My dear mother; kaṁsāt — out of Kaṁsa’s; uru — great; śaṅkitānām — of those who are afraid; prasīdatam — be pleased with; naḥ — Our; akṛta — not executed; niṣkṛtīnām — duties to serve you.

Translation
Lord Kṛṣṇa begged pardon from His parents for Their [Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma’s] inability to serve their feet, due to being away from home because of great fear of Kaṁsa. He said, “O mother, O father, please excuse Us for this inability.” All this behavior of the Lord gives me pain at heart.

Text 18
को वा अमुष्याङ्‌घ्रि सरोजरेणुं
विस्मर्तुमीशीत पुमान् विजिघ्रन् ।
यो विस्फुरद्भ्रूविटपेन भूमे-
र्भारं कृतान्तेन तिरश्चकार ॥ १८ ॥
ko vā amuṣyāṅghri-saroja-reṇuṁ
vismartum īśīta pumān vijighran
yo visphurad-bhrū-viṭapena bhūmer
bhāraṁ kṛtāntena tiraścakāra
Synonyms
kaḥ — who else; vā — either; amuṣya — the Lord’s; aṅghri — feet; saroja-reṇum — dust of the lotus; vismartum — to forget; īśīta — may be able; pumān — person; vijighran — smelling; yaḥ — one who; visphurat — expanding; bhrū-viṭapena — by the leaves of the eyebrows; bhūmeḥ — of the earth; bhāram — burden; kṛta-antena — by deathblows; tiraścakāra — executed.

Translation
Who, after smelling the dust of His lotus feet even once, could ever forget it? Simply by expanding the leaves of His eyebrows, Kṛṣṇa has given the deathblow to those who were burdening the earth.

Text 19
द‍ृष्टा भवद्‍‌भिर्ननु राजसूये
चैद्यस्य कृष्णं द्विषतोऽपि सिद्धि: ।
यां योगिन: संस्पृहयन्ति सम्यग्
योगेन कस्तद्विरहं सहेत ॥ १९ ॥
dṛṣṭā bhavadbhir nanu rājasūye
caidyasya kṛṣṇaṁ dviṣato ’pi siddhiḥ
yāṁ yoginaḥ saṁspṛhayanti samyag
yogena kas tad-virahaṁ saheta
Synonyms
dṛṣṭā — it has been seen; bhavadbhiḥ — by your good self; nanu — of course; rājasūye — in the assembly of the rājasūya sacrifice performed by Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira; caidyasya — of the King of Cedi (Śiśupāla); kṛṣṇam — unto Kṛṣṇa; dviṣataḥ — envying; api — in spite of; siddhiḥ — success; yām — which; yoginaḥ — the yogīs; saṁspṛhayanti — verily desire; samyak — fully; yogena — by performance of yoga; kaḥ — who; tat — His; viraham — separation; saheta — can tolerate.

Translation
You have personally seen how the King of Cedi [Śiśupāla] achieved success in yoga practice, although he hated Lord Kṛṣṇa. Even the actual yogīs aspire after such success with great interest by performance of their various practices. Who can tolerate separation from Him?

Text 20
तथैव चान्ये नरलोकवीरा
य आहवे कृष्णमुखारविन्दम् ।
नेत्रै: पिबन्तो नयनाभिरामं
पार्थास्त्रपूत: पदमापुरस्य ॥ २० ॥
tathaiva cānye nara-loka-vīrā
ya āhave kṛṣṇa-mukhāravindam
netraiḥ pibanto nayanābhirāmaṁ
pārthāstra-pūtaḥ padam āpur asya
Synonyms
tathā — as also; eva ca — and certainly; anye — others; nara-loka — human society; vīrāḥ — fighters; ye — those; āhave — on the battlefield (of Kurukṣetra); kṛṣṇa — Lord Kṛṣṇa’s; mukha-aravindam — face like a lotus flower; netraiḥ — with the eyes; pibantaḥ — while seeing; nayana-abhirāmam — very pleasing to the eyes; pārtha — Arjuna; astra-pūtaḥ — purified by arrows; padam — abode; āpuḥ — achieved; asya — of Him.

Translation
Certainly others who were fighters on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra were purified by the onslaught of Arjuna’s arrows, and while seeing the lotuslike face of Kṛṣṇa, so pleasing to the eyes, they achieved the abode of the Lord.

Text 21
स्वयं त्वसाम्यातिशयस्त्र्यधीश:
स्वाराज्यलक्ष्म्याप्तसमस्तकाम: ।
बलिं हरद्‍‌भिश्चिरलोकपालै:
किरीटकोट्येडितपादपीठ: ॥ २१ ॥
svayaṁ tv asāmyātiśayas tryadhīśaḥ
svārājya-lakṣmy-āpta-samasta-kāmaḥ
baliṁ haradbhiś cira-loka-pālaiḥ
kirīṭa-koṭyeḍita-pāda-pīṭhaḥ
Synonyms
svayam — Himself; tu — but; asāmya — unique; atiśayaḥ — greater; tri-adhīśaḥ — Lord of the three; svārājya — independent supremacy; lakṣmī — fortune; āpta — achieved; samasta-kāmaḥ — all desires; balim — worshiping paraphernalia; haradbhiḥ — offered by; cira-loka-pālaiḥ — by the eternal maintainers of the order of creation; kirīṭa-koṭyā — millions of helmets; iḍita-pāda-pīṭhaḥ — feet honored by prayers.

Translation
Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Lord of all kinds of threes and is independently supreme by achievement of all kinds of fortune. He is worshiped by the eternal maintainers of the creation, who offer Him the paraphernalia of worship by touching their millions of helmets to His feet.

Text 22
तत्तस्य कैङ्कर्यमलं भृतान्नो
विग्लापयत्यङ्ग यदुग्रसेनम् ।
तिष्ठन्निषण्णं परमेष्ठिधिष्ण्ये
न्यबोधयद्देव निधारयेति ॥ २२ ॥
tat tasya kaiṅkaryam alaṁ bhṛtān no
viglāpayaty aṅga yad ugrasenam
tiṣṭhan niṣaṇṇaṁ parameṣṭhi-dhiṣṇye
nyabodhayad deva nidhārayeti
Synonyms
tat — therefore; tasya — His; kaiṅkaryam — service; alam — of course; bhṛtān — the servitors; naḥ — us; viglāpayati — gives pain; aṅga — O Vidura; yat — as much as; ugrasenam — unto King Ugrasena; tiṣṭhan — being seated; niṣaṇṇam — waiting upon Him; parameṣṭhi-dhiṣṇye — on the royal throne; nyabodhayat — submitted; deva — addressing my Lord; nidhāraya — please know it; iti — thus.

Translation
Therefore, O Vidura, does it not pain us, His servitors, when we remember that He [Lord Kṛṣṇa] used to stand before King Ugrasena, who was sitting on the royal throne, and used to submit explanations before him, saying, “O My lord, please let it be known to you”?

Text 23
अहो बकी यं स्तनकालकूटं
जिघांसयापाययदप्यसाध्वी ।
लेभे गतिं धात्र्युचितां ततोऽन्यं
कं वा दयालुं शरणं व्रजेम ॥ २३ ॥
aho bakī yaṁ stana-kāla-kūṭaṁ
jighāṁsayāpāyayad apy asādhvī
lebhe gatiṁ dhātry-ucitāṁ tato ’nyaṁ
kaṁ vā dayāluṁ śaraṇaṁ vrajema
Synonyms
aho — alas; bakī — the she-demon (Pūtanā); yam — whom; stana — of her breast; kāla — deadly; kūṭam — poison; jighāṁsayā — out of envy; apāyayat — nourished; api — although; asādhvī — unfaithful; lebhe — achieved; gatim — destination; dhātrī-ucitām — just suitable for the nurse; tataḥ — beyond whom; anyam — other; kam — who else; vā — certainly; dayālum — merciful; śaraṇam — shelter; vrajema — shall I take.

Translation
Alas, how shall I take shelter of one more merciful than He who granted the position of mother to a she-demon [Pūtanā] although she was unfaithful and she prepared deadly poison to be sucked from her breast?

Text 24
मन्येऽसुरान् भागवतांस्त्र्यधीशे
संरम्भमार्गाभिनिविष्टचित्तान् ।
ये संयुगेऽचक्षत तार्क्ष्यपुत्र-
मंसे सुनाभायुधमापतन्तम् ॥ २४ ॥
manye ’surān bhāgavatāṁs tryadhīśe
saṁrambha-mārgābhiniviṣṭa-cittān
ye saṁyuge ’cakṣata tārkṣya-putram
aṁse sunābhāyudham āpatantam
Synonyms
manye — I think; asurān — the demons; bhāgavatān — great devotees; tri-adhīśe — unto the Lord of the threes; saṁrambha — enmity; mārga — by the way of; abhiniviṣṭa-cittān — absorbed in thought; ye — those; saṁyuge — in the fight; acakṣata — could see; tārkṣya-putram — Garuḍa, the carrier of the Lord; aṁse — on the shoulder; sunābha — the wheel; āyudham — one who carries the weapon; āpatantam — coming forward.

Translation
I consider the demons, who are inimical toward the Lord, to be more than the devotees because while fighting with the Lord, absorbed in thoughts of enmity, they are able to see the Lord carried on the shoulder of Garuḍa, the son of Tārkṣya [Kaśyapa], and carrying the wheel weapon in His hand.

Text 25
वसुदेवस्य देवक्यां जातो भोजेन्द्रबन्धने ।
चिकीर्षुर्भगवानस्या: शमजेनाभियाचित: ॥ २५ ॥
vasudevasya devakyāṁ
jāto bhojendra-bandhane
cikīrṣur bhagavān asyāḥ
śam ajenābhiyācitaḥ
Synonyms
vasudevasya — of the wife of Vasudeva; devakyām — in the womb of Devakī; jātaḥ — born of; bhoja-indra — of the King of the Bhojas; bandhane — in the prison house; cikīrṣuḥ — for doing; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; asyāḥ — of the earth; śam — welfare; ajena — by Brahmā; abhiyācitaḥ — being prayed for.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, being prayed to by Brahmā to bring welfare to the earth, was begotten by Vasudeva in the womb of his wife Devakī in the prison of the King of Bhoja.

Text 26
ततो नन्दव्रजमित: पित्रा कंसाद्विबिभ्यता ।
एकादश समास्तत्र गूढार्चि: सबलोऽवसत् ॥ २६ ॥
tato nanda-vrajam itaḥ
pitrā kaṁsād vibibhyatā
ekādaśa samās tatra
gūḍhārciḥ sa-balo ’vasat
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; nanda-vrajam — cow pastures of Nanda Mahārāja; itaḥ — being brought up; pitrā — by His father; kaṁsāt — from Kaṁsa; vibibhyatā — being afraid of; ekādaśa — eleven; samāḥ — years; tatra — therein; gūḍha-arciḥ — covered fire; sa-balaḥ — with Baladeva; avasat — resided.

Translation
Thereafter, His father, being afraid of Kaṁsa, brought Him to the cow pastures of Mahārāja Nanda, and there He lived for eleven years like a covered flame with His elder brother, Baladeva.

Text 27
परीतो वत्सपैर्वत्सांश्चारयन् व्यहरद्विभु: ।
यमुनोपवने कूजद्‌द्विजसंकुलिताङ्‌घ्रिपे ॥ २७ ॥
parīto vatsapair vatsāṁś
cārayan vyaharad vibhuḥ
yamunopavane kūjad-
dvija-saṅkulitāṅghripe
Synonyms
parītaḥ — surrounded by; vatsapaiḥ — cowherd boys; vatsān — calves; cārayan — herding, tending; vyaharat — enjoyed by traveling; vibhuḥ — the Almighty; yamunā — the Yamunā river; upavane — gardens on the shore; kūjat — vibrated by the voice; dvija — the twice-born birds; saṅkulita — densely situated; aṅghripe — in the trees.

Translation
In His childhood, the Almighty Lord was surrounded by cowherd boys and calves, and thus He traveled on the shore of the Yamunā river, through gardens densely covered with trees and filled with vibrations of chirping birds.

Text 28
कौमारीं दर्शयंश्चेष्टां प्रेक्षणीयां व्रजौकसाम् ।
रुदन्निव हसन्मुग्धबालसिंहावलोकन: ॥ २८ ॥
kaumārīṁ darśayaṁś ceṣṭāṁ
prekṣaṇīyāṁ vrajaukasām
rudann iva hasan mugdha-
bāla-siṁhāvalokanaḥ
Synonyms
kaumārīm — just suitable to childhood; darśayan — while showing; ceṣṭām — activities; prekṣaṇīyām — worthy to be seen; vraja-okasām — by the inhabitants of the land of Vṛndāvana; rudan — crying; iva — just like; hasan — laughing; mugdha — struck with wonder; bāla-siṁha — lion cub; avalokanaḥ — looking like that.

Translation
When the Lord displayed His activities just suitable for childhood, He was visible only to the residents of Vṛndāvana. Sometimes He would cry and sometimes laugh, just like a child, and while so doing He would appear like a lion cub.

Text 29
स एव गोधनं लक्ष्म्या निकेतं सितगोवृषम् ।
चारयन्ननुगान् गोपान् रणद्वेणुररीरमत् ॥ २९ ॥
sa eva go-dhanaṁ lakṣmyā
niketaṁ sita-go-vṛṣam
cārayann anugān gopān
raṇad-veṇur arīramat
Synonyms
saḥ — He (Lord Kṛṣṇa); eva — certainly; go-dhanam — the treasure of cows; lakṣmyāḥ — by opulence; niketam — reservoir; sita-go-vṛṣam — beautiful cows and bulls; cārayan — herding; anugān — the followers; gopān — cowherd boys; raṇat — blowing; veṇuḥ — flute; arīramat — enlivened.

Translation
While herding the very beautiful bulls, the Lord, who was the reservoir of all opulence and fortune, used to blow His flute, and thus He enlivened His faithful followers, the cowherd boys.

Text 30
प्रयुक्तान् भोजराजेन मायिन: कामरूपिण: ।
लीलया व्यनुदत्तांस्तान् बाल: क्रीडनकानिव ॥ ३० ॥
prayuktān bhoja-rājena
māyinaḥ kāma-rūpiṇaḥ
līlayā vyanudat tāṁs tān
bālaḥ krīḍanakān iva
Synonyms
prayuktān — engaged; bhoja-rājena — by King Kaṁsa; māyinaḥ — great wizards; kāma-rūpiṇaḥ — who could assume any form they liked; līlayā — in the course of the pastimes; vyanudat — killed; tān — them; tān — as they came there; bālaḥ — the child; krīḍanakān — dolls; iva — like that.

Translation
The great wizards who were able to assume any form were engaged by the King of Bhoja, Kaṁsa, to kill Kṛṣṇa, but in the course of His pastimes the Lord killed them as easily as a child breaks dolls.

Text 31
विपन्नान् विषपानेन निगृह्य भुजगाधिपम् ।
उत्थाप्यापाययद्गावस्तत्तोयं प्रकृतिस्थितम् ॥ ३१ ॥
vipannān viṣa-pānena
nigṛhya bhujagādhipam
utthāpyāpāyayad gāvas
tat toyaṁ prakṛti-sthitam
Synonyms
vipannān — perplexed in great difficulties; viṣa-pānena — by drinking poison; nigṛhya — subduing; bhujaga-adhipam — the chief of the reptiles; utthāpya — after coming out; apāyayat — caused to drink; gāvaḥ — the cows; tat — that; toyam — water; prakṛti — natural; sthitam — situated.

Translation
The inhabitants of Vṛndāvana were perplexed by great difficulties because a certain portion of the Yamunā was poisoned by the chief of the reptiles [Kāliya]. The Lord chastised the snake-king within the water and drove him away, and after coming out of the river, He caused the cows to drink the water and proved that the water was again in its natural state.

Text 32
अयाजयद्गोसवेन गोपराजं द्विजोत्तमै: ।
वित्तस्य चोरुभारस्य चिकीर्षन् सद्वय‍यं विभु: ॥ ३२ ॥
ayājayad go-savena
gopa-rājaṁ dvijottamaiḥ
vittasya coru-bhārasya
cikīrṣan sad-vyayaṁ vibhuḥ
Synonyms
ayājayat — made to perform; go-savena — by worship of the cows; gopa-rājam — the king of the cowherds; dvija-uttamaiḥ — by the learned brāhmaṇas; vittasya — of the wealth; ca — also; uru-bhārasya — great opulence; cikīrṣan — desiring to act; sat-vyayam — proper utilization; vibhuḥ — the great.

Translation
The Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa, desired to utilize the opulent financial strength of Mahārāja Nanda for worship of the cows, and also He wanted to give a lesson to Indra, the King of heaven. Thus He advised His father to perform worship of go, or the pasturing land and the cows, with the help of learned brāhmaṇas.

Text 33
वर्षतीन्द्रे व्रज: कोपाद्भग्नमानेऽतिविह्वल: ।
गोत्रलीलातपत्रेण त्रातो भद्रानुगृह्णता ॥ ३३ ॥
varṣatīndre vrajaḥ kopād
bhagnamāne ’tivihvalaḥ
gotra-līlātapatreṇa
trāto bhadrānugṛhṇatā
Synonyms
varṣati — in pouring water; indre — by the King of heaven, Indra; vrajaḥ — the land of cows (Vṛndāvana); kopāt bhagnamāne — having been in anger on being insulted; ati — highly; vihvalaḥ — perturbed; gotra — the hill for the cows; līlā-ātapatreṇa — by the pastime umbrella; trātaḥ — were protected; bhadra — O sober one; anugṛhṇatā — by the merciful Lord.

Translation
O sober Vidura, King Indra, his honor having been insulted, poured water incessantly on Vṛndāvana, and thus the inhabitants of Vraja, the land of cows, were greatly distressed. But the compassionate Lord Kṛṣṇa saved them from danger with His pastime umbrella, the Govardhana Hill.

Text 34
शरच्छशिकरैर्मृष्टं मानयन् रजनीमुखम् ।
गायन् कलपदं रेमे स्त्रीणां मण्डलमण्डन: ॥ ३४ ॥
śarac-chaśi-karair mṛṣṭaṁ
mānayan rajanī-mukham
gāyan kala-padaṁ reme
strīṇāṁ maṇḍala-maṇḍanaḥ
Synonyms
śarat — autumn; śaśi — of the moon; karaiḥ — by the shining; mṛṣṭam — brightened; mānayan — thinking so; rajanī-mukham — the face of the night; gāyan — singing; kala-padam — pleasing songs; reme — enjoyed; strīṇām — of the women; maṇḍala-maṇḍanaḥ — as the central beauty of the assembly of women.

Translation
In the third season of the year, the Lord enjoyed as the central beauty of the assembly of women by attracting them with His pleasing songs in an autumn night brightened by moonshine.