Text 1
शौनक उवाच
महीं प्रतिष्ठामध्यस्य सौते स्वायम्भुवो मनु: ।
कान्यन्वतिष्ठद् द्वाराणि मार्गायावरजन्मनाम् ॥ १ ॥
śaunaka uvāca
mahīṁ pratiṣṭhām adhyasya
saute svāyambhuvo manuḥ
kāny anvatiṣṭhad dvārāṇi
mārgāyāvara-janmanām
Synonyms
śaunakaḥ — Śaunaka; uvāca — said; mahīm — the earth; pratiṣṭhām — situated; adhyasya — having secured; saute — O Sūta Gosvāmī; svāyambhuvaḥ — Svāyambhuva; manuḥ — Manu; kāni — what; anvatiṣṭhat — performed; dvārāṇi — ways; mārgāya — to get out; avara — later; janmanām — of those to be born.

Translation
Śrī Śaunaka inquired: O Sūta Gosvāmī, after the earth was again situated in its orbit, what did Svāyambhuva Manu do to show the path of liberation to persons who were to take birth later on?

Text 2
क्षत्ता महाभागवत: कृष्णस्यैकान्तिक: सुहृत् ।
यस्तत्याजाग्रजं कृष्णे सापत्यमघवानिति ॥ २ ॥
kṣattā mahā-bhāgavataḥ
kṛṣṇasyaikāntikaḥ suhṛt
yas tatyājāgrajaṁ kṛṣṇe
sāpatyam aghavān iti
Synonyms
kṣattā — Vidura; mahā-bhāgavataḥ — a great devotee of the Lord; kṛṣṇasya — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; ekāntikaḥ — unalloyed devotee; suhṛt — intimate friend; yaḥ — he who; tatyāja — abandoned; agra-jam — his elder brother (King Dhṛtarāṣṭra); kṛṣṇe — toward Kṛṣṇa; sa-apatyam — along with his one hundred sons; agha-vān — offender; iti — thus.

Translation
Śaunaka Ṛṣi inquired about Vidura, who was a great devotee and friend of Lord Kṛṣṇa and who gave up the company of his elder brother because the latter, along with his sons, played tricks against the desires of the Lord.

Text 3
द्वैपायनादनवरो महित्वे तस्य देहज: ।
सर्वात्मना श्रित: कृष्णं तत्परांश्चाप्यनुव्रत: ॥ ३ ॥
dvaipāyanād anavaro
mahitve tasya dehajaḥ
sarvātmanā śritaḥ kṛṣṇaṁ
tat-parāṁś cāpy anuvrataḥ
Synonyms
dvaipāyanāt — from Vyāsadeva; anavaraḥ — in no way inferior; mahitve — in greatness; tasya — his (Vyāsa’s); deha-jaḥ — born of his body; sarva-ātmanā — with all his heart; śritaḥ — took shelter; kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; tat-parān — those devoted to Him; ca — and; api — also; anuvrataḥ — followed.

Translation
Vidura was born from the body of Vedavyāsa and was not less than he. Thus he accepted the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa wholeheartedly and was attached to His devotees.

Text 4
किमन्वपृच्छन्मैत्रेयं विरजास्तीर्थसेवया ।
उपगम्य कुशावर्त आसीनं तत्त्ववित्तमम् ॥ ४ ॥
kim anvapṛcchan maitreyaṁ
virajās tīrtha-sevayā
upagamya kuśāvarta
āsīnaṁ tattva-vittamam
Synonyms
kim — what; anvapṛcchat — inquired; maitreyam — from the sage Maitreya; virajāḥ — Vidura, who was without material contamination; tīrtha-sevayā — by visiting sacred places; upagamya — having met; kuśāvarte — at Kuśāvarta (Haridvāra, or Hardwar); āsīnam — who was abiding; tattva-vit-tamam — the foremost knower of the science of spiritual life.

Translation
Vidura was purified of all passion by wandering in sacred places, and at last he reached Hardwar, where he met the great sage who knew the science of spiritual life, and he inquired from him. Śaunaka Ṛṣi therefore asked: What more did Vidura inquire from Maitreya?

Text 5
तयो: संवदतो: सूत प्रवृत्ता ह्यमला: कथा: ।
आपो गाङ्गा इवाघघ्नीर्हरे: पादाम्बुजाश्रया: ॥ ५ ॥
tayoḥ saṁvadatoḥ sūta
pravṛttā hy amalāḥ kathāḥ
āpo gāṅgā ivāgha-ghnīr
hareḥ pādāmbujāśrayāḥ
Synonyms
tayoḥ — while the two (Maitreya and Vidura); saṁvadatoḥ — were conversing; sūta — O Sūta; pravṛttāḥ — arose; hi — certainly; amalāḥ — spotless; kathāḥ — narrations; āpaḥ — waters; gāṅgāḥ — of the river Ganges; iva — like; agha-ghnīḥ — vanquishing all sins; hareḥ — of the Lord; pāda-ambuja — the lotus feet; āśrayāḥ — taking shelter.

Translation
Śaunaka inquired about the conversation between Vidura and Maitreya: There must have been many narrations of the spotless pastimes of the Lord. The hearing of such narrations is exactly like bathing in the water of the Ganges, for it can free one from all sinful reactions.

Text 6
ता न: कीर्तय भद्रं ते कीर्तन्योदारकर्मण: ।
रसज्ञ: को नु तृप्येत हरिलीलामृतं पिबन् ॥ ६ ॥
tā naḥ kīrtaya bhadraṁ te
kīrtanyodāra-karmaṇaḥ
rasajñaḥ ko nu tṛpyeta
hari-līlāmṛtaṁ piban
Synonyms
tāḥ — those talks; naḥ — to us; kīrtaya — narrate; bhadram te — may all good come unto you; kīrtanya — should be chanted; udāra — liberal; karmaṇaḥ — activities; rasa-jñaḥ — a devotee who can appreciate mellow tastes; kaḥ — who; nu — indeed; tṛpyeta — would feel satisfied; hari-līlā-amṛtam — the nectar of the pastimes of the Lord; piban — drinking.

Translation
O Sūta Gosvāmī, all good fortune to you! Please narrate the activities of the Lord, which are all magnanimous and worth glorifying. What sort of devotee can be satiated by hearing the nectarean pastimes of the Lord?

Text 7
एवमुग्रश्रवा: पृष्ट ऋषिभिर्नैमिषायनै: ।
भगवत्यर्पिताध्यात्मस्तानाह श्रूयतामिति ॥ ७ ॥
evam ugraśravāḥ pṛṣṭa
ṛṣibhir naimiṣāyanaiḥ
bhagavaty arpitādhyātmas
tān āha śrūyatām iti
Synonyms
evam — thus; ugraśravāḥ — Sūta Gosvāmī; pṛṣṭaḥ — being asked; ṛṣibhiḥ — by the sages; naimiṣa-ayanaiḥ — who were assembled in the forest of Naimiṣa; bhagavati — unto the Lord; arpita — dedicated; adhyātmaḥ — his mind; tān — to them; āha — said; śrūyatām — just hear; iti — thus.

Translation
On being asked to speak by the great sages of Naimiṣāraṇya, the son of Romaharṣaṇa, Sūta Gosvāmī, whose mind was absorbed in the transcendental pastimes of the Lord, said: Please hear what I shall now speak.

Text 8
सूत उवाच
हरेर्धृतक्रोडतनो: स्वमायया
निशम्य गोरुद्धरणं रसातलात् ।
लीलां हिरण्याक्षमवज्ञया हतं
सञ्जातहर्षो मुनिमाह भारत: ॥ ८ ॥
sūta uvāca
harer dhṛta-kroḍa-tanoḥ sva-māyayā
niśamya gor uddharaṇaṁ rasātalāt
līlāṁ hiraṇyākṣam avajñayā hataṁ
sañjāta-harṣo munim āha bhārataḥ
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Sūta said; hareḥ — of the Lord; dhṛta — who had assumed; kroḍa — of a boar; tanoḥ — body; sva-māyayā — by His divine potency; niśamya — having heard; goḥ — of the earth; uddharaṇam — uplifting; rasātalāt — from the bottom of the ocean; līlām — sport; hiraṇyākṣam — the demon Hiraṇyākṣa; avajñayā — neglectfully; hatam — killed; sañjāta-harṣaḥ — being overjoyed; munim — to the sage (Maitreya); āha — said; bhārataḥ — Vidura.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī continued: Vidura, the descendant of Bharata, was delighted to hear the story of the Lord, who, having assumed by His own divine potency the form of a boar, had enacted the sport of lifting the earth from the bottom of the ocean and indifferently killing the demon Hiraṇyākṣa. Vidura then spoke to the sage as follows.

Text 9
विदुर उवाच
प्रजापतिपति: सृष्ट्वा प्रजासर्गे प्रजापतीन् ।
किमारभत मे ब्रह्मन् प्रब्रूह्यव्यक्तमार्गवित् ॥ ९ ॥
vidura uvāca
prajāpati-patiḥ sṛṣṭvā
prajā-sarge prajāpatīn
kim ārabhata me brahman
prabrūhy avyakta-mārga-vit
Synonyms
viduraḥ uvāca — Vidura said; prajāpati-patiḥ — Lord Brahmā; sṛṣṭvā — after creating; prajā-sarge — for the purpose of creating living beings; prajāpatīn — the Prajāpatis; kim — what; ārabhata — started; me — to me; brahman — O holy sage; prabrūhi — tell; avyakta-mārga-vit — knower of that which we do not know.

Translation
Vidura said: Since you know of matters inconceivable to us, tell me, O holy sage, what did Brahmā do to create living beings after evolving the Prajāpatis, the progenitors of living beings?

Text 10
ये मरीच्यादयो विप्रा यस्तु स्वायम्भुवो मनु: ।
ते वै ब्रह्मण आदेशात्कथमेतदभावयन् ॥ १० ॥
ye marīcy-ādayo viprā
yas tu svāyambhuvo manuḥ
te vai brahmaṇa ādeśāt
katham etad abhāvayan
Synonyms
ye — those; marīci-ādayaḥ — great sages headed by Marīci; viprāḥ — brāhmaṇas; yaḥ — who; tu — indeed; svāyambhuvaḥ manuḥ — and Svāyambhuva Manu; te — they; vai — indeed; brahmaṇaḥ — of Lord Brahmā; ādeśāt — by the order; katham — how; etat — this universe; abhāvayan — evolved.

Translation
Vidura inquired: How did the Prajāpatis [such progenitors of living entities as Marīci and Svāyambhuva Manu] create according to the instruction of Brahmā, and how did they evolve this manifested universe?

Text 11
सद्वितीया: किमसृजन् स्वतन्त्रा उत कर्मसु ।
आहोस्वित्संहता: सर्व इदं स्म समकल्पयन् ॥ ११ ॥
sa-dvitīyāḥ kim asṛjan
svatantrā uta karmasu
āho svit saṁhatāḥ sarva
idaṁ sma samakalpayan
Synonyms
sa-dvitīyāḥ — with their wives; kim — whether; asṛjan — created; sva-tantrāḥ — remaining independent; uta — or; karmasu — in their actions; āho svit — or else; saṁhatāḥ — jointly; sarve — all the Prajāpatis; idam — this; sma samakalpayan — produced.

Translation
Did they evolve the creation in conjunction with their respective wives, did they remain independent in their action, or did they all jointly produce it?

Text 12
मैत्रेय उवाच
दैवेन दुर्वितर्क्येण परेणानिमिषेण च ।
जातक्षोभाद्भगवतो महानासीद् गुणत्रयात् ॥ १२ ॥
maitreya uvāca
daivena durvitarkyeṇa
pareṇānimiṣeṇa ca
jāta-kṣobhād bhagavato
mahān āsīd guṇa-trayāt
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; daivena — by superior management known as destiny; durvitarkyeṇa — beyond empiric speculation; pareṇa — by Mahā-Viṣṇu; animiṣeṇa — by the potency of eternal time; ca — and; jāta-kṣobhāt — the equilibrium was agitated; bhagavataḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; mahān — the total material elements (the mahat-tattva); āsīt — were produced; guṇa-trayāt — from the three modes of nature.

Translation
Maitreya said: When the equilibrium of the combination of the three modes of nature was agitated by the unseen activity of the living entity, by Mahā-Viṣṇu and by the force of time, the total material elements were produced.

Text 13
रज:प्रधानान्महतस्त्रिलिङ्गो दैवचोदितात् ।
जात: ससर्ज भूतादिर्वियदादीनि पञ्चश: ॥ १३ ॥
rajaḥ-pradhānān mahatas
tri-liṅgo daiva-coditāt
jātaḥ sasarja bhūtādir
viyad-ādīni pañcaśaḥ
Synonyms
rajaḥ-pradhānāt — in which the element of rajas, or passion, predominates; mahataḥ — from the mahat-tattva; tri-liṅgaḥ — of three kinds; daiva-coditāt — impelled by superior authority; jātaḥ — was born; sasarja — evolved; bhūta-ādiḥ — the false ego (origin of the material elements); viyat — the ether; ādīni — beginning with; pañcaśaḥ — in groups of five.

Translation
As impelled by the destiny of the jīva, the false ego, which is of three kinds, evolved from the mahat-tattva, in which the element of rajas predominates. From the ego, in turn, evolved many groups of five principles.

Text 14
तानि चैकैकश: स्रष्टुमसमर्थानि भौतिकम् ।
संहत्य दैवयोगेन हैममण्डमवासृजन् ॥ १४ ॥
tāni caikaikaśaḥ sraṣṭum
asamarthāni bhautikam
saṁhatya daiva-yogena
haimam aṇḍam avāsṛjan
Synonyms
tāni — those elements; ca — and; eka-ekaśaḥ — separately; sraṣṭum — to produce; asamarthāni — unable; bhautikam — the material universe; saṁhatya — having combined; daiva-yogena — with the energy of the Supreme Lord; haimam — shining like gold; aṇḍam — globe; avāsṛjan — produced.

Translation
Separately unable to produce the material universe, they combined with the help of the energy of the Supreme Lord and were able to produce a shining egg.

Text 15
सोऽशयिष्टाब्धिसलिले आण्डकोशो निरात्मक: ।
साग्रं वै वर्षसाहस्रमन्ववात्सीत्तमीश्वर: ॥ १५ ॥
so ’śayiṣṭābdhi-salile
āṇḍakośo nirātmakaḥ
sāgraṁ vai varṣa-sāhasram
anvavātsīt tam īśvaraḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — it; aśayiṣṭa — lay; abdhi-salile — on the waters of the Causal Ocean; āṇḍa-kośaḥ — egg; nirātmakaḥ — in an unconscious state; sāgram — a little more than; vai — in fact; varṣa-sāhasram — a thousand years; anvavātsīt — became situated; tam — in the egg; īśvaraḥ — the Lord.

Translation
For over one thousand years the shiny egg lay on the waters of the Causal Ocean in the lifeless state. Then the Lord entered it as Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu.

Text 16
तस्य नाभेरभूत्पद्मं सहस्रार्कोरुदीधिति ।
सर्वजीवनिकायौको यत्र स्वयमभूत्स्वराट् ॥ १६ ॥
tasya nābher abhūt padmaṁ
sahasrārkoru-dīdhiti
sarva-jīvanikāyauko
yatra svayam abhūt svarāṭ
Synonyms
tasya — of the Lord; nābheḥ — from the navel; abhūt — sprouted up; padmam — a lotus; sahasra-arka — a thousand suns; uru — more; dīdhiti — with dazzling splendor; sarva — all; jīva-nikāya — resting place of conditioned souls; okaḥ — place; yatra — where; svayam — himself; abhūt — emanated; sva-rāṭ — the omnipotent (Lord Brahmā).

Translation
From the navel of the Personality of Godhead Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu sprouted a lotus flower effulgent like a thousand blazing suns. This lotus flower is the reservoir of all conditioned souls, and the first living entity who came out of the lotus flower was the omnipotent Brahmā

Text 17
सोऽनुविष्टो भगवता य: शेते सलिलाशये ।
लोकसंस्थां यथापूर्वं निर्ममे संस्थया स्वया ॥ १७ ॥
so ’nuviṣṭo bhagavatā
yaḥ śete salilāśaye
loka-saṁsthāṁ yathā pūrvaṁ
nirmame saṁsthayā svayā
Synonyms
saḥ — Lord Brahmā; anuviṣṭaḥ — was entered; bhagavatā — by the Lord; yaḥ — who; śete — sleeps; salila-āśaye — on the Garbhodaka Ocean; loka-saṁsthām — the universe; yathā pūrvam — as previously; nirmame — created; saṁsthayā — by intelligence; svayā — his own.

Translation
When that Supreme Personality of Godhead who is lying on the Garbhodaka Ocean entered the heart of Brahmā, Brahmā brought his intelligence to bear, and with the intelligence invoked he began to create the universe as it was before.

Text 18
ससर्ज च्छाययाविद्यां पञ्चपर्वाणमग्रत: ।
तामिस्रमन्धतामिस्रं तमो मोहो महातम: ॥ १८ ॥
sasarja cchāyayāvidyāṁ
pañca-parvāṇam agrataḥ
tāmisram andha-tāmisraṁ
tamo moho mahā-tamaḥ
Synonyms
sasarja — created; chāyayā — with his shadow; avidyām — ignorance; pañca-parvāṇam — five varieties; agrataḥ — first of all; tāmisram — tāmisra; andha-tāmisram — andha-tāmisra; tamaḥ — tamas; mohaḥ — moha; mahā-tamaḥ — mahā-tamas, or mahā-moha.

Translation
First of all, Brahmā created from his shadow the coverings of ignorance of the conditioned souls. They are five in number and are called tāmisra, andha-tāmisra, tamas, moha and mahā-moha.

Text 19
विससर्जात्मन: कायं नाभिनन्दंस्तमोमयम् ।
जगृहुर्यक्षरक्षांसि रात्रिं क्षुत्तृट्‌समुद्भवाम् ॥ १९ ॥
visasarjātmanaḥ kāyaṁ
nābhinandaṁs tamomayam
jagṛhur yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi
rātriṁ kṣut-tṛṭ-samudbhavām
Synonyms
visasarja — threw off; ātmanaḥ — his own; kāyam — body; na — not; abhinandan — being pleased; tamaḥ-mayam — made of ignorance; jagṛhuḥ — took possession; yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi — the Yakṣas and Rākṣasas; rātrim — night; kṣut — hunger; tṛṭ — thirst; samudbhavām — the source.

Translation
Out of disgust, Brahmā threw off the body of ignorance, and taking this opportunity, Yakṣas and Rākṣasas sprang for possession of the body, which continued to exist in the form of night. Night is the source of hunger and thirst.

Text 20
क्षुत्तृड्भ्यामुपसृष्टास्ते तं जग्धुमभिदुद्रुवु: ।
मा रक्षतैनं जक्षध्वमित्यूचु: क्षुत्तृडर्दिता: ॥ २० ॥
kṣut-tṛḍbhyām upasṛṣṭās te
taṁ jagdhum abhidudruvuḥ
mā rakṣatainaṁ jakṣadhvam
ity ūcuḥ kṣut-tṛḍ-arditāḥ
Synonyms
kṣut-tṛḍbhyām — by hunger and thirst; upasṛṣṭāḥ — were overcome; te — the demons (Yakṣas and Rākṣasas); tam — Lord Brahmā; jagdhum — to eat; abhidudruvuḥ — ran toward; mā — do not; rakṣata — spare; enam — him; jakṣadhvam — eat; iti — thus; ūcuḥ — said; kṣut-tṛṭ-arditāḥ — afflicted by hunger and thirst.

Translation
Overpowered by hunger and thirst, they ran to devour Brahmā from all sides and cried, “Spare him not! Eat him up!”

Text 21
देवस्तानाह संविग्नो मा मां जक्षत रक्षत ।
अहो मे यक्षरक्षांसि प्रजा यूयं बभूविथ ॥ २१ ॥
devas tān āha saṁvigno
mā māṁ jakṣata rakṣata
aho me yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi
prajā yūyaṁ babhūvitha
Synonyms
devaḥ — Lord Brahmā; tān — to them; āha — said; saṁvignaḥ — being anxious; mā — do not; mām — me; jakṣata — eat; rakṣata — protect; aho — oh; me — my; yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi — O Yakṣas and Rākṣasas; prajāḥ — sons; yūyam — you; babhūvitha — were born.

Translation
Brahmā, the head of the demigods, full of anxiety, asked them, “Do not eat me, but protect me. You are born from me and have become my sons. Therefore you are Yakṣas and Rākṣasas.”

Text 22
देवता: प्रभया या या दीव्यन् प्रमुखतोऽसृजत् ।
ते अहार्षुर्देवयन्तो विसृष्टां तां प्रभामह: ॥ २२ ॥
devatāḥ prabhayā yā yā
dīvyan pramukhato ’sṛjat
te ahārṣur devayanto
visṛṣṭāṁ tāṁ prabhām ahaḥ
Synonyms
devatāḥ — the demigods; prabhayā — with the glory of light; yāḥ yāḥ — those who; dīvyan — shining; pramukhataḥ — chiefly; asṛjat — created; te — they; ahārṣuḥ — took possession of; devayantaḥ — being active; visṛṣṭām — separated; tām — that; prabhām — effulgent form; ahaḥ — daytime.

Translation
He then created the chief demigods, who were shining with the glory of goodness. He dropped before them the effulgent form of daytime, and the demigods sportingly took possession of it.

Text 23
देवोऽदेवाञ्जघनत: सृजति स्मातिलोलुपान् ।
त
एनं लोलुपतया मैथुनायाभिपेदिरे ॥ २३ ॥
devo ’devāñ jaghanataḥ
sṛjati smātilolupān
ta enaṁ lolupatayā
maithunāyābhipedire
Synonyms
devaḥ — Lord Brahmā; adevān — demons; jaghanataḥ — from his buttocks; sṛjati sma — gave birth; ati-lolupān — excessively fond of sex; te — they; enam — Lord Brahmā; lolupatayā — with lust; maithunāya — for copulation; abhipedire — approached.

Translation
Lord Brahmā then gave birth to the demons from his buttocks, and they were very fond of sex. Because they were too lustful, they approached him for copulation.

Text 24
ततो हसन् स
भगवानसुरैर्निरपत्रपै: ।
अन्वीयमानस्तरसा क्रुद्धो भीत: परापतत् ॥ २४ ॥
tato hasan sa bhagavān
asurair nirapatrapaiḥ
anvīyamānas tarasā
kruddho bhītaḥ parāpatat
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; hasan — laughing; saḥ bhagavān — the worshipful Lord Brahmā; asuraiḥ — by the demons; nirapatrapaiḥ — shameless; anvīyamānaḥ — being followed; tarasā — in great haste; kruddhaḥ — angry; bhītaḥ — being afraid; parāpatat — ran away.

Translation
The worshipful Brahmā first laughed at their stupidity, but finding the shameless asuras close upon him, he grew indignant and ran in great haste out of fear.

Text 25
स उपव्रज्य वरदं प्रपन्नार्तिहरं हरिम् ।
अनुग्रहाय भक्तानामनुरूपात्मदर्शनम् ॥ २५ ॥
sa upavrajya varadaṁ
prapannārti-haraṁ harim
anugrahāya bhaktānām
anurūpātma-darśanam
Synonyms
saḥ — Lord Brahmā; upavrajya — approaching; vara-dam — the bestower of all boons; prapanna — of those taking shelter at His lotus feet; ārti — distress; haram — who dispels; harim — Lord Śrī Hari; anugrahāya — for showing mercy; bhaktānām — to His devotees; anurūpa — in suitable forms; ātma-darśanam — who manifests Himself.

Translation
He approached the Personality of Godhead, who bestows all boons and who dispels the agony of His devotees and of those who take shelter of His lotus feet. He manifests His innumerable transcendental forms for the satisfaction of His devotees.

Text 26
पाहि मां परमात्मंस्ते प्रेषणेनासृजं
प्रजा: ।
ता इमा यभितुं पापा उपाक्रामन्ति मां प्रभो ॥ २६ ॥
pāhi māṁ paramātmaṁs te
preṣaṇenāsṛjaṁ prajāḥ
tā imā yabhituṁ pāpā
upākrāmanti māṁ prabho
Synonyms
pāhi — protect; mām — me; parama-ātman — O Supreme Lord; te — Your; preṣaṇena — by order; asṛjam — I created; prajāḥ — living beings; tāḥ imāḥ — those very persons; yabhitum — to have sex; pāpāḥ — sinful beings; upākrāmanti — are approaching; mām — me; prabho — O Lord.

Translation
Lord Brahmā, approaching the Lord, addressed Him thus: My Lord, please protect me from these sinful demons, who were created by me under Your order. They are infuriated by an appetite for sex and have come to attack me.

Text 27
त्वमेक: किल लोकानां क्लिष्टानां
क्लेशनाशन: ।
त्वमेक: क्लेशदस्तेषामनासन्नपदां तव ॥ २७ ॥
tvam ekaḥ kila lokānāṁ
kliṣṭānāṁ kleśa-nāśanaḥ
tvam ekaḥ kleśadas teṣām
anāsanna-padāṁ tava
Synonyms
tvam — You; ekaḥ — alone; kila — indeed; lokānām — of the people; kliṣṭānām — afflicted with miseries; kleśa — the distresses; nāśanaḥ — relieving; tvam ekaḥ — You alone; kleśa-daḥ — inflicting distress; teṣām — on those; anāsanna — not taken shelter; padām — feet; tava — Your.

Translation
My Lord, You are the only one capable of ending the affliction of the distressed and inflicting agony on those who never resort to Your feet.

Text 28
सोऽवधार्यास्य कार्पण्यं विविक्ताध्यात्मदर्शन: ।
विमुञ्चात्मतनुं घोरामित्युक्तो विमुमोच ह ॥ २८ ॥
so ’vadhāryāsya kārpaṇyaṁ
viviktādhyātma-darśanaḥ
vimuñcātma-tanuṁ ghorām
ity ukto vimumoca ha
Synonyms
saḥ — the Supreme Lord, Hari; avadhārya — perceiving; asya — of Lord Brahmā; kārpaṇyam — the distress; vivikta — without a doubt; adhyātma — minds of others; darśanaḥ — one who can see; vimuñca — cast off; ātma-tanum — your body; ghorām — impure; iti uktaḥ — thus commanded; vimumoca ha — Lord Brahmā threw it off.

Translation
The Lord, who can distinctly see the minds of others, perceived Brahmā’s distress and said to him: “Cast off this impure body of yours.” Thus commanded by the Lord, Brahmā cast off his body.

Text 29
तां क्‍वणच्चरणाम्भोजां मदविह्वललोचनाम् ।
काञ्चीकलापविलसद्दुकूलच्छन्नरोधसम् ॥ २९ ॥
tāṁ kvaṇac-caraṇāmbhojāṁ
mada-vihvala-locanām
kāñcī-kalāpa-vilasad-
dukūla-cchanna-rodhasam
Synonyms
tām — that body; kvaṇat — tinkling with ankle bells; caraṇa-ambhojām — with lotus feet; mada — intoxication; vihvala — overwhelmed; locanām — with eyes; kāñcī-kalāpa — with a girdle made of golden ornaments; vilasat — shining; dukūla — by fine cloth; channa — covered; rodhasam — having hips.

Translation
The body given up by Brahmā took the form of the evening twilight, when the day and night meet, a time which kindles passion. The asuras, who are passionate by nature, dominated as they are by the element of rajas, took it for a damsel, whose lotus feet resounded with the tinkling of anklets, whose eyes were wide with intoxication and whose hips were covered by fine cloth, over which shone a girdle.

Text 30
अन्योन्यश्लेषयोत्तुङ्गनिरन्तरपयोधराम् ।
सुनासां सुद्विजां स्‍निग्धहासलीलावलोकनाम् ॥ ३० ॥
anyonya-śleṣayottuṅga-
nirantara-payodharām
sunāsāṁ sudvijāṁ snigdha-
hāsa-līlāvalokanām
Synonyms
anyonya — to each other; śleṣayā — because of clinging; uttuṅga — raised; nirantara — without intervening space; payaḥ-dharām — breasts; su-nāsām — shapely nose; su-dvijām — beautiful teeth; snigdha — lovely; hāsa — smile; līlā-avalokanām — sportful glance.

Translation
Her breasts projected upward because of their clinging to each other, and they were too contiguous to admit any intervening space. She had a shapely nose and beautiful teeth, a lovely smile played on her lips, and she cast a sportful glance at the asuras.

Text 31
गूहन्तीं व्रीडयात्मानं नीलालकवरूथिनीम् ।
उपलभ्यासुरा धर्म सर्वे सम्मुमुहु: स्त्रियम् ॥ ३१ ॥
gūhantīṁ vrīḍayātmānaṁ
nīlālaka-varūthinīm
upalabhyāsurā dharma
sarve sammumuhuḥ striyam
Synonyms
gūhantīm — hiding; vrīḍayā — out of shyness; ātmānam — herself; nīla — dark; alaka — hair; varūthinīm — a bunch; upalabhya — upon imagining; asurāḥ — the demons; dharma — O Vidura; sarve — all; sammumuhuḥ — were captivated; striyam — woman.

Translation
Adorned with dark tresses, she hid herself, as it were, out of shyness. Upon seeing that girl, the asuras were all infatuated with an appetite for sex.

Text 32
अहो रूपमहो धैर्यमहो अस्या नवं वय: ।
मध्ये कामयमानानामकामेव विसर्पति ॥ ३२ ॥
aho rūpam aho dhairyam
aho asyā navaṁ vayaḥ
madhye kāmayamānānām
akāmeva visarpati
Synonyms
aho — oh; rūpam — what beauty; aho — oh; dhairyam — what self-control; aho — oh; asyāḥ — her; navam — budding; vayaḥ — youth; madhye — in the midst; kāmayamānānām — of those passionately longing for; akāmā — free from passion; iva — like; visarpati — walking with us.

Translation
The demons praised her: Oh, what a beauty! What rare self-control! What a budding youth! In the midst of us all, who are passionately longing for her, she is moving about like one absolutely free from passion.

Text 33
वितर्कयन्तो बहुधा तां सन्ध्यां
प्रमदाकृतिम् ।
अभिसम्भाव्य विश्रम्भात्पर्यपृच्छन् कुमेधस: ॥ ३३ ॥
vitarkayanto bahudhā
tāṁ sandhyāṁ pramadākṛtim
abhisambhāvya viśrambhāt
paryapṛcchan kumedhasaḥ
Synonyms
vitarkayantaḥ — indulging in speculations; bahudhā — various kinds; tām — her; sandhyām — the evening twilight; pramadā — a young woman; ākṛtim — in the form of; abhisambhāvya — treating with great respect; viśrambhāt — fondly; paryapṛcchan — questioned; ku-medhasaḥ — wicked-minded.

Translation
Indulging in various speculations about the evening twilight, which appeared to them endowed with the form of a young woman, the wicked-minded asuras treated her with respect and fondly spoke to her as follows.

Text 34
कासि कस्यासि रम्भोरु को वार्थस्तेऽत्र
भामिनि ।
रूपद्रविणपण्येन दुर्भगान्नो विबाधसे ॥ ३४ ॥
kāsi kasyāsi rambhoru
ko vārthas te ’tra bhāmini
rūpa-draviṇa-paṇyena
durbhagān no vibādhase
Synonyms
kā — who; asi — are you; kasya — belonging to whom; asi — are you; rambhoru — O pretty one; kaḥ — what; vā — or; arthaḥ — object; te — your; atra — here; bhāmini — O passionate lady; rūpa — beauty; draviṇa — priceless; paṇyena — with the commodity; durbhagān — unfortunate; naḥ — us; vibādhase — you tantalize.

Translation
Who are you, O pretty girl? Whose wife or daughter are you, and what can be the object of your appearing before us? Why do you tantalize us, unfortunate as we are, with the priceless commodity of your beauty?

Text 35
या वा काचित्त्वमबले दिष्टय‍ा सन्दर्शनं तव ।
उत्सुनोषीक्षमाणानां कन्दुकक्रीडया मन: ॥ ३५ ॥
yā vā kācit tvam abale
diṣṭyā sandarśanaṁ tava
utsunoṣīkṣamāṇānāṁ
kanduka-krīḍayā manaḥ
Synonyms
yā — whosoever; vā — or; kācit — anyone; tvam — you; abale — O beautiful girl; diṣṭyā — by fortune; sandarśanam — seeing; tava — of you; utsunoṣi — you agitate; īkṣamāṇānām — of the onlookers; kanduka — with a ball; krīḍayā — by play; manaḥ — the mind.

Translation
Whosoever you may be, O beautiful girl, we are fortunate in being able to see you. While playing with a ball, you have agitated the minds of all onlookers.

Text 36
नैकत्र ते जयति शालिनि पादपद्मं
घ्नन्त्या मुहु: करतलेन पतत्पतङ्गम् ।
मध्यं विषीदति बृहत्स्तनभारभीतं
शान्तेव द‍ृष्टिरमला सुशिखासमूह: ॥ ३६ ॥
naikatra te jayati śālini pāda-padmaṁ
ghnantyā muhuḥ kara-talena patat-pataṅgam
madhyaṁ viṣīdati bṛhat-stana-bhāra-bhītaṁ
śānteva dṛṣṭir amalā suśikhā-samūhaḥ
Synonyms
na — not; ekatra — in one place; te — your; jayati — stay; śālini — O beautiful woman; pāda-padmam — lotus feet; ghnantyāḥ — striking; muhuḥ — again and again; kara-talena — by the palm of the hand; patat — bouncing; pataṅgam — the ball; madhyam — waist; viṣīdati — gets fatigued; bṛhat — full grown; stana — of your breasts; bhāra — by the weight; bhītam — oppressed; śāntā iva — as if fatigued; dṛṣṭiḥ — vision; amalā — clear; su — beautiful; śikhā — your hair; samūhaḥ — bunch.

Translation
O beautiful woman, when you strike the bouncing ball against the ground with your hand again and again, your lotus feet do not stay in one place. Oppressed by the weight of your full-grown breasts, your waist becomes fatigued, and your clear vision grows dull, as it were. Pray braid your comely hair.

Text 37
इति सायन्तनीं सन्ध्यामसुरा: प्रमदायतीम् ।
प्रलोभयन्तीं जगृहुर्मत्वा मूढधिय: स्त्रियम् ॥ ३७ ॥
iti sāyantanīṁ sandhyām
asurāḥ pramadāyatīm
pralobhayantīṁ jagṛhur
matvā mūḍha-dhiyaḥ striyam
Synonyms
iti — in this way; sāyantanīm — the evening; sandhyām — twilight; asurāḥ — the demons; pramadāyatīm — behaving like a wanton woman; pralobhayantīm — alluring; jagṛhuḥ — seized; matvā — thinking to be; mūḍha-dhiyaḥ — unintelligent; striyam — a woman.

Translation
The asuras, clouded in their understanding, took the evening twilight to be a beautiful woman showing herself in her alluring form, and they seized her.

Text 38
प्रहस्य भावगम्भीरं जिघ्रन्त्यात्मानमात्मना ।
कान्त्या ससर्ज भगवान् गन्धर्वाप्सरसां गणान् ॥ ३८ ॥
prahasya bhāva-gambhīraṁ
jighrantyātmānam ātmanā
kāntyā sasarja bhagavān
gandharvāpsarasāṁ gaṇān
Synonyms
prahasya — smiling; bhāva-gambhīram — with a deep purpose; jighrantyā — understanding; ātmānam — himself; ātmanā — by himself; kāntyā — by his loveliness; sasarja — created; bhagavān — the worshipful Lord Brahmā; gandharva — the celestial musicians; apsarasām — and of the heavenly dancing girls; gaṇān — the hosts of.

Translation
With a laugh full of deep significance, the worshipful Brahmā then evolved by his own loveliness, which seemed to enjoy itself by itself, the hosts of Gandharvas and Apsarās.

Text 39
विससर्ज तनुं तां वैज्योत्‍स्‍नां कान्तिमतीं प्रियाम् ।
त एव चाददु: प्रीत्या विश्वावसुपुरोगमा: ॥ ३९ ॥
visasarja tanuṁ tāṁ vai
jyotsnāṁ kāntimatīṁ priyām
ta eva cādaduḥ prītyā
viśvāvasu-purogamāḥ
Synonyms
visasarja — gave up; tanum — form; tām — that; vai — in fact; jyotsnām — moonlight; kānti-matīm — shining; priyām — beloved; te — the Gandharvas; eva — certainly; ca — and; ādaduḥ — took possession; prītyā — gladly; viśvāvasu-puraḥ-gamāḥ — headed by Viśvāvasu.

Translation
After that, Brahmā gave up that shining and beloved form of moonlight. Viśvāvasu and other Gandharvas gladly took possession of it.

Text 40
सृष्ट्वा भूतपिशाचांश्च भगवानात्मतन्द्रिणा ।
दिग्वाससो मुक्तकेशान् वीक्ष्य चामीलयद् द‍ृशौ ॥ ४० ॥
sṛṣṭvā bhūta-piśācāṁś ca
bhagavān ātma-tandriṇā
dig-vāsaso mukta-keśān
vīkṣya cāmīlayad dṛśau
Synonyms
sṛṣṭvā — having created; bhūta — ghosts; piśācān — fiends; ca — and; bhagavān — Lord Brahmā; ātma — his; tandriṇā — from laziness; dik-vāsasaḥ — naked; mukta — disheveled; keśān — hair; vīkṣya — seeing; ca — and; amīlayat — closed; dṛśau — two eyes.

Translation
The glorious Brahmā next evolved from his sloth the ghosts and fiends, but he closed his eyes when he saw them stand naked with their hair scattered.

Text 41
जगृहुस्तद्विसृष्टां तां जृम्भणाख्यां तनुं प्रभो: ।
निद्रामिन्द्रियविक्लेदो यया भूतेषु द‍ृश्यते ।
येनोच्छिष्टान्धर्षयन्ति तमुन्मादं प्रचक्षते ॥ ४१ ॥
jagṛhus tad-visṛṣṭāṁ tāṁ
jṛmbhaṇākhyāṁ tanuṁ prabhoḥ
nidrām indriya-vikledo
yayā bhūteṣu dṛśyate
yenocchiṣṭān dharṣayanti
tam unmādaṁ pracakṣate
Synonyms
jagṛhuḥ — took possession; tat-visṛṣṭām — thrown off by him; tām — that; jṛmbhaṇa-ākhyām — known as yawning; tanum — the body; prabhoḥ — of Lord Brahmā; nidrām — sleep; indriya-vikledaḥ — drooling; yayā — by which; bhūteṣu — among the living beings; dṛśyate — is observed; yena — by which; ucchiṣṭān — smeared with stool and urine; dharṣayanti — bewilder; tam — that; unmādam — madness; pracakṣate — is spoken of.

Translation
The ghosts and hobgoblins took possession of the body thrown off in the form of yawning by Brahmā, the creator of the living entities. This is also known as the sleep which causes drooling. The hobgoblins and ghosts attack men who are impure, and their attack is spoken of as insanity.

Text 42
ऊर्जस्वन्तं मन्यमान आत्मानं भगवानज: ।
साध्यान् गणान् पितृगणान् परोक्षेणासृजत्प्रभु: ॥ ४२ ॥
ūrjasvantaṁ manyamāna
ātmānaṁ bhagavān ajaḥ
sādhyān gaṇān pitṛ-gaṇān
parokṣeṇāsṛjat prabhuḥ
Synonyms
ūrjaḥ-vantam — full of energy; manyamānaḥ — recognizing; ātmānam — himself; bhagavān — the most worshipful; ajaḥ — Brahmā; sādhyān — the demigods; gaṇān — hosts; pitṛ-gaṇān — and the Pitās; parokṣeṇa — from his invisible form; asṛjat — created; prabhuḥ — the lord of beings.

Translation
Recognizing himself to be full of desire and energy, the worshipful Brahmā, the creator of the living entities, evolved from his own invisible form, from his navel, the hosts of Sādhyas and Pitās.

Text 43
त आत्मसर्गं तं कायं पितर: प्रतिपेदिरे ।
साध्येभ्यश्च पितृभ्यश्च कवयो यद्वितन्वते ॥ ४३ ॥
ta ātma-sargaṁ taṁ kāyaṁ
pitaraḥ pratipedire
sādhyebhyaś ca pitṛbhyaś ca
kavayo yad vitanvate
Synonyms
te — they; ātma-sargam — source of their existence; tam — that; kāyam — body; pitaraḥ — the Pitās; pratipedire — accepted; sādhyebhyaḥ — to the Sādhyas; ca — and; pitṛbhyaḥ — to the Pitās; ca — also; kavayaḥ — those well versed in rituals; yat — through which; vitanvate — offer oblations.

Translation
The Pitās themselves took possession of the invisible body, the source of their existence. It is through the medium of this invisible body that those well versed in the rituals offer oblations to the Sādhyas and Pitās [in the form of their departed ancestors] on the occasion of śrāddha.

Text 44
सिद्धान् विद्याधरांश्चैव तिरोधानेन सोऽसृजत् ।
तेभ्योऽददात्तमात्मानमन्तर्धानाख्यमद्भुतम् ॥ ४४ ॥
siddhān vidyādharāṁś caiva
tirodhānena so ’sṛjat
tebhyo ’dadāt tam ātmānam
antardhānākhyam adbhutam
Synonyms
siddhān — the Siddhas; vidyādharān — Vidyādharas; ca eva — and also; tirodhānena — by the faculty of remaining hidden from vision; saḥ — Lord Brahmā; asṛjat — created; tebhyaḥ — to them; adadāt — gave; tam ātmānam — that form of his; antardhāna-ākhyam — known as the Antardhāna; adbhutam — wonderful.

Translation
Then Lord Brahmā, by his ability to be hidden from vision, created the Siddhas and Vidyādharas and gave them that wonderful form of his known as the Antardhāna.

Text 45
स किन्नरान किम्पुरुषान् प्रत्यात्म्येनासृजत्प्रभु: ।
मानयन्नात्मनात्मानमात्माभासं विलोकयन् ॥ ४५ ॥
sa kinnarān kimpuruṣān
pratyātmyenāsṛjat prabhuḥ
mānayann ātmanātmānam
ātmābhāsaṁ vilokayan
Synonyms
saḥ — Lord Brahmā; kinnarān — the Kinnaras; kimpuruṣān — the Kimpuruṣas; pratyātmyena — from his reflection (in water); asṛjat — created; prabhuḥ — the lord of the living beings (Brahmā); mānayan — admiring; ātmanā ātmānam — himself by himself; ātma-ābhāsam — his reflection; vilokayan — seeing.

Translation
One day, Brahmā, the creator of the living entities, beheld his own reflection in the water, and admiring himself, he evolved Kimpuruṣas as well as Kinnaras out of that reflection.

Text 46
ते तु तज्जगृहू रूपं त्यक्तं यत्परमेष्ठिना ।
मिथुनीभूय गायन्तस्तमेवोषसि कर्मभि: ॥ ४६ ॥
te tu taj jagṛhū rūpaṁ
tyaktaṁ yat parameṣṭhinā
mithunī-bhūya gāyantas
tam evoṣasi karmabhiḥ
Synonyms
te — they (the Kinnaras and Kimpuruṣas); tu — but; tat — that; jagṛhuḥ — took possession of; rūpam — that shadowy form; tyaktam — given up; yat — which; parameṣṭhinā — by Brahmā; mithunī-bhūya — coming together with their spouses; gāyantaḥ — praise in song; tam — him; eva — only; uṣasi — at daybreak; karmabhiḥ — with his exploits.

Translation
The Kimpuruṣas and Kinnaras took possession of that shadowy form left by Brahmā. That is why they and their spouses sing his praises by recounting his exploits at every daybreak.

Text 47
देहेन वै भोगवता शयानो बहुचिन्तया ।
सर्गेऽनुपचिते क्रोधादुत्ससर्ज ह तद्वपु: ॥ ४७ ॥
dehena vai bhogavatā
śayāno bahu-cintayā
sarge ’nupacite krodhād
utsasarja ha tad vapuḥ
Synonyms
dehena — with his body; vai — indeed; bhogavatā — stretching out full length; śayānaḥ — lying fully stretched; bahu — great; cintayā — with concern; sarge — the creation; anupacite — not proceeded; krodhāt — out of anger; utsasarja — gave up; ha — in fact; tat — that; vapuḥ — body.

Translation
Once Brahmā lay down with his body stretched at full length. He was very concerned that the work of creation had not proceeded apace, and in a sullen mood he gave up that body too.

Text 48
येऽहीयन्तामुत: केशा अहयस्तेऽङ्ग जज्ञिरे ।
सर्पा: प्रसर्पत: क्रूरा नागा भोगोरुकन्धरा: ॥ ४८ ॥
ye ’hīyantāmutaḥ keśā
ahayas te ’ṅga jajñire
sarpāḥ prasarpataḥ krūrā
nāgā bhogoru-kandharāḥ
Synonyms
ye — which; ahīyanta — dropped out; amutaḥ — from that; keśāḥ — hairs; ahayaḥ — snakes; te — they; aṅga — O dear Vidura; jajñire — took birth as; sarpāḥ — snakes; prasarpataḥ — from the crawling body; krūrāḥ — envious; nāgāḥ — cobras; bhoga — with hoods; uru — big; kandharāḥ — whose necks.

Translation
O dear Vidura, the hair that dropped from that body transformed into snakes, and even while the body crawled along with its hands and feet contracted, there sprang from it ferocious serpents and Nāgas with their hoods expanded.

Text 49
स आत्मान् मन्यमान: कृतकृत्यमिवात्मभू: ।
तदा मनून् ससर्जान्ते मनसा लोकभावनान् ॥ ४९ ॥
sa ātmānaṁ manyamānaḥ
kṛta-kṛtyam ivātmabhūḥ
tadā manūn sasarjānte
manasā loka-bhāvanān
Synonyms
saḥ — Lord Brahmā; ātmānam — himself; manyamānaḥ — considering; kṛta-kṛtyam — had accomplished the object of life; iva — as if; ātmabhūḥ — born from the Supreme; tadā — then; manūn — the Manus; sasarja — created; ante — at the end; manasā — from his mind; loka — of the world; bhāvanān — promoting the welfare.

Translation
One day Brahmā, the self-born, the first living creature, felt as if the object of his life had been accomplished. At that time he evolved from his mind the Manus, who promote the welfare activities of the universe.

Text 50
तेभ्य: सोऽसृजत्स्वीयं पुरं पुरुषमात्मवान् ।
तान् दृष्ट्वा ये पुरा सृष्टा: प्रशशंसु: प्रजापतिम् ॥ ५० ॥
tebhyaḥ so ’sṛjat svīyaṁ
puraṁ puruṣam ātmavān
tān dṛṣṭvā ye purā sṛṣṭāḥ
praśaśaṁsuḥ prajāpatim
Synonyms
tebhyaḥ — to them; saḥ — Lord Brahmā; asṛjat — gave; svīyam — his own; puram — body; puruṣam — human; ātma-vān — self-possessed; tān — them; dṛṣṭvā — on seeing; ye — those who; purā — earlier; sṛṣṭāḥ — were created (the demigods, Gandharvas, etc., who were created earlier); praśaśaṁsuḥ — applauded; prajāpatim — Brahmā (the lord of created beings).

Translation
The self-possessed creator gave them his own human form. On seeing the Manus, those who had been created earlier — the demigods, the Gandharvas and so on — applauded Brahmā, the lord of the universe.

Text 51
अहो एतज्जगत्स्रष्ट: सुकृतं बत ते कृतम् ।
प्रतिष्ठिता: क्रिया यस्मिन् साकमन्नमदामहे ॥ ५१ ॥
aho etaj jagat-sraṣṭaḥ
sukṛtaṁ bata te kṛtam
pratiṣṭhitāḥ kriyā yasmin
sākam annam adāma he
Synonyms
aho — oh; etat — this; jagat-sraṣṭaḥ — O creator of the universe; sukṛtam — well done; bata — indeed; te — by you; kṛtam — produced; pratiṣṭhitāḥ — established soundly; kriyāḥ — all ritualistic performances; yasmin — in which; sākam — along with this; annam — the sacrificial oblations; adāma — we shall share; he — O.

Translation
They prayed: O creator of the universe, we are glad; what you have produced is well done. Since ritualistic acts have now been established soundly in this human form, we shall all share the sacrificial oblations.

Text 52
तपसा विद्यया युक्तो योगेन सुसमाधिना ।
ऋषीनृषिर्हृषीकेश: ससर्जाभिमता: प्रजा: ॥ ५२ ॥
tapasā vidyayā yukto
yogena susamādhinā
ṛṣīn ṛṣir hṛṣīkeśaḥ
sasarjābhimatāḥ prajāḥ
Synonyms
tapasā — by penance; vidyayā — by worship; yuktaḥ — being engaged; yogena — by concentration of the mind in devotion; su-samādhinā — by nice meditation; ṛṣīn — the sages; ṛṣiḥ — the first seer (Brahmā); hṛṣīkeśaḥ — the controller of his senses; sasarja — created; abhimatāḥ — beloved; prajāḥ — sons.

Translation
Having equipped himself with austere penance, adoration, mental concentration and absorption in devotion, accompanied by dispassion, and having controlled his senses, Brahmā, the self-born living creature, evolved great sages as his beloved sons.

Text 53
तेभ्यश्चैकैकश: स्वस्य देहस्यांशमदादज: ।
यत्तत्समाधियोगर्द्धितपोविद्याविरक्तिमत् ॥ ५३ ॥
tebhyaś caikaikaśaḥ svasya
dehasyāṁśam adād ajaḥ
yat tat samādhi-yogarddhi-
tapo-vidyā-viraktimat
Synonyms
tebhyaḥ — to them; ca — and; ekaikaśaḥ — each one; svasya — of his own; dehasya — body; aṁśam — part; adāt — gave; ajaḥ — the unborn Brahmā; yat — which; tat — that; samādhi — deep meditation; yoga — concentration of the mind; ṛddhi — supernatural power; tapaḥ — austerity; vidyā — knowledge; virakti — renunciation; mat — possessing.

Translation
To each one of these sons the unborn creator of the universe gave a part of his own body, which was characterized by deep meditation, mental concentration, supernatural power, austerity, adoration and renunciation.