Text 1
विदुर उवाच
स्वायम्भुवस्य च मनोर्वंश: परमसम्मत: ।
कथ्यतां भगवन् यत्र मैथुनेनैधिरे प्रजा: ॥ १ ॥
vidura uvāca
svāyambhuvasya ca manor
vaṁśaḥ parama-sammataḥ
kathyatāṁ bhagavan yatra
maithunenaidhire prajāḥ
Synonyms
viduraḥ uvāca — Vidura said; svāyambhuvasya — of Svāyambhuva; ca — and; manoḥ — of Manu; vaṁśaḥ — the dynasty; parama — most; sammataḥ — esteemed; kathyatām — kindly describe; bhagavan — O worshipful sage; yatra — in which; maithunena — through sexual intercourse; edhire — multiplied; prajāḥ — the progeny.

Translation
Vidura said: The line of Svāyambhuva Manu was most esteemed. O worshipful sage, I beg you: Give me an account of this race, whose progeny multiplied through sexual intercourse.

Text 2
प्रियव्रतोत्तानपादौ सुतौ स्वायम्भुवस्य वै ।
यथाधर्मं जुगुपतु: सप्तद्वीपवतीं महीम् ॥ २ ॥
priyavratottānapādau
sutau svāyambhuvasya vai
yathā-dharmaṁ jugupatuḥ
sapta-dvīpavatīṁ mahīm
Synonyms
priyavrata — Mahārāja Priyavrata; uttānapādau — and Mahārāja Uttānapāda; sutau — the two sons; svāyambhuvasya — of Svāyambhuva Manu; vai — indeed; yathā — according to; dharmam — religious principles; jugupatuḥ — ruled; sapta-dvīpa-vatīm — consisting of seven islands; mahīm — the world.

Translation
The two great sons of Svāyambhuva Manu — Priyavrata and Uttānapāda — ruled the world, consisting of seven islands, just according to religious principles.

Text 3
तस्य वै दुहिता ब्रह्मन्देवहूतीति विश्रुता ।
पत्नी प्रजापतेरुक्ता कर्दमस्य त्वयानघ ॥ ३ ॥
tasya vai duhitā brahman
devahūtīti viśrutā
patnī prajāpater uktā
kardamasya tvayānagha
Synonyms
tasya — of that Manu; vai — indeed; duhitā — the daughter; brahman — O holy brāhmaṇa; devahūti — named Devahūti; iti — thus; viśrutā — was known; patnī — wife; prajāpateḥ — of the lord of created beings; uktā — has been spoken of; kardamasya — of Kardama Muni; tvayā — by you; anagha — O sinless one.

Translation
O holy brāhmaṇa, O sinless one, you have spoken of his daughter, known by the name Devahūti, as the wife of the sage Kardama, the lord of created beings.

Text 4
तस्यां स वै महायोगी युक्तायां योगलक्षणै: ।
ससर्ज कतिधा वीर्यं तन्मे शुश्रूषवे वद ॥ ४ ॥
tasyāṁ sa vai mahā-yogī
yuktāyāṁ yoga-lakṣaṇaiḥ
sasarja katidhā vīryaṁ
tan me śuśrūṣave vada
Synonyms
tasyām — in her; saḥ — Kardama Muni; vai — in fact; mahā-yogī — great mystic yogī; yuktāyām — endowed; yoga-lakṣaṇaiḥ — with the eightfold symptoms of yogic perfection; sasarja — propagated; katidhā — how many times; vīryam — offspring; tat — that narration; me — to me; śuśrūṣave — who am eager to hear; vada — tell.

Translation
How many offspring did that great yogī beget through the princess, who was endowed with eightfold perfection in the yoga principles? Oh, pray tell me this, for I am eager to hear it.

Text 5
रुचिर्यो भगवान् ब्रह्मन्दक्षो वा ब्रह्मण: सुत: ।
यथा ससर्ज भूतानि लब्ध्वा भार्यां च मानवीम् ॥ ५ ॥
rucir yo bhagavān brahman
dakṣo vā brahmaṇaḥ sutaḥ
yathā sasarja bhūtāni
labdhvā bhāryāṁ ca mānavīm
Synonyms
ruciḥ — Ruci; yaḥ — who; bhagavān — worshipful; brahman — O holy sage; dakṣaḥ — Dakṣa; vā — and; brahmaṇaḥ — of Lord Brahmā; sutaḥ — the son; yathā — in what way; sasarja — generated; bhūtāni — offspring; labdhvā — after securing; bhāryām — as their wives; ca — and; mānavīm — the daughters of Svāyambhuva Manu.

Translation
O holy sage, tell me how the worshipful Ruci and Dakṣa, the son of Brahmā, generated children after securing as their wives the other two daughters of Svāyambhuva Manu.

Text 6
मैत्रेय उवाच
प्रजा: सृजेति भगवान् कर्दमो ब्रह्मणोदित: ।
सरस्वत्यां तपस्तेपे सहस्राणां समा दश ॥ ६ ॥
maitreya uvāca
prajāḥ sṛjeti bhagavān
kardamo brahmaṇoditaḥ
sarasvatyāṁ tapas tepe
sahasrāṇāṁ samā daśa
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya said; prajāḥ — children; sṛja — beget; iti — thus; bhagavān — the worshipful; kardamaḥ — Kardama Muni; brahmaṇā — by Lord Brahmā; uditaḥ — commanded; sarasvatyām — on the bank of the river Sarasvatī; tapaḥ — penance; tepe — practiced; sahasrāṇām — of thousands; samāḥ — years; daśa — ten.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya replied: Commanded by Lord Brahmā to beget children in the worlds, the worshipful Kardama Muni practiced penance on the bank of the river Sarasvatī for a period of ten thousand years.

Text 7
तत: समाधियुक्तेन क्रियायोगेन कर्दम: ।
सम्प्रपेदे हरिं भक्त्या प्रपन्नवरदाशुषम् ॥ ७ ॥
tataḥ samādhi-yuktena
kriyā-yogena kardamaḥ
samprapede hariṁ bhaktyā
prapanna-varadāśuṣam
Synonyms
tataḥ — then, in that penance; samādhi-yuktena — in trance; kriyā-yogena — by bhakti-yoga worship; kardamaḥ — the sage Kardama; samprapede — served; harim — the Personality of Godhead; bhaktyā — in devotional service; prapanna — to the surrendered souls; varadāśuṣam — the bestower of all blessings.

Translation
During that period of penance, the sage Kardama, by worship through devotional service in trance, propitiated the Personality of Godhead, who is the quick bestower of all blessings upon those who flee to Him for protection.

Text 8
तावत्प्रसन्नो भगवान् पुष्कराक्ष: कृते युगे ।
दर्शयामास तं क्षत्त: शाब्दं ब्रह्म दधद्वपु: ॥ ८ ॥
tāvat prasanno bhagavān
puṣkarākṣaḥ kṛte yuge
darśayām āsa taṁ kṣattaḥ
śābdaṁ brahma dadhad vapuḥ
Synonyms
tāvat — then; prasannaḥ — being pleased; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puṣkara-akṣaḥ — lotus-eyed; kṛte yuge — in the Satya-yuga; darśayām āsa — showed; tam — to that Kardama Muni; kṣattaḥ — O Vidura; śābdam — which is to be understood only through the Vedas; brahma — the Absolute Truth; dadhat — exhibiting; vapuḥ — His transcendental body.

Translation
Then, in the Satya-yuga, the lotus-eyed Supreme Personality of Godhead, being pleased, showed Himself to that Kardama Muni and displayed His transcendental form, which can be understood only through the Vedas.

Text 9
स तं विरजमर्काभं सितपद्मोत्पलस्रजम् ।
स्‍निग्धनीलालकव्रातवक्त्राब्जं विरजोऽम्बरम् ॥ ९ ॥
sa taṁ virajam arkābhaṁ
sita-padmotpala-srajam
snigdha-nīlālaka-vrāta-
vaktrābjaṁ virajo ’mbaram
Synonyms
saḥ — that Kardama Muni; tam — Him; virajam — without contamination; arka-ābham — effulgent like the sun; sita — white; padma — lotuses; utpala — water lilies; srajam — garland; snigdha — slick; nīla — blackish-blue; alaka — of locks of hair; vrāta — an abundance; vaktra — face; abjam — lotuslike; virajaḥ — spotless; ambaram — clothing.

Translation
Kardama Muni saw the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is free from material contamination, in His eternal form, effulgent like the sun, wearing a garland of white lotuses and water lilies. The Lord was clad in spotless yellow silk, and His lotus face was fringed with slick dark locks of curly hair.

Text 10
किरीटिनं कुण्डलिनं शङ्खचक्रगदाधरम् ।
श्वेतोत्पलक्रीडनकं मन:स्पर्शस्मितेक्षणम् ॥ १० ॥
kirīṭinaṁ kuṇḍalinaṁ
śaṅkha-cakra-gadā-dharam
śvetotpala-krīḍanakaṁ
manaḥ-sparśa-smitekṣaṇam
Synonyms
kirīṭinam — adorned with a crown; kuṇḍalinam — wearing earrings; śaṅkha — conch; cakra — disc; gadā — mace; dharam — holding; śveta — white; utpala — lily; krīḍanakam — plaything; manaḥ — heart; sparśa — touching; smita — smiling; īkṣaṇam — and glancing.

Translation
Adorned with a crown and earrings, He held His characteristic conch, disc and mace in three of His hands and a white lily in the fourth. He glanced about in a happy, smiling mood whose sight captivates the hearts of all devotees.

Text 11
विन्यस्तचरणाम्भोजमंसदेशे गरुत्मत: ।
दृष्ट्वा खेऽवस्थितं वक्ष:श्रियं कौस्तुभकन्धरम् ॥ ११ ॥
vinyasta-caraṇāmbhojam
aṁsa-deśe garutmataḥ
dṛṣṭvā khe ’vasthitaṁ vakṣaḥ-
śriyaṁ kaustubha-kandharam
Synonyms
vinyasta — having been placed; caraṇa-ambhojam — lotus feet; aṁsa-deśe — on the shoulders; garutmataḥ — of Garuḍa; dṛṣṭvā — having seen; khe — in the air; avasthitam — standing; vakṣaḥ — on His chest; śriyam — auspicious mark; kaustubha — the Kaustubha gem; kandharam — neck.

Translation
A golden streak on His chest, the famous Kaustubha gem suspended from His neck, He stood in the air with His lotus feet placed on the shoulders of Garuḍa.

Text 12
जातहर्षोऽपतन्मूर्ध्ना क्षितौ लब्धमनोरथ: ।
गीर्भिस्त्वभ्यगृणात्प्रीतिस्वभावात्मा कृताञ्जलि: ॥ १२ ॥
jāta-harṣo ’patan mūrdhnā
kṣitau labdha-manorathaḥ
gīrbhis tv abhyagṛṇāt prīti-
svabhāvātmā kṛtāñjaliḥ
Synonyms
jāta-harṣaḥ — naturally jubilant; apatat — he fell down; mūrdhnā — with his head; kṣitau — on the ground; labdha — having been achieved; manaḥ-rathaḥ — his desire; gīrbhiḥ — with prayers; tu — and; abhyagṛṇāt — he satisfied; prīti-svabhāva-ātmā — whose heart is by nature always full of love; kṛta-añjaliḥ — with folded hands.

Translation
When Kardama Muni actually realized the Supreme Personality of Godhead in person, he was greatly satisfied because his transcendental desire was fulfilled. He fell on the ground with his head bowed to offer obeisances unto the lotus feet of the Lord. His heart naturally full of love of God, with folded hands he satisfied the Lord with prayers.

Text 13
ऋषिरुवाच
जुष्टं बताद्याखिलसत्त्वराशे:
सांसिद्ध्यमक्ष्णोस्तव दर्शनान्न: ।
यद्दर्शनं जन्मभिरीड्य सद्‌भि-
राशासते योगिनो रूढयोगा: ॥ १३ ॥
ṛṣir uvāca
juṣṭaṁ batādyākhila-sattva-rāśeḥ
sāṁsiddhyam akṣṇos tava darśanān naḥ
yad-darśanaṁ janmabhir īḍya sadbhir
āśāsate yogino rūḍha-yogāḥ
Synonyms
ṛṣiḥ uvāca — the great sage said; juṣṭam — is attained; bata — ah; adya — now; akhila — all; sattva — of goodness; rāśeḥ — who are the reservoir; sāṁsiddhyam — the complete success; akṣṇoḥ — of the two eyes; tava — of You; darśanāt — from the sight; naḥ — by us; yat — of whom; darśanam — sight; janmabhiḥ — through births; īḍya — O worshipable Lord; sadbhiḥ — gradually elevated in position; āśāsate — aspire; yoginaḥ — yogīs; rūḍha-yogāḥ — having obtained perfection in yoga.

Translation
The great sage Kardama said: O supreme worshipful Lord, my power of sight is now fulfilled, having attained the greatest perfection of the sight of You, who are the reservoir of all existences. Through many successive births of deep meditation, advanced yogīs aspire to see Your transcendental form.

Text 14
ये मायया ते हतमेधसस्त्वत्-
पादारविन्दं भवसिन्धुपोतम् ।
उपासते कामलवाय तेषां
रासीश कामान्निरयेऽपि ये स्यु: ॥ १४ ॥
ye māyayā te hata-medhasas tvat-
pādāravindaṁ bhava-sindhu-potam
upāsate kāma-lavāya teṣāṁ
rāsīśa kāmān niraye ’pi ye syuḥ
Synonyms
ye — those persons; māyayā — by the deluding energy; te — of You; hata — has been lost; medhasaḥ — whose intelligence; tvat — Your; pāda-aravindam — lotus feet; bhava — of mundane existence; sindhu — the ocean; potam — the boat for crossing; upāsate — worship; kāma-lavāya — for obtaining trivial pleasures; teṣām — their; rāsi — You bestow; īśa — O Lord; kāmān — desires; niraye — in hell; api — even; ye — which desires; syuḥ — can be available.

Translation
Your lotus feet are the true vessel to take one across the ocean of mundane nescience. Only persons deprived of their intelligence by the spell of the deluding energy will worship those feet with a view to attain the trivial and momentary pleasures of the senses, which even persons rotting in hell can attain. However, O my Lord, You are so kind that You bestow mercy even upon them.

Text 15
तथा स चाहं परिवोढुकाम:
समानशीलां गृहमेधधेनुम् ।
उपेयिवान्मूलमशेषमूलं
दुराशय: कामदुघाङ्‌घ्रिपस्य ॥ १५ ॥
tathā sa cāhaṁ parivoḍhu-kāmaḥ
samāna-śīlāṁ gṛhamedha-dhenum
upeyivān mūlam aśeṣa-mūlaṁ
durāśayaḥ kāma-dughāṅghripasya
Synonyms
tathā — similarly; saḥ — myself; ca — also; aham — I; parivoḍhu-kāmaḥ — desiring to marry; samāna-śīlām — a girl of like disposition; gṛha-medha — in married life; dhenum — a cow of plenty; upeyivān — have approached; mūlam — the root (lotus feet); aśeṣa — of everything; mūlam — the source; durāśayaḥ — with lustful desire; kāma-dugha — yielding all desires; aṅghripasya — (of You) who are the tree.

Translation
Therefore, desiring to marry a girl of like disposition who may prove to be a veritable cow of plenty in my married life, to satisfy my lustful desire I too have sought the shelter of Your lotus feet, which are the source of everything, for You are like a desire tree.

Text 16
प्रजापतेस्ते वचसाधीश तन्त्या
लोक: किलायं कामहतोऽनुबद्ध: ।
अहं च लोकानुगतो वहामि
बलिं च शुक्लानिमिषाय तुभ्यम् ॥ १६ ॥
prajāpates te vacasādhīśa tantyā
lokaḥ kilāyaṁ kāma-hato ’nubaddhaḥ
ahaṁ ca lokānugato vahāmi
baliṁ ca śuklānimiṣāya tubhyam
Synonyms
prajāpateḥ — who are the master of all living entities; te — of You; vacasā — under the direction; adhīśa — O my Lord; tantyā — by a rope; lokaḥ — conditioned souls; kila — indeed; ayam — these; kāma-hataḥ — conquered by lusty desires; anubaddhaḥ — are bound; aham — I; ca — and; loka-anugataḥ — following the conditioned souls; vahāmi — offer; balim — oblations; ca — and; śukla — O embodiment of religion; animiṣāya — existing as eternal time; tubhyam — to You.

Translation
O my Lord, You are the master and leader of all living entities. Under Your direction, all conditioned souls, as if bound by rope, are constantly engaged in satisfying their desires. Following them, O embodiment of religion, I also bear oblations for You, who are eternal time.

Text 17
लोकांश्च लोकानुगतान् पशूंश्च
हित्वा श्रितास्ते चरणातपत्रम् ।
परस्परं त्वद्गुणवादसीधु-
पीयूषनिर्यापितदेहधर्मा: ॥ १७ ॥
lokāṁś ca lokānugatān paśūṁś ca
hitvā śritās te caraṇātapatram
parasparaṁ tvad-guṇa-vāda-sīdhu-
pīyūṣa-niryāpita-deha-dharmāḥ
Synonyms
lokān — worldly affairs; ca — and; loka-anugatān — the followers of worldly affairs; paśūn — beastly; ca — and; hitvā — having given up; śritāḥ — taken shelter; te — Your; caraṇa — of lotus feet; ātapatram — the umbrella; parasparam — with one another; tvat — Your; guṇa — of qualities; vāda — by discussion; sīdhu — intoxicating; pīyūṣa — by the nectar; niryāpita — extinguished; deha-dharmāḥ — the primary necessities of the body.

Translation
However, persons who have given up stereotyped worldly affairs and the beastly followers of these affairs, and who have taken shelter of the umbrella of Your lotus feet by drinking the intoxicating nectar of Your qualities and activities in discussions with one another, can be freed from the primary necessities of the material body.

Text 18
न तेऽजराक्षभ्रमिरायुरेषां
त्रयोदशारं त्रिशतं षष्टिपर्व ।
षण्नेम्यनन्तच्छदि यत्‍त्रिणाभि
करालस्रोतो जगदाच्छिद्य धावत् ॥ १८ ॥
na te ’jarākṣa-bhramir āyur eṣāṁ
trayodaśāraṁ tri-śataṁ ṣaṣṭi-parva
ṣaṇ-nemy ananta-cchadi yat tri-ṇābhi
karāla-sroto jagad ācchidya dhāvat
Synonyms
na — not; te — Your; ajara — of imperishable Brahman; akṣa — on the axle; bhramiḥ — rotating; āyuḥ — span of life; eṣām — of the devotees; trayodaśa — thirteen; aram — spokes; tri-śatam — three hundred; ṣaṣṭi — sixty; parva — functions; ṣaṭ — six; nemi — rims; ananta — innumerable; chadi — leaves; yat — which; tri — three; nābhi — naves; karāla-srotaḥ — with tremendous velocity; jagat — the universe; ācchidya — cutting short; dhāvat — running.

Translation
Your wheel, which has three naves, rotates around the axis of the imperishable Brahman. It has thirteen spokes, 360 joints, six rims and numberless leaves carved upon it. Though its revolution cuts short the life span of the entire creation, this wheel of tremendous velocity cannot touch the life span of the devotees of the Lord.

Text 19
एक: स्वयं सञ्जगत: सिसृक्षया-
द्वितीययात्मन्नधियोगमायया ।
सृजस्यद: पासि पुनर्ग्रसिष्यसे
यथोर्णनाभिर्भगवन् स्वशक्तिभि: ॥ १९ ॥
ekaḥ svayaṁ sañ jagataḥ sisṛkṣayā-
dvitīyayātmann adhi-yogamāyayā
sṛjasy adaḥ pāsi punar grasiṣyase
yathorṇa-nābhir bhagavan sva-śaktibhiḥ
Synonyms
ekaḥ — one; svayam — Yourself; san — being; jagataḥ — the universes; sisṛkṣayā — with a desire to create; advitīyayā — without a second; ātman — in Yourself; adhi — controlling; yoga-māyayā — by yoga-māyā; sṛjasi — You create; adaḥ — those universes; pāsi — You maintain; punaḥ — again; grasiṣyase — You will wind up; yathā — like; ūrṇa-nābhiḥ — a spider; bhagavan — O Lord; sva-śaktibhiḥ — by its own energy.

Translation
My dear Lord, You alone create the universes. O Personality of Godhead, desiring to create these universes, You create them, maintain them and again wind them up by Your own energies, which are under the control of Your second energy, called yoga-māyā, just as a spider creates a cobweb by its own energy and again winds it up.

Text 20
नैतद्बताधीश पदं तवेप्सितं
यन्मायया नस्तनुषे भूतसूक्ष्मम् ।
अनुग्रहायास्त्वपि यर्ही मायया
लसत्तुलस्या भगवान् विलक्षित: ॥ २० ॥
naitad batādhīśa padaṁ tavepsitaṁ
yan māyayā nas tanuṣe bhūta-sūkṣmam
anugrahāyāstv api yarhi māyayā
lasat-tulasyā bhagavān vilakṣitaḥ
Synonyms
na — not; etat — this; bata — indeed; adhīśa — O Lord; padam — material world; tava — Your; īpsitam — desire; yat — which; māyayā — by Your external energy; naḥ — for us; tanuṣe — You manifest; bhūta-sūkṣmam — the elements, gross and subtle; anugrahāya — for bestowing mercy; astu — let it be; api — also; yarhi — when; māyayā — through Your causeless mercy; lasat — splendid; tulasyā — with a wreath of tulasī leaves; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vilakṣitaḥ — is perceived.

Translation
My dear Lord, although it is not Your desire, You manifest this creation of gross and subtle elements just for our sensual satisfaction. Let Your causeless mercy be upon us, for You have appeared before us in Your eternal form, adorned with a splendid wreath of tulasī leaves.

Text 21
तं त्वानुभूत्योपरतक्रियार्थं
स्वमायया वर्तितलोकतन्त्रम् ।
नमाम्यभीक्ष्णं नमनीयपाद-
सरोजमल्पीयसि कामवर्षम् ॥ २१ ॥
taṁ tvānubhūtyoparata-kriyārthaṁ
sva-māyayā vartita-loka-tantram
namāmy abhīkṣṇaṁ namanīya-pāda-
sarojam alpīyasi kāma-varṣam
Synonyms
tam — that; tvā — You; anubhūtyā — by realizing; uparata — disregarded; kriyā — enjoyment of fruitive activities; artham — in order that; sva-māyayā — by Your own energy; vartita — brought about; loka-tantram — the material worlds; namāmi — I offer obeisances; abhīkṣṇam — continuously; namanīya — worshipable; pāda-sarojam — lotus feet; alpīyasi — on the insignificant; kāma — desires; varṣam — showering.

Translation
I continuously offer my respectful obeisances unto Your lotus feet, of which it is worthy to take shelter, because You shower all benedictions on the insignificant. To give all living entities detachment from fruitive activity by realizing You, You have expanded these material worlds by Your own energy.

Text 22
ऋषिरुवाच
इत्यव्यलीकं प्रणुतोऽब्जनाभ-
स्तमाबभाषे वचसामृतेन ।
सुपर्णपक्षोपरि रोचमान:
प्रेमस्मितोद्वीक्षणविभ्रमद्भ्रू: ॥ २२ ॥
ṛṣir uvāca
ity avyalīkaṁ praṇuto ’bja-nābhas
tam ābabhāṣe vacasāmṛtena
suparṇa-pakṣopari rocamānaḥ
prema-smitodvīkṣaṇa-vibhramad-bhrūḥ
Synonyms
ṛṣiḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya said; iti — thus; avyalīkam — sincerely; praṇutaḥ — having been praised; abja-nābhaḥ — Lord Viṣṇu; tam — to Kardama Muni; ābabhāṣe — replied; vacasā — with words; amṛtena — as sweet as nectar; suparṇa — of Garuḍa; pakṣa — the shoulders; upari — upon; rocamānaḥ — shining; prema — of affection; smita — with a smile; udvīkṣaṇa — looking; vibhramat — gracefully moving; bhrūḥ — eyebrows.

Translation
Maitreya resumed: Sincerely extolled in these words, Lord Viṣṇu, shining very beautifully on the shoulders of Garuḍa, replied with words as sweet as nectar. His eyebrows moved gracefully as He looked at the sage with a smile full of affection.

Text 23
श्रीभगवानुवाच
विदित्वा तव चैत्यं मे पुरैव समयोजि तत् ।
यदर्थमात्मनियमैस्त्वयैवाहं समर्चित: ॥ २३ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
viditvā tava caityaṁ me
puraiva samayoji tat
yad-artham ātma-niyamais
tvayaivāhaṁ samarcitaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Lord said; viditvā — understanding; tava — your; caityam — mental condition; me — by Me; purā — previously; eva — certainly; samayoji — was arranged; tat — that; yat-artham — for the sake of which; ātma — of the mind and senses; niyamaiḥ — by discipline; tvayā — by you; eva — only; aham — I; samarcitaḥ — have been worshiped.

Translation
The Supreme Lord said: Having come to know what was in your mind, I have already arranged for that for which you have worshiped Me well through your mental and sensory discipline.

Text 24
न वै जातु मृषैव स्यात्प्रजाध्यक्ष मदर्हणम् ।
भवद्विधेष्वतितरां मयि संगृभितात्मनाम् ॥ २४ ॥
na vai jātu mṛṣaiva syāt
prajādhyakṣa mad-arhaṇam
bhavad-vidheṣv atitarāṁ
mayi saṅgṛbhitātmanām
Synonyms
na — not; vai — indeed; jātu — ever; mṛṣā — useless; eva — only; syāt — it may be; prajā — of the living entities; adhyakṣa — O leader; mat-arhaṇam — worship of Me; bhavat-vidheṣu — unto persons like you; atitarām — entirely; mayi — on Me; saṅgṛbhita — are fixed; ātmanām — of those whose minds.

Translation
The Lord continued: My dear ṛṣi, O leader of the living entities, for those who serve Me in devotion by worshiping Me, especially persons like you who have given up everything unto Me, there is never any question of frustration.

Text 25
प्रजापतिसुत: सम्राण्मनुर्विख्यातमङ्गल: ।
ब्रह्मावर्तं योऽधिवसन् शास्ति सप्तार्णवां महीम् ॥ २५ ॥
prajāpati-sutaḥ samrāṇ
manur vikhyāta-maṅgalaḥ
brahmāvartaṁ yo ’dhivasan
śāsti saptārṇavāṁ mahīm
Synonyms
prajāpati-sutaḥ — the son of Lord Brahmā; samrāṭ — the Emperor; manuḥ — Svāyambhuva Manu; vikhyāta — well known; maṅgalaḥ — whose righteous acts; brahmāvartam — Brahmāvarta; yaḥ — he who; adhivasan — living in; śāsti — rules; sapta — seven; arṇavām — oceans; mahīm — the earth.

Translation
The Emperor Svāyambhuva Manu, the son of Lord Brahmā, who is well known for his righteous acts, has his seat in Brahmāvarta and rules over the earth with its seven oceans.

Text 26
स चेह विप्र राजर्षिर्महिष्या शतरूपया ।
आयास्यति दिद‍ृक्षुस्त्वां परश्वो धर्मकोविद: ॥ २६ ॥
sa ceha vipra rājarṣir
mahiṣyā śatarūpayā
āyāsyati didṛkṣus tvāṁ
paraśvo dharma-kovidaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — Svāyambhuva Manu; ca — and; iha — here; vipra — O holy brāhmaṇa; rāja-ṛṣiḥ — the saintly king; mahiṣyā — along with his queen; śatarūpayā — called Śatarūpā; āyāsyati — will come; didṛkṣuḥ — desiring to see; tvām — you; paraśvaḥ — the day after tomorrow; dharma — in religious activities; kovidaḥ — expert.

Translation
The day after tomorrow, O brāhmaṇa, that celebrated emperor, who is expert in religious activities, will come here with his queen, Śatarūpā, wishing to see you.

Text 27
आत्मजामसितापाङ्गीं वय:शीलगुणान्विताम् ।
मृगयन्तीं पतिं दास्यत्यनुरूपाय ते प्रभो ॥ २७ ॥
ātmajām asitāpāṅgīṁ
vayaḥ-śīla-guṇānvitām
mṛgayantīṁ patiṁ dāsyaty
anurūpāya te prabho
Synonyms
ātma-jām — his own daughter; asita — black; apāṅgīm — eyes; vayaḥ — grown-up age; śīla — with character; guṇa — with good qualities; anvitām — endowed; mṛgayantīm — searching for; patim — a husband; dāsyati — he will give; anurūpāya — who are suitable; te — unto you; prabho — My dear sir.

Translation
He has a grown-up daughter whose eyes are black. She is ready for marriage, and she has good character and all good qualities. She is also searching for a good husband. My dear sir, her parents will come to see you, who are exactly suitable for her, just to deliver their daughter as your wife.

Text 28
समाहितं ते हृदयं यत्रेमान् परिवत्सरान् ।
सा त्वां ब्रह्मन्नृपवधू: काममाशु भजिष्यति ॥ २८ ॥
samāhitaṁ te hṛdayaṁ
yatremān parivatsarān
sā tvāṁ brahman nṛpa-vadhūḥ
kāmam āśu bhajiṣyati
Synonyms
samāhitam — has been fixed; te — your; hṛdayam — heart; yatra — on whom; imān — for all these; parivatsarān — years; sā — she; tvām — you; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; nṛpa-vadhūḥ — the princess; kāmam — as you desire; āśu — very soon; bhajiṣyati — will serve.

Translation
That princess, O holy sage, will be just the type you have been thinking of in your heart for all these long years. She will soon be yours and will serve you to your heart’s content.

Text 29
या त आत्मभृतं वीर्यं नवधा प्रसविष्यति ।
वीर्ये त्वदीये ऋषय आधास्यन्त्यञ्जसात्मन: ॥ २९ ॥
yā ta ātma-bhṛtaṁ vīryaṁ
navadhā prasaviṣyati
vīrye tvadīye ṛṣaya
ādhāsyanty añjasātmanaḥ
Synonyms
yā — she; te — by you; ātma-bhṛtam — sown in her; vīryam — the seed; nava-dhā — nine daughters; prasaviṣyati — will bring forth; vīrye tvadīye — in the daughters begotten by you; ṛṣayaḥ — the sages; ādhāsyanti — will beget; añjasā — in total; ātmanaḥ — children.

Translation
She will bring forth nine daughters from the seed sown in her by you, and through the daughters you beget, the sages will duly beget children.

Text 30
त्वं च सम्यगनुष्ठाय निदेशं म उशत्तम: ।
मयि तीर्थीकृताशेषक्रियार्थो मां प्रपत्स्यसे ॥ ३० ॥
tvaṁ ca samyag anuṣṭhāya
nideśaṁ ma uśattamaḥ
mayi tīrthī-kṛtāśeṣa-
kriyārtho māṁ prapatsyase
Synonyms
tvam — you; ca — and; samyak — properly; anuṣṭhāya — having carried out; nideśam — command; me — My; uśattamaḥ — completely cleansed; mayi — unto Me; tīrthī-kṛta — having resigned; aśeṣa — all; kriyā — of actions; arthaḥ — the fruits; mām — to Me; prapatsyase — you will attain.

Translation
With your heart cleansed by properly carrying out My command, resigning to Me the fruits of all your acts, you will finally attain to Me.

Text 31
कृत्वा दयां च जीवेषु दत्त्वा चाभयमात्मवान् ।
मय्यात्मानं सह जगद् द्रक्ष्यस्यात्मनि चापि माम् ॥ ३१ ॥
kṛtvā dayāṁ ca jīveṣu
dattvā cābhayam ātmavān
mayy ātmānaṁ saha jagad
drakṣyasy ātmani cāpi mām
Synonyms
kṛtvā — having shown; dayām — compassion; ca — and; jīveṣu — toward living beings; dattvā — having given; ca — and; abhayam — assurance of safety; ātma-vān — self-realized; mayi — in Me; ātmānam — yourself; saha jagat — along with the universe; drakṣyasi — you will perceive; ātmani — in yourself; ca — and; api — also; mām — Me.

Translation
Showing compassion to all living entities, you will attain self-realization. Giving assurance of safety to all, you will perceive your own self as well as all the universes in Me, and Myself in you.

Text 32
सहाहं स्वांशकलया त्वद्वीर्येण महामुने ।
तव क्षेत्रे देवहूत्यां प्रणेष्ये तत्त्वसंहिताम् ॥ ३२ ॥
sahāhaṁ svāṁśa-kalayā
tvad-vīryeṇa mahā-mune
tava kṣetre devahūtyāṁ
praṇeṣye tattva-saṁhitām
Synonyms
saha — with; aham — I; sva-aṁśa-kalayā — My own plenary portion; tvat-vīryeṇa — by your semen; mahā-mune — O great sage; tava kṣetre — in your wife; devahūtyām — in Devahūti; praṇeṣye — I shall instruct; tattva — of the ultimate principles; saṁhitām — the doctrine.

Translation
O great sage, I shall manifest My own plenary portion through your wife, Devahūti, along with your nine daughters, and I shall instruct her in the system of philosophy that deals with the ultimate principles or categories.

Text 33
मैत्रेय उवाच
एवं तमनुभाष्याथ भगवान् प्रत्यगक्षज: ।
जगाम बिन्दुसरस: सरस्वत्या परिश्रितात् ॥ ३३ ॥
maitreya uvāca
evaṁ tam anubhāṣyātha
bhagavān pratyag-akṣajaḥ
jagāma bindusarasaḥ
sarasvatyā pariśritāt
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya said; evam — thus; tam — to him; anubhāṣya — having spoken; atha — then; bhagavān — the Lord; pratyak — directly; akṣa — by senses; jaḥ — who is perceived; jagāma — went away; bindu-sarasaḥ — from Lake Bindu-sarovara; sarasvatyā — by the river Sarasvatī; pariśritāt — encircled.

Translation
Maitreya went on: Thus having spoken to Kardama Muni, the Lord, who reveals Himself only when the senses are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, departed from that lake called Bindu-sarovara, which was encircled by the river Sarasvatī.

Text 34
निरीक्षतस्तस्य ययावशेष-
सिद्धेश्वराभिष्टुतसिद्धमार्ग: ।
आकर्णयन् पत्ररथेन्द्रपक्षै-
रुच्चारितं स्तोममुदीर्णसाम ॥ ३४ ॥
nirīkṣatas tasya yayāv aśeṣa-
siddheśvarābhiṣṭuta-siddha-mārgaḥ
ākarṇayan patra-rathendra-pakṣair
uccāritaṁ stomam udīrṇa-sāma
Synonyms
nirīkṣataḥ tasya — while he was looking on; yayau — He left; aśeṣa — all; siddha-īśvara — by liberated souls; abhiṣṭuta — is praised; siddha-mārgaḥ — the way to the spiritual world; ākarṇayan — hearing; patra-ratha-indra — of Garuḍa (king of birds); pakṣaiḥ — by the wings; uccāritam — vibrated; stomam — hymns; udīrṇa-sāma — forming the Sāma Veda.

Translation
While the sage stood looking on, the Lord left by the pathway leading to Vaikuṇṭha, a path extolled by all great liberated souls. The sage stood listening as the hymns forming the basis of the Sāma Veda were vibrated by the flapping wings of the Lord’s carrier, Garuḍa.

Text 35
अथ सम्प्रस्थिते शुक्ले कर्दमो भगवानृषि: ।
आस्ते स्म बिन्दुसरसि तं कालं प्रतिपालयन् ॥ ३५ ॥
atha samprasthite śukle
kardamo bhagavān ṛṣiḥ
āste sma bindusarasi
taṁ kālaṁ pratipālayan
Synonyms
atha — then; samprasthite śukle — when the Lord had gone; kardamaḥ — Kardama Muni; bhagavān — the greatly powerful; ṛṣiḥ — sage; āste sma — stayed; bindu-sarasi — on the bank of Lake Bindu-sarovara; tam — that; kālam — time; pratipālayan — awaiting.

Translation
Then, after the departure of the Lord, the worshipful sage Kardama stayed on the bank of Bindu-sarovara, awaiting the time of which the Lord had spoken.

Text 36
मनु: स्यन्दनमास्थाय शातकौम्भपरिच्छदम् ।
आरोप्य स्वां दुहितरं सभार्य: पर्यटन्महीम् ॥ ३६ ॥
manuḥ syandanam āsthāya
śātakaumbha-paricchadam
āropya svāṁ duhitaraṁ
sa-bhāryaḥ paryaṭan mahīm
Synonyms
manuḥ — Svāyambhuva Manu; syandanam — the chariot; āsthāya — having mounted; śātakaumbha — made of gold; paricchadam — the outer cover; āropya — putting on; svām — his own; duhitaram — daughter; sa-bhāryaḥ — along with his wife; paryaṭan — traveling all over; mahīm — the globe.

Translation
Svāyambhuva Manu, with his wife, mounted his chariot, which was decorated with golden ornaments. Placing his daughter on it with them, he began traveling all over the earth.

Text 37
तस्मिन् सुधन्वन्नहनि भगवान् यत्समादिशत् ।
उपायादाश्रमपदं मुने: शान्तव्रतस्य तत् ॥ ३७ ॥
tasmin sudhanvann ahani
bhagavān yat samādiśat
upāyād āśrama-padaṁ
muneḥ śānta-vratasya tat
Synonyms
tasmin — on that; su-dhanvan — O great bowman Vidura; ahani — on the day; bhagavān — the Lord; yat — which; samādiśat — foretold; upāyāt — he reached; āśrama-padam — the holy hermitage; muneḥ — of the sage; śānta — completed; vratasya — whose vows of austerity; tat — that.

Translation
O Vidura, they reached the hermitage of the sage, who had just completed his vows of austerity on the very day foretold by the Lord.

Texts 38-39
यस्मिन् भगवतो नेत्रान्न्यपतन्नश्रुबिन्दव: ।
कृपया सम्परीतस्य प्रपन्नेऽर्पितया भृशम् ॥ ३८ ॥
तद्वै बिन्दुसरो नाम सरस्वत्या परिप्लुतम् ।
पुण्यं शिवामृतजलं महर्षिगणसेवितम् ॥ ३९ ॥
yasmin bhagavato netrān
nyapatann aśru-bindavaḥ
kṛpayā samparītasya
prapanne ’rpitayā bhṛśam
tad vai bindusaro nāma
sarasvatyā pariplutam
puṇyaṁ śivāmṛta-jalaṁ
maharṣi-gaṇa-sevitam
Synonyms
yasmin — in which; bhagavataḥ — of the Lord; netrāt — from the eye; nyapatan — fell down; aśru-bindavaḥ — teardrops; kṛpayā — by compassion; samparītasya — who was overwhelmed; prapanne — on the surrendered soul (Kardama); arpitayā — placed upon; bhṛśam — extremely; tat — that; vai — indeed; bindu-saraḥ — lake of tears; nāma — called; sarasvatyā — by the river Sarasvatī; pariplutam — overflowed; puṇyam — holy; śiva — auspicious; amṛta — nectar; jalam — water; mahā-ṛṣi — of great sages; gaṇa — by hosts; sevitam — served.

Translation
The holy Lake Bindu-sarovara, flooded by the waters of the river Sarasvatī, was resorted to by hosts of eminent sages. Its holy water was not only auspicious but as sweet as nectar. It was called Bindu-sarovara because drops of tears had fallen there from the eyes of the Lord, who was overwhelmed by extreme compassion for the sage who had sought His protection.

Text 40
पुण्यद्रुमलताजालै: कूजत्पुण्यमृगद्विजै: ।
सर्वर्तुफलपुष्पाढ्यं वनराजिश्रियान्वितम् ॥ ४० ॥
puṇya-druma-latā-jālaiḥ
kūjat-puṇya-mṛga-dvijaiḥ
sarvartu-phala-puṣpāḍhyaṁ
vana-rāji-śriyānvitam
Synonyms
puṇya — pious; druma — of trees; latā — of creepers; jālaiḥ — with clusters; kūjat — uttering cries; puṇya — pious; mṛga — animals; dvijaiḥ — with birds; sarva — in all; ṛtu — seasons; phala — in fruits; puṣpa — in flowers; āḍhyam — rich; vana-rāji — of groves of trees; śriyā — by the beauty; anvitam — adorned.

Translation
The shore of the lake was surrounded by clusters of pious trees and creepers, rich in fruits and flowers of all seasons, that afforded shelter to pious animals and birds, which uttered various cries. It was adorned by the beauty of groves of forest trees.

Text 41
मत्तद्विजगणैर्घुष्टं मत्तभ्रमरविभ्रमम् ।
मत्तबर्हिनटाटोपमाह्वयन्मत्तकोकिलम् ॥ ४१ ॥
matta-dvija-gaṇair ghuṣṭaṁ
matta-bhramara-vibhramam
matta-barhi-naṭāṭopam
āhvayan-matta-kokilam
Synonyms
matta — overjoyed; dvija — of birds; gaṇaiḥ — by flocks; ghuṣṭam — resounded; matta — intoxicated; bhramara — of bees; vibhramam — wandering; matta — maddened; barhi — of peacocks; naṭa — of dancers; āṭopam — pride; āhvayat — calling one another; matta — merry; kokilam — cuckoos.

Translation
The area resounded with the notes of overjoyed birds. Intoxicated bees wandered there, intoxicated peacocks proudly danced, and merry cuckoos called one another.

Texts 42-43
कदम्बचम्पकाशोककरञ्जबकुलासनै: ।
कुन्दमन्दारकुटजैश्चूतपोतैरलङ्कृतम् ॥ ४२ ॥
कारण्डवै: प्लवैर्हंसै: कुररैर्जलकुक्‍कुटै: ।
सारसैश्चक्रवाकैश्च चकोरैर्वल्गु कूजितम् ॥ ४३ ॥
kadamba-campakāśoka-
karañja-bakulāsanaiḥ
kunda-mandāra-kuṭajaiś
cūta-potair alaṅkṛtam
kāraṇḍavaiḥ plavair haṁsaiḥ
kurarair jala-kukkuṭaiḥ
sārasaiś cakravākaiś ca
cakorair valgu kūjitam
Synonyms
kadamba — kadamba flowers; campaka — campaka flowers; aśoka — aśoka flowers; karañja — karañja flowers; bakula — bakula flowers; āsanaiḥ — by āsana trees; kunda — kunda; mandāra — mandāra; kuṭajaiḥ — and by kuṭaja trees; cūta-potaiḥ — by young mango trees; alaṅkṛtam — adorned; kāraṇḍavaiḥ — by kāraṇḍava ducks; plavaiḥ — by plavas; haṁsaiḥ — by swans; kuraraiḥ — by ospreys; jala-kukkuṭaiḥ — by waterfowl; sārasaiḥ — by cranes; cakravākaiḥ — by cakravāka birds; ca — and; cakoraiḥ — by cakora birds; valgu — pleasing; kūjitam — vibration of birds’ sounds.

Translation
Lake Bindu-sarovara was adorned by flowering trees such as kadamba, campaka, aśoka, karañja, bakula, āsana, kunda, mandāra, kuṭaja and young mango trees. The air was filled with the pleasing notes of kāraṇḍava ducks, plavas, swans, ospreys, waterfowl, cranes, cakravākas and cakoras.

Text 44
तथैव हरिणै: क्रोडै: श्‍वाविद्गवयकुञ्जरै: ।
गोपुच्छैर्हरिभिर्मर्कैर्नकुलैर्नाभिभिर्वृतम् ॥ ४४ ॥
tathaiva hariṇaiḥ kroḍaiḥ
śvāvid-gavaya-kuñjaraiḥ
gopucchair haribhir markair
nakulair nābhibhir vṛtam
Synonyms
tathā eva — likewise; hariṇaiḥ — by deer; kroḍaiḥ — by boars; śvāvit — porcupines; gavaya — a wild animal closely resembling the cow; kuñjaraiḥ — by elephants; gopucchaiḥ — by baboons; haribhiḥ — by lions; markaiḥ — by monkeys; nakulaiḥ — by mongooses; nābhibhiḥ — by musk deer; vṛtam — surrounded.

Translation
Its shores abounded with deer, boars, porcupines, gavayas, elephants, baboons, lions, monkeys, mongooses and musk deer.

Texts 45-47
प्रविश्य तत्तीर्थवरमादिराज: सहात्मज: ।
ददर्श मुनिमासीनं तस्मिन् हुतहुताशनम् ॥ ४५ ॥
विद्योतमानं वपुषा तपस्युग्रयुजा चिरम् ।
नातिक्षामं भगवत: स्‍निग्धापाङ्गावलोकनात् ।
त द्वय‍हृतामृतकलापीयूषश्रवणेन च ॥ ४६ ॥
प्रांशुं पद्मपलाशाक्षं जटिलं चीरवाससम् ।
उपसंश्रित्य मलिनं यथार्हणमसंस्कृतम् ॥ ४७ ॥
praviśya tat tīrtha-varam
ādi-rājaḥ sahātmajaḥ
dadarśa munim āsīnaṁ
tasmin huta-hutāśanam
vidyotamānaṁ vapuṣā
tapasy ugra-yujā ciram
nātikṣāmaṁ bhagavataḥ
snigdhāpāṅgāvalokanāt
tad-vyāhṛtāmṛta-kalā-
pīyūṣa-śravaṇena ca
prāṁśuṁ padma-palāśākṣaṁ
jaṭilaṁ cīra-vāsasam
upasaṁśritya malinaṁ
yathārhaṇam asaṁskṛtam
Synonyms
praviśya — entering; tat — that; tīrtha-varam — best of sacred places; ādi-rājaḥ — the first monarch (Svāyambhuva Manu); saha-ātmajaḥ — along with his daughter; dadarśa — saw; munim — the sage; āsīnam — sitting; tasmin — in the hermitage; huta — being offered oblations; huta-aśanam — the sacred fire; vidyotamānam — shining brilliantly; vapuṣā — by his body; tapasi — in penance; ugra — terribly; yujā — engaged in yoga; ciram — for a long time; na — not; atikṣāmam — very emaciated; bhagavataḥ — of the Lord; snigdha — affectionate; apāṅga — sidelong; avalokanāt — from the glance; tat — of Him; vyāhṛta — from the words; amṛta-kalā — moonlike; pīyūṣa — the nectar; śravaṇena — by hearing; ca — and; prāṁśum — tall; padma — lotus flower; palāśa — petal; akṣam — eyes; jaṭilam — matted locks; cīra-vāsasam — having rags for clothes; upasaṁśritya — having approached; malinam — soiled; yathā — like; arhaṇam — gem; asaṁskṛtam — unpolished.

Translation
Entering that most sacred spot with his daughter and going near the sage, the first monarch, Svāyambhuva Manu, saw the sage sitting in his hermitage, having just propitiated the sacred fire by pouring oblations into it. His body shone most brilliantly; though he had engaged in austere penance for a long time, he was not emaciated, for the Lord had cast His affectionate sidelong glance upon him and he had also heard the nectar flowing from the moonlike words of the Lord. The sage was tall, his eyes were large, like the petals of a lotus, and he had matted locks on his head. He was clad in rags. Svāyambhuva Manu approached and saw him to be somewhat soiled, like an unpolished gem.

Text 48
अथोटजमुपायातं नृदेवं प्रणतं पुर: ।
सपर्यया पर्यगृह्णात्प्रतिनन्द्यानुरूपया ॥ ४८ ॥
athoṭajam upāyātaṁ
nṛdevaṁ praṇataṁ puraḥ
saparyayā paryagṛhṇāt
pratinandyānurūpayā
Synonyms
atha — then; uṭajam — the hermitage; upāyātam — approached; nṛdevam — the monarch; praṇatam — bowed down; puraḥ — in front; saparyayā — with honor; paryagṛhṇāt — received him; pratinandya — greeting him; anurūpayā — befitting the King’s position.

Translation
Seeing that the monarch had come to his hermitage and was bowing before him, the sage greeted him with benediction and received him with due honor.

Text 49
गृहीतार्हणमासीनं संयतं प्रीणयन्मुनि: ।
स्मरन् भगवदादेशमित्याह श्लक्ष्णया गिरा ॥ ४९ ॥
gṛhītārhaṇam āsīnaṁ
saṁyataṁ prīṇayan muniḥ
smaran bhagavad-ādeśam
ity āha ślakṣṇayā girā
Synonyms
gṛhīta — received; arhaṇam — honor; āsīnam — seated; saṁyatam — remained silent; prīṇayan — delighting; muniḥ — the sage; smaran — remembering; bhagavat — of the Lord; ādeśam — the order; iti — thus; āha — spoke; ślakṣṇayā — sweet; girā — with a voice.

Translation
After receiving the sage’s attention, the King sat down and was silent. Recalling the instructions of the Lord, Kardama then spoke to the King as follows, delighting him with his sweet accents.

Text 50
नूनं चङ्‌क्रमणं देव सतां संरक्षणाय ते ।
वधाय चासतां यस्त्वं हरे: शक्तिर्हि पालिनी ॥ ५० ॥
nūnaṁ caṅkramaṇaṁ deva
satāṁ saṁrakṣaṇāya te
vadhāya cāsatāṁ yas tvaṁ
hareḥ śaktir hi pālinī
Synonyms
nūnam — surely; caṅkramaṇam — the tour; deva — O lord; satām — of the virtuous; saṁrakṣaṇāya — for the protection; te — your; vadhāya — for killing; ca — and; asatām — of the demons; yaḥ — the person who; tvam — you; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śaktiḥ — the energy; hi — since; pālinī — protecting.

Translation
The tour you have undertaken, O lord, is surely intended to protect the virtuous and kill the demons, since you embody the protecting energy of Śrī Hari.

Text 51
योऽर्केन्द्वग्नीन्द्रवायूनां यमधर्मप्रचेतसाम् ।
रूपाणि स्थान आधत्से तस्मै शुक्लाय ते नम: ॥ ५१ ॥
yo ’rkendv-agnīndra-vāyūnāṁ
yama-dharma-pracetasām
rūpāṇi sthāna ādhatse
tasmai śuklāya te namaḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — you who; arka — of the sun; indu — of the moon; agni — of Agni, the fire-god; indra — of Indra, the lord of heaven; vāyūnām — of Vāyu, the wind-god; yama — of Yama, the god of punishment; dharma — of Dharma, the god of piety; pracetasām — and of Varuṇa, the god of the waters; rūpāṇi — the forms; sthāne — when necessary; ādhatse — you assume; tasmai — unto Him; śuklāya — unto Lord Viṣṇu; te — unto you; namaḥ — obeisances.

Translation
When necessary, You assume the part of the sun-god; the moon-god; Agni, the god of fire; Indra, the lord of paradise; Vāyu, the wind-god; Yama, the god of punishment; Dharma, the god of piety; and Varuṇa, the god presiding over the waters. All obeisances to you, who are none other than Lord Viṣṇu!

Texts 52-54
न यदा रथमास्थाय जैत्रं मणिगणार्पितम् ।
विस्फूर्जच्चण्डकोदण्डो रथेन त्रासयन्नघान् ॥ ५२ ॥
स्वसैन्यचरणक्षुण्णं वेपयन्मण्डलं भुव: ।
विकर्षन् बृहतीं सेनां पर्यटस्यंशुमानिव ॥ ५३ ॥
तदैव सेतव: सर्वे वर्णाश्रमनिबन्धना: ।
भगवद्रचिता राजन् भिद्येरन् बत दस्युभि: ॥ ५४ ॥
na yadā ratham āsthāya
jaitraṁ maṇi-gaṇārpitam
visphūrjac-caṇḍa-kodaṇḍo
rathena trāsayann aghān
sva-sainya-caraṇa-kṣuṇṇaṁ
vepayan maṇḍalaṁ bhuvaḥ
vikarṣan bṛhatīṁ senāṁ
paryaṭasy aṁśumān iva
tadaiva setavaḥ sarve
varṇāśrama-nibandhanāḥ
bhagavad-racitā rājan
bhidyeran bata dasyubhiḥ
Synonyms
na — not; yadā — when; ratham — the chariot; āsthāya — having mounted; jaitram — victorious; maṇi — of jewels; gaṇa — with clusters; arpitam — bedecked; visphūrjat — twanging; caṇḍa — a fearful sound just to punish the criminals; kodaṇḍaḥ — bow; rathena — by the presence of such a chariot; trāsayan — threatening; aghān — all the culprits; sva-sainya — of your soldiers; caraṇa — by the feet; kṣuṇṇam — trampled; vepayan — causing to tremble; maṇḍalam — the globe; bhuvaḥ — of the earth; vikarṣan — leading; bṛhatīm — huge; senām — army; paryaṭasi — you roam about; aṁśumān — the brilliant sun; iva — like; tadā — then; eva — certainly; setavaḥ — religious codes; sarve — all; varṇa — of varṇas; āśrama — of āśramas; nibandhanāḥ — obligations; bhagavat — by the Lord; racitāḥ — created; rājan — O King; bhidyeran — they would be broken; bata — alas; dasyubhiḥ — by rogues.

Translation
If you did not mount your victorious jeweled chariot, whose mere presence threatens culprits, if you did not produce fierce sounds by the twanging of your bow, and if you did not roam about the world like the brilliant sun, leading a huge army whose trampling feet cause the globe of the earth to tremble, then all the moral laws governing the varṇas and āśramas created by the Lord Himself would be broken by the rogues and rascals.

Text 55
अधर्मश्च समेधेत लोलुपैर्व्यङ्कुशैर्नृभि: ।
शयाने त्वयि लोकोऽयं दस्युग्रस्तो विनङ्‍क्ष्यति ॥ ५५ ॥
adharmaś ca samedheta
lolupair vyaṅkuśair nṛbhiḥ
śayāne tvayi loko ’yaṁ
dasyu-grasto vinaṅkṣyati
Synonyms
adharmaḥ — unrighteousness; ca — and; samedheta — would flourish; lolupaiḥ — simply hankering after money; vyaṅkuśaiḥ — uncontrolled; nṛbhiḥ — by men; śayāne tvayi — when you lie down for rest; lokaḥ — world; ayam — this; dasyu — by the miscreants; grastaḥ — attacked; vinaṅkṣyati — it will perish.

Translation
If you gave up all thought of the world’s situation, unrighteousness would flourish, for men who hanker only after money would be unopposed. Such miscreants would attack, and the world would perish.

Text 56
अथापि पृच्छे त्वां वीर यदर्थं त्वमिहागत: ।
तद्वयं निर्व्यलीकेन प्रतिपद्यामहे हृदा ॥ ५६ ॥
athāpi pṛcche tvāṁ vīra
yad-arthaṁ tvam ihāgataḥ
tad vayaṁ nirvyalīkena
pratipadyāmahe hṛdā
Synonyms
atha api — in spite of all this; pṛcche — I ask; tvām — you; vīra — O valiant King; yat-artham — the purpose; tvam — you; iha — here; āgataḥ — have come; tat — that; vayam — we; nirvyalīkena — without reservation; pratipadyāmahe — we shall carry out; hṛdā — with heart and soul.

Translation
In spite of all this, I ask you, O valiant King, the purpose for which you have come here. Whatever it may be, we shall carry it out without reservation.