Text 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
एवमाविष्कृताशेषगुणकर्मोदयो मुनिम् ।
सव्रीड इव तं सम्राडुपारतमुवाच ह ॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvāca
evam āviṣkṛtāśeṣa-
guṇa-karmodayo munim
savrīḍa iva taṁ samrāḍ
upāratam uvāca ha
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ — the great sage Maitreya; uvāca — said; evam — thus; āviṣkṛta — having been described; aśeṣa — all; guṇa — of the virtues; karma — of the activities; udayaḥ — the greatness; munim — the great sage; sa-vrīḍaḥ — feeling modest; iva — as though; tam — him (Kardama); samrāṭ — Emperor Manu; upāratam — silent; uvāca ha — addressed.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya said: After describing the greatness of the Emperor’s manifold qualities and activities, the sage became silent, and the Emperor, feeling modesty, addressed him as follows.

Text 2
मनुरुवाच
ब्रह्मासृजत्स्वमुखतो युष्मानात्मपरीप्सया ।
छन्दोमयस्तपोविद्यायोगयुक्तानलम्पटान् ॥ २ ॥
manur uvāca
brahmāsṛjat sva-mukhato
yuṣmān ātma-parīpsayā
chandomayas tapo-vidyā-
yoga-yuktān alampaṭān
Synonyms
manuḥ — Manu; uvāca — said; brahmā — Lord Brahmā; asṛjat — created; sva-mukhataḥ — from his face; yuṣmān — you (brāhmaṇas); ātma-parīpsayā — to protect himself by expanding; chandaḥ-mayaḥ — the form of the Vedas; tapaḥ-vidyā-yoga-yuktān — full of austerity, knowledge and mystic power; alampaṭān — averse to sense gratification.

Translation
Manu replied: To expand himself in Vedic knowledge, Lord Brahmā, the personified Veda, from his face created you, the brāhmaṇas, who are full of austerity, knowledge and mystic power and are averse to sense gratification.

Text 3
तत्‍त्राणायासृजच्चास्मान् दो:सहस्रात्सहस्रपात् ।
हृदयं तस्य हि ब्रह्म क्षत्रमङ्गं प्रचक्षते ॥ ३ ॥
tat-trāṇāyāsṛjac cāsmān
doḥ-sahasrāt sahasra-pāt
hṛdayaṁ tasya hi brahma
kṣatram aṅgaṁ pracakṣate
Synonyms
tat-trāṇāya — for the protection of the brāhmaṇas; asṛjat — created; ca — and; asmān — us (kṣatriyas); doḥ-sahasrāt — from His thousand arms; sahasra-pāt — the thousand-legged Supreme Being (the universal form); hṛdayam — heart; tasya — His; hi — for; brahma — brāhmaṇas; kṣatram — the kṣatriyas; aṅgam — arms; pracakṣate — are spoken of.

Translation
For the protection of the brāhmaṇas, the thousand-legged Supreme Being created us, the kṣatriyas, from His thousand arms. Hence the brāhmaṇas are said to be His heart and the kṣatriyas His arms.

Text 4
अतो ह्यन्योन्यमात्मानं ब्रह्म क्षत्रं च रक्षत: ।
रक्षति स्माव्ययो देव: स य: सदसदात्मक: ॥ ४ ॥
ato hy anyonyam ātmānaṁ
brahma kṣatraṁ ca rakṣataḥ
rakṣati smāvyayo devaḥ
sa yaḥ sad-asad-ātmakaḥ
Synonyms
ataḥ — hence; hi — certainly; anyonyam — each other; ātmānam — the self; brahma — the brāhmaṇas; kṣatram — the kṣatriyas; ca — and; rakṣataḥ — protect; rakṣati sma — protects; avyayaḥ — immutable; devaḥ — the Lord; saḥ — He; yaḥ — who; sat-asat-ātmakaḥ — the form of the cause and effect.

Translation
That is why the brāhmaṇas and kṣatriyas protect each other, as well as themselves; and the Lord Himself, who is both the cause and effect and is yet immutable, protects them through each other.

Text 5
तव सन्दर्शनादेवच्छिन्ना मे सर्वसंशया: ।
यत्स्वयं भगवान् प्रीत्या धर्ममाह रिरक्षिषो: ॥ ५ ॥
tava sandarśanād eva
cchinnā me sarva-saṁśayāḥ
yat svayaṁ bhagavān prītyā
dharmam āha rirakṣiṣoḥ
Synonyms
tava — your; sandarśanāt — by sight; eva — only; chinnāḥ — resolved; me — my; sarva-saṁśayāḥ — all doubts; yat — inasmuch as; svayam — personally; bhagavān — Your Lordship; prītyā — lovingly; dharmam — duty; āha — explained; rirakṣiṣoḥ — of a king anxious to protect his subjects.

Translation
Now I have resolved all my doubts simply by meeting you, for Your Lordship has very kindly and clearly explained the duty of a king who desires to protect his subjects.

Text 6
दिष्टय‍ा मे भगवान् द‍ृष्टो दुर्दर्शो योऽकृतात्मनाम् ।
दिष्टय‍ा पादरज: स्पृष्टं शीर्ष्णा मे भवत: शिवम् ॥ ६ ॥
diṣṭyā me bhagavān dṛṣṭo
durdarśo yo ’kṛtātmanām
diṣṭyā pāda-rajaḥ spṛṣṭaṁ
śīrṣṇā me bhavataḥ śivam
Synonyms
diṣṭyā — by good fortune; me — my; bhagavān — all-powerful; dṛṣṭaḥ — is seen; durdarśaḥ — not easily seen; yaḥ — who; akṛta-ātmanām — of those who have not controlled the mind and senses; diṣṭyā — by my good fortune; pāda-rajaḥ — the dust of the feet; spṛṣṭam — is touched; śīrṣṇā — by the head; me — my; bhavataḥ — your; śivam — causing all auspiciousness.

Translation
It is my good fortune that I have been able to see you, for you cannot easily be seen by persons who have not subdued the mind or controlled the senses. I am all the more fortunate to have touched with my head the blessed dust of your feet.

Text 7
दिष्टय‍ा त्वयानुशिष्टोऽहं कृतश्चानुग्रहो महान् ।
अपावृतै: कर्णरन्ध्रैर्जुष्टा दिष्ट्योशतीर्गिर: ॥ ७ ॥
diṣṭyā tvayānuśiṣṭo ’haṁ
kṛtaś cānugraho mahān
apāvṛtaiḥ karṇa-randhrair
juṣṭā diṣṭyośatīr giraḥ
Synonyms
diṣṭyā — luckily; tvayā — by you; anuśiṣṭaḥ — instructed; aham — I; kṛtaḥ — bestowed; ca — and; anugrahaḥ — favor; mahān — great; apāvṛtaiḥ — open; karṇa-randhraiḥ — with the holes of the ears; juṣṭāḥ — received; diṣṭyā — by good fortune; uśatīḥ — pure; giraḥ — words.

Translation
I have fortunately been instructed by you, and thus great favor has been bestowed upon me. I thank God that I have listened with open ears to your pure words.

Text 8
स भवान्दुहितृस्‍नेहपरिक्लिष्टात्मनो मम ।
श्रोतुमर्हसि दीनस्य श्रावितं कृपया मुने ॥ ८ ॥
sa bhavān duhitṛ-sneha-
parikliṣṭātmano mama
śrotum arhasi dīnasya
śrāvitaṁ kṛpayā mune
Synonyms
saḥ — yourself; bhavān — Your Honor; duhitṛ-sneha — by affection for my daughter; parikliṣṭa-ātmanaḥ — whose mind is agitated; mama — my; śrotum — to listen; arhasi — be pleased; dīnasya — of my humble self; śrāvitam — to the prayer; kṛpayā — graciously; mune — O sage.

Translation
O great sage, graciously be pleased to listen to the prayer of my humble self, for my mind is troubled by affection for my daughter.

Text 9
प्रियव्रतोत्तानपदो: स्वसेयं दुहिता मम ।
अन्विच्छति पतिं युक्तं वय: शीलगुणादिभि: ॥ ९ ॥
priyavratottānapadoḥ
svaseyaṁ duhitā mama
anvicchati patiṁ yuktaṁ
vayaḥ-śīla-guṇādibhiḥ
Synonyms
priyavrata-uttānapadoḥ — of Priyavrata and Uttānapāda; svasā — sister; iyam — this; duhitā — daughter; mama — my; anvicchati — is seeking; patim — husband; yuktam — suited; vayaḥ-śīla-guṇa-ādibhiḥ — by age, character, good qualities, etc.

Translation
My daughter is the sister of Priyavrata and Uttānapāda. She is seeking a suitable husband in terms of age, character and good qualities.

Text 10
यदा तु भवत: शीलश्रुतरूपवयोगुणान् ।
अश‍ृणोन्नारदादेषा त्वय्यासीत्कृतनिश्चया ॥ १० ॥
yadā tu bhavataḥ śīla-
śruta-rūpa-vayo-guṇān
aśṛṇon nāradād eṣā
tvayy āsīt kṛta-niścayā
Synonyms
yadā — when; tu — but; bhavataḥ — your; śīla — noble character; śruta — learning; rūpa — beautiful appearance; vayaḥ — youth; guṇān — virtues; aśṛṇot — heard; nāradāt — from Nārada Muni; eṣā — Devahūti; tvayi — in you; āsīt — became; kṛta-niścayā — fixed in determination.

Translation
The moment she heard from the sage Nārada of your noble character, learning, beautiful appearance, youth and other virtues, she fixed her mind upon you.

Text 11
तत्प्रतीच्छ द्विजाग्र्येमां श्रद्धयोपहृतां मया ।
सर्वात्मनानुरूपां ते गृहमेधिषु कर्मसु ॥ ११ ॥
tat pratīccha dvijāgryemāṁ
śraddhayopahṛtāṁ mayā
sarvātmanānurūpāṁ te
gṛhamedhiṣu karmasu
Synonyms
tat — therefore; pratīccha — please accept; dvija-agrya — O best of the brāhmaṇas; imām — her; śraddhayā — with faith; upahṛtām — offered as a presentation; mayā — by me; sarva-ātmanā — in every way; anurūpām — suitable; te — for you; gṛha-medhiṣu — in the household; karmasu — duties.

Translation
Therefore please accept her, O chief of the brāhmaṇas, for I offer her with faith and she is in every respect fit to be your wife and take charge of your household duties.

Text 12
उद्यतस्य हि कामस्य प्रतिवादो न शस्यते ।
अपि निर्मुक्तसङ्गस्य कामरक्तस्य किं पुन: ॥ १२ ॥
udyatasya hi kāmasya
prativādo na śasyate
api nirmukta-saṅgasya
kāma-raktasya kiṁ punaḥ
Synonyms
udyatasya — which has come of itself; hi — in fact; kāmasya — of material desire; prativādaḥ — the denial; na — not; śasyate — to be praised; api — even; nirmukta — of one who is free; saṅgasya — from attachment; kāma — to sensual pleasures; raktasya — of one addicted; kim punaḥ — how much less.

Translation
To deny an offering that has come of itself is not commendable even for one absolutely free from all attachment, much less one addicted to sensual pleasure.

Text 13
य उद्यतमनाद‍ृत्य कीनाशमभियाचते ।
क्षीयते तद्यश: स्फीतं मानश्चावज्ञया हत: ॥ १३ ॥
ya udyatam anādṛtya
kīnāśam abhiyācate
kṣīyate tad-yaśaḥ sphītaṁ
mānaś cāvajñayā hataḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — who; udyatam — an offering; anādṛtya — rejecting; kīnāśam — from a miser; abhiyācate — begs; kṣīyate — is lost; tat — his; yaśaḥ — reputation; sphītam — widespread; mānaḥ — honor; ca — and; avajñayā — by neglectful behavior; hataḥ — destroyed.

Translation
One who rejects an offering that comes of its own accord but later begs a boon from a miser thus loses his widespread reputation, and his pride is humbled by the neglectful behavior of others.

Text 14
अहं त्वाश‍ृणवं विद्वन् विवाहार्थं समुद्यतम् ।
अतस्त्वमुपकुर्वाण: प्रत्तां प्रतिगृहाण मे ॥ १४ ॥
ahaṁ tvāśṛṇavaṁ vidvan
vivāhārthaṁ samudyatam
atas tvam upakurvāṇaḥ
prattāṁ pratigṛhāṇa me
Synonyms
aham — I; tvā — you; aśṛṇavam — heard; vidvan — O wise man; vivāha-artham — for the sake of marriage; samudyatam — prepared; ataḥ — hence; tvam — you; upakurvāṇaḥ — not taken a vow of perpetual celibacy; prattām — offered; pratigṛhāṇa — please accept; me — of me.

Translation
Svāyambhuva Manu continued: O wise man, I heard that you were prepared to marry. Please accept her hand, which is being offered to you by me, since you have not taken a vow of perpetual celibacy.

Text 15
ऋषिरुवाच
बाढमुद्वोढुकामोऽहमप्रत्ता च तवात्मजा ।
आवयोरनुरूपोऽसावाद्यो वैवाहिको विधि: ॥ १५ ॥
ṛṣir uvāca
bāḍham udvoḍhu-kāmo ’ham
aprattā ca tavātmajā
āvayor anurūpo ’sāv
ādyo vaivāhiko vidhiḥ
Synonyms
ṛṣiḥ — the great sage Kardama; uvāca — said; bāḍham — very well; udvoḍhu-kāmaḥ — desirous to marry; aham — I; aprattā — not promised to anyone else; ca — and; tava — your; ātma-jā — daughter; āvayoḥ — of us two; anurūpaḥ — proper; asau — this; ādyaḥ — first; vaivāhikaḥ — of marriage; vidhiḥ — ritualistic ceremony.

Translation
The great sage replied: Certainly I have a desire to marry, and your daughter has not yet married or given her word to anyone. Therefore our marriage according to the Vedic system can take place.

Text 16
काम: स भूयान्नरदेव तेऽस्या:
पुत्र्या: समाम्नायविधौ प्रतीत: ।
क एव ते तनयां नाद्रियेत
स्वयैव कान्त्या क्षिपतीमिव श्रियम् ॥ १६ ॥
kāmaḥ sa bhūyān naradeva te ’syāḥ
putryāḥ samāmnāya-vidhau pratītaḥ
ka eva te tanayāṁ nādriyeta
svayaiva kāntyā kṣipatīm iva śriyam
Synonyms
kāmaḥ — desire; saḥ — that; bhūyāt — let it be fulfilled; nara-deva — O King; te — your; asyāḥ — this; putryāḥ — of the daughter; samāmnāya-vidhau — in the process of the Vedic scriptures; pratītaḥ — recognized; kaḥ — who; eva — in fact; te — your; tanayām — daughter; na ādriyeta — would not adore; svayā — by her own; eva — alone; kāntyā — bodily luster; kṣipatīm — excelling; iva — as if; śriyam — ornaments.

Translation
Let your daughter’s desire for marriage, which is recognized in the Vedic scriptures, be fulfilled. Who would not accept her hand? She is so beautiful that by her bodily luster alone she excels the beauty of her ornaments.

Text 17
यां हर्म्यपृष्ठे क्‍वणदङ्‌घ्रिशोभां
विक्रीडतीं कन्दुकविह्वलाक्षीम् ।
विश्‍वावसुर्न्यपतत्स्वाद्विमाना-
द्विलोक्य सम्मोहविमूढचेता: ॥ १७ ॥
yāṁ harmya-pṛṣṭhe kvaṇad-aṅghri-śobhāṁ
vikrīḍatīṁ kanduka-vihvalākṣīm
viśvāvasur nyapatat svād vimānād
vilokya sammoha-vimūḍha-cetāḥ
Synonyms
yām — whom; harmya-pṛṣṭhe — on the roof of the palace; kvaṇat-aṅghri-śobhām — whose beauty was heightened by the tinkling ornaments on her feet; vikrīḍatīm — playing; kanduka-vihvala-akṣīm — with eyes bewildered, following her ball; viśvāvasuḥ — Viśvāvasu; nyapatat — fell down; svāt — from his own; vimānāt — from the airplane; vilokya — seeing; sammoha-vimūḍha-cetāḥ — whose mind was stupefied.

Translation
I have heard that Viśvāvasu, the great Gandharva, his mind stupefied with infatuation, fell from his airplane after seeing your daughter playing with a ball on the roof of the palace, for she was indeed beautiful with her tinkling ankle bells and her eyes moving to and fro.

Text 18
तां प्रार्थयन्तीं ललनाललाम-
मसेवितश्रीचरणैरद‍ृष्टाम् ।
वत्सां मनोरुच्चपद: स्वसारं
को नानुमन्येत बुधोऽभियाताम् ॥ १८ ॥
tāṁ prārthayantīṁ lalanā-lalāmam
asevita-śrī-caraṇair adṛṣṭām
vatsāṁ manor uccapadaḥ svasāraṁ
ko nānumanyeta budho ’bhiyātām
Synonyms
tām — her; prārthayantīm — seeking; lalanā-lalāmam — the ornament of women; asevita-śrī-caraṇaiḥ — by those who have not worshiped the feet of Lakṣmī; adṛṣṭām — not seen; vatsām — beloved daughter; manoḥ — of Svāyambhuva Manu; uccapadaḥ — of Uttānapāda; svasāram — sister; kaḥ — what; na anumanyeta — would not welcome; budhaḥ — wise man; abhiyātām — who has come of her own accord.

Translation
What wise man would not welcome her, the very ornament of womanhood, the beloved daughter of Svāyambhuva Manu and sister of Uttānapāda? Those who have not worshiped the gracious feet of the goddess of fortune cannot even perceive her, yet she has come of her own accord to seek my hand.

Text 19
अतो भजिष्ये समयेन साध्वीं
यावत्तेजो बिभृयादात्मनो मे ।
अतो धर्मान् पारमहंस्यमुख्यान्
शुक्लप्रोक्तान् बहु मन्येऽविहिंस्रान् ॥ १९ ॥
ato bhajiṣye samayena sādhvīṁ
yāvat tejo bibhṛyād ātmano me
ato dharmān pāramahaṁsya-mukhyān
śukla-proktān bahu manye ’vihiṁsrān
Synonyms
ataḥ — therefore; bhajiṣye — I shall accept; samayena — on the conditions; sādhvīm — the chaste girl; yāvat — until; tejaḥ — semen; bibhṛyāt — may bear; ātmanaḥ — from my body; me — my; ataḥ — thereafter; dharmān — the duties; pāramahaṁsya-mukhyān — of the best of the paramahaṁsas; śukla-proktān — spoken by Lord Viṣṇu; bahu — much; manye — I shall consider; avihiṁsrān — free from envy.

Translation
Therefore I shall accept this chaste girl as my wife, on the condition that after she bears semen from my body, I shall accept the life of devotional service accepted by the most perfect human beings. That process was described by Lord Viṣṇu. It is free from envy.

Text 20
यतोऽभवद्विश्वमिदं विचित्रं
संस्थास्यते यत्र च वावतिष्ठते ।
प्रजापतीनां पतिरेष मह्यं
परं प्रमाणं भगवाननन्त: ॥ २० ॥
yato ’bhavad viśvam idaṁ vicitraṁ
saṁsthāsyate yatra ca vāvatiṣṭhate
prajāpatīnāṁ patir eṣa mahyaṁ
paraṁ pramāṇaṁ bhagavān anantaḥ
Synonyms
yataḥ — from whom; abhavat — emanated; viśvam — creation; idam — this; vicitram — wonderful; saṁsthāsyate — will dissolve; yatra — in whom; ca — and; vā — or; avatiṣṭhate — presently exists; prajā-patīnām — of the Prajāpatis; patiḥ — the Lord; eṣaḥ — this; mahyam — to me; param — highest; pramāṇam — authority; bhagavān — Supreme Lord; anantaḥ — unlimited.

Translation
The highest authority for me is the unlimited Supreme Personality of Godhead, from whom this wonderful creation emanates and in whom its sustenance and dissolution rest. He is the origin of all Prajāpatis, the personalities meant to produce living entities in this world.

Text 21
मैत्रेय उवाच
स उग्रधन्वन्नियदेवाबभाषे
आसीच्च तूष्णीमरविन्दनाभम् ।
धियोपगृह्णन् स्मितशोभितेन
मुखेन चेतो लुलुभे देवहूत्या: ॥ २१ ॥
maitreya uvāca
sa ugra-dhanvann iyad evābabhāṣe
āsīc ca tūṣṇīm aravinda-nābham
dhiyopagṛhṇan smita-śobhitena
mukhena ceto lulubhe devahūtyāḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ — the great sage Maitreya; uvāca — said; saḥ — he (Kardama); ugra-dhanvan — O great warrior Vidura; iyat — this much; eva — only; ābabhāṣe — spoke; āsīt — became; ca — and; tūṣṇīm — silent; aravinda-nābham — Lord Viṣṇu (whose navel is adorned by a lotus); dhiyā — by thought; upagṛhṇan — seizing; smita-śobhitena — beautified by his smile; mukhena — by his face; cetaḥ — the mind; lulubhe — was captivated; devahūtyāḥ — of Devahūti.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya said: O great warrior Vidura, the sage Kardama said this much only and then became silent, thinking of his worshipable Lord Viṣṇu, who has a lotus on His navel. As he silently smiled, his face captured the mind of Devahūti, who began to meditate upon the great sage.

Text 22
सोऽनुज्ञात्वा व्यवसितं महिष्या दुहितु: स्फुटम् ।
तस्मै गुणगणाढ्याय ददौ तुल्यां प्रहर्षित: ॥ २२ ॥
so ’nu jñātvā vyavasitaṁ
mahiṣyā duhituḥ sphuṭam
tasmai guṇa-gaṇāḍhyāya
dadau tulyāṁ praharṣitaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Emperor Manu); anu — afterward; jñātvā — having known; vyavasitam — the fixed decision; mahiṣyāḥ — of the Queen; duhituḥ — of his daughter; sphuṭam — clearly; tasmai — to him; guṇa-gaṇa-āḍhyāya — who was endowed with a host of virtues; dadau — gave away; tulyām — who was equal (in good qualities); praharṣitaḥ — extremely pleased.

Translation
After having unmistakably known the decision of the Queen, as well as that of Devahūti, the Emperor most gladly gave his daughter to the sage, whose host of virtues was equaled by hers.

Text 23
शतरूपा महाराज्ञी पारिबर्हान्महाधनान् ।
दम्पत्यो: पर्यदात्प्रीत्या भूषावास: परिच्छदान् ॥ २३ ॥
śatarūpā mahā-rājñī
pāribarhān mahā-dhanān
dampatyoḥ paryadāt prītyā
bhūṣā-vāsaḥ paricchadān
Synonyms
śatarūpā — Empress Śatarūpā; mahā-rājñī — the Empress; pāribarhān — dowry; mahā-dhanān — valuable presents; dam-patyoḥ — to the bride and bridegroom; paryadāt — gave; prītyā — out of affection; bhūṣā — ornaments; vāsaḥ — clothes; paricchadān — articles for household use.

Translation
Empress Śatarūpā lovingly gave most valuable presents, suitable for the occasion, such as jewelry, clothes and household articles, in dowry to the bride and bridegroom.

Text 24
प्रत्तां दुहितरं सम्राट् सद‍ृक्षाय गतव्यथ: ।
उपगुह्य च बाहुभ्यामौत्कण्ठ्योन्मथिताशय: ॥ २४ ॥
prattāṁ duhitaraṁ samrāṭ
sadṛkṣāya gata-vyathaḥ
upaguhya ca bāhubhyām
autkaṇṭhyonmathitāśayaḥ
Synonyms
prattām — who was given; duhitaram — daughter; samrāṭ — the Emperor (Manu); sadṛkṣāya — unto a suitable person; gata-vyathaḥ — relieved of his responsibility; upaguhya — embracing; ca — and; bāhubhyām — with his two arms; autkaṇṭhya-unmathita-āśayaḥ — having an anxious and agitated mind.

Translation
Thus relieved of his responsibility by handing over his daughter to a suitable man, Svāyambhuva Manu, his mind agitated by feelings of separation, embraced his affectionate daughter with both his arms.

Text 25
अशक्नुवंस्तद्विरहं मुञ्चन् बाष्पकलां मुहु: ।
आसिञ्चदम्ब वत्सेति नेत्रोदैर्दुहितु: शिखा: ॥ २५ ॥
aśaknuvaṁs tad-virahaṁ
muñcan bāṣpa-kalāṁ muhuḥ
āsiñcad amba vatseti
netrodair duhituḥ śikhāḥ
Synonyms
aśaknuvan — being unable to bear; tat-viraham — separation from her; muñcan — shedding; bāṣpa-kalām — tears; muhuḥ — again and again; āsiñcat — he drenched; amba — my dear mother; vatsa — my dear daughter; iti — thus; netra-udaiḥ — by the water from his eyes; duhituḥ — of his daughter; śikhāḥ — the locks of hair.

Translation
The Emperor was unable to bear the separation of his daughter. Therefore tears poured from his eyes again and again, drenching his daughter’s head as he cried, “My dear mother! My dear daughter!”

Texts 26-27
आमन्‍त्र्‍य तं मुनिवरमनुज्ञात: सहानुग: ।
प्रतस्थे रथमारुह्य सभार्य: स्वपुरं नृप: ॥ २६ ॥
उभयोऋर्षिकुल्याया: सरस्वत्या: सुरोधसो: ।
ऋषीणामुपशान्तानां पश्यन्नाश्रमसम्पद: ॥ २७ ॥
āmantrya taṁ muni-varam
anujñātaḥ sahānugaḥ
pratasthe ratham āruhya
sabhāryaḥ sva-puraṁ nṛpaḥ
ubhayor ṛṣi-kulyāyāḥ
sarasvatyāḥ surodhasoḥ
ṛṣīṇām upaśāntānāṁ
paśyann āśrama-sampadaḥ
Synonyms
āmantrya — taking permission to go; tam — from him (Kardama); muni-varam — from the best of sages; anujñātaḥ — being permitted to leave; saha-anugaḥ — along with his retinue; pratasthe — started for; ratham āruhya — mounting his chariot; sa-bhāryaḥ — along with his wife; sva-puram — his own capital; nṛpaḥ — the Emperor; ubhayoḥ — on both; ṛṣi-kulyāyāḥ — agreeable to the sages; sarasvatyāḥ — of the river Sarasvatī; su-rodhasoḥ — the charming banks; ṛṣīṇām — of the great sages; upaśāntānām — tranquil; paśyan — seeing; āśrama-sampadaḥ — the prosperity of the beautiful hermitages.

Translation
After asking and obtaining the great sage’s permission to leave, the monarch mounted his chariot with his wife and started for his capital, followed by his retinue. Along the way he saw the prosperity of the tranquil seers’ beautiful hermitages on both the charming banks of the Sarasvatī, the river so agreeable to saintly persons.

Text 28
तमायान्तमभिप्रेत्य ब्रह्मावर्तात्प्रजा: पतिम् ।
गीतसंस्तुतिवादित्रै: प्रत्युदीयु: प्रहर्षिता: ॥ २८ ॥
tam āyāntam abhipretya
brahmāvartāt prajāḥ patim
gīta-saṁstuti-vāditraiḥ
pratyudīyuḥ praharṣitāḥ
Synonyms
tam — him; āyāntam — who was arriving; abhipretya — knowing of; brahmāvartāt — from Brahmāvarta; prajāḥ — his subjects; patim — their lord; gīta-saṁstuti-vāditraiḥ — with songs, praise and instrumental music; pratyudīyuḥ — came forward to greet; praharṣitāḥ — overjoyed.

Translation
Overjoyed to know of his arrival, his subjects came forth from Brahmāvarta to greet their returning lord with songs, prayers and musical instruments.

Texts 29-30
बर्हिष्मती नाम पुरी सर्वसम्पत्समन्विता ।
न्यपतन् यत्र रोमाणि यज्ञस्याङ्गं विधुन्वत: ॥ २९ ॥
कुशा: काशास्त एवासन् शश्वद्धरितवर्चस: ।
ऋषयो यै: पराभाव्य यज्ञघ्नान् यज्ञमीजिरे ॥ ३० ॥
barhiṣmatī nāma purī
sarva-sampat-samanvitā
nyapatan yatra romāṇi
yajñasyāṅgaṁ vidhunvataḥ
kuśāḥ kāśās ta evāsan
śaśvad-dharita-varcasaḥ
ṛṣayo yaiḥ parābhāvya
yajña-ghnān yajñam ījire
Synonyms
barhiṣmatī — Barhiṣmatī; nāma — named; purī — city; sarva-sampat — all kinds of wealth; samanvitā — full of; nyapatan — fell down; yatra — where; romāṇi — the hairs; yajñasya — of Lord Boar; aṅgam — His body; vidhunvataḥ — shaking; kuśāḥ — kuśa grass; kāśāḥ — kāśa grass; te — they; eva — certainly; āsan — became; śaśvat-harita — of evergreen; varcasaḥ — having the color; ṛṣayaḥ — the sages; yaiḥ — by which; parābhāvya — defeating; yajña-ghnān — the disturbers of the sacrificial performances; yajñam — Lord Viṣṇu; ījire — they worshiped.

Translation
The city of Barhiṣmatī, rich in all kinds of wealth, was so called because Lord Viṣṇu’s hair dropped there from His body when He manifested Himself as Lord Boar. As He shook His body, this very hair fell and turned into blades of evergreen kuśa grass and kāśa [another kind of grass used for mats], by means of which the sages worshiped Lord Viṣṇu after defeating the demons who had interfered with the performance of their sacrifices.

Text 31
कुशकाशमयं बर्हिरास्तीर्य भगवान्मनु: ।
अयजद्यज्ञपुरुषं लब्धा स्थानं यतो भुवम् ॥ ३१ ॥
kuśa-kāśamayaṁ barhir
āstīrya bhagavān manuḥ
ayajad yajña-puruṣaṁ
labdhā sthānaṁ yato bhuvam
Synonyms
kuśa — of kuśa grass; kāśa — and of kāśa grass; mayam — made; barhiḥ — a seat; āstīrya — having spread; bhagavān — the greatly fortunate; manuḥ — Svāyambhuva Manu; ayajat — worshiped; yajña-puruṣam — Lord Viṣṇu; labdhā — had achieved; sthānam — the abode; yataḥ — from whom; bhuvam — the earth.

Translation
Manu spread a seat of kuśas and kāśas and worshiped the Lord, the Personality of Godhead, by whose grace he had obtained the rule of the terrestrial globe.

Text 32
बर्हिष्मतीं नाम विभुर्यां निर्विश्य समावसत् ।
तस्यां प्रविष्टो भवनं तापत्रयविनाशनम् ॥ ३२ ॥
barhiṣmatīṁ nāma vibhur
yāṁ nirviśya samāvasat
tasyāṁ praviṣṭo bhavanaṁ
tāpa-traya-vināśanam
Synonyms
barhiṣmatīm — the city Barhiṣmatī; nāma — named; vibhuḥ — the very powerful Svāyambhuva Manu; yām — which; nirviśya — having entered; samāvasat — he lived in previously; tasyām — in that city; praviṣṭaḥ — entered; bhavanam — the palace; tāpa-traya — the threefold miseries; vināśanam — destroying.

Translation
Having entered the city of Barhiṣmatī, in which he had previously lived, Manu entered his palace, which was filled with an atmosphere that eradicated the three miseries of material existence.

Text 33
सभार्य: सप्रज: कामान् बुभुजेऽन्याविरोधत: ।
सङ्गीयमानसत्कीर्ति: सस्त्रीभि: सुरगायकै: ।
प्रत्यूषेष्वनुबद्धेन हृदा श‍ृण्वन् हरे: कथा: ॥ ३३ ॥
sabhāryaḥ saprajaḥ kāmān
bubhuje ’nyāvirodhataḥ
saṅgīyamāna-sat-kīrtiḥ
sastrībhiḥ sura-gāyakaiḥ
praty-ūṣeṣv anubaddhena
hṛdā śṛṇvan hareḥ kathāḥ
Synonyms
sa-bhāryaḥ — along with his wife; sa-prajaḥ — along with his subjects; kāmān — the necessities of life; bubhuje — he enjoyed; anya — from others; avirodhataḥ — without disturbance; saṅgīyamāna — being praised; sat-kīrtiḥ — reputation for pious activities; sa-strībhiḥ — along with their wives; sura-gāyakaiḥ — by celestial musicians; prati-ūṣeṣu — at every dawn; anubaddhena — being attached; hṛdā — with the heart; śṛṇvan — listening to; hareḥ — of Lord Hari; kathāḥ — the topics.

Translation
Emperor Svāyambhuva Manu enjoyed life with his wife and subjects and fulfilled his desires without being disturbed by unwanted principles contrary to the process of religion. Celestial musicians and their wives sang in chorus about the pure reputation of the Emperor, and early in the morning, every day, he used to listen to the pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead with a loving heart.

Text 34
निष्णातं योगमायासु मुनिं स्वायम्भुवं मनुम् ।
यदाभ्रंशयितुं भोगा न शेकुर्भगवत्परम् ॥ ३४ ॥
niṣṇātaṁ yoga-māyāsu
muniṁ svāyambhuvaṁ manum
yad ābhraṁśayituṁ bhogā
na śekur bhagavat-param
Synonyms
niṣṇātam — absorbed; yoga-māyāsu — in temporary enjoyment; munim — who was equal to a saint; svāyambhuvam — Svāyambhuva; manum — Manu; yat — from which; ābhraṁśayitum — to cause to deviate; bhogāḥ — material enjoyments; na — not; śekuḥ — were able; bhagavat-param — who was a great devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
Thus Svāyambhuva Manu was a saintly king. Although absorbed in material happiness, he was not dragged to the lowest grade of life, for he always enjoyed his material happiness in a Kṛṣṇa conscious atmosphere.

Text 35
अयातयामास्तस्यासन् यामा:स्वान्तरयापना: ।
श‍ृण्वतो ध्यायतो विष्णो: कुर्वतो ब्रुवत: कथा: ॥ ३५ ॥
ayāta-yāmās tasyāsan
yāmāḥ svāntara-yāpanāḥ
śṛṇvato dhyāyato viṣṇoḥ
kurvato bruvataḥ kathāḥ
Synonyms
ayāta-yāmāḥ — time never lost; tasya — of Manu; āsan — were; yāmāḥ — the hours; sva-antara — his duration of life; yāpanāḥ — bringing to an end; śṛṇvataḥ — hearing; dhyāyataḥ — contemplating; viṣṇoḥ — of Lord Viṣṇu; kurvataḥ — acting; bruvataḥ — speaking; kathāḥ — the topics.

Translation
Consequently, although his duration of life gradually came to an end, his long life, consisting of a Manvantara era, was not spent in vain, since he ever engaged in hearing, contemplating, writing down and chanting the pastimes of the Lord.

Text 36
स एवं स्वान्तरं निन्ये युगानामेकसप्ततिम् ।
वासुदेवप्रसङ्गेन परिभूतगतित्रय: ॥ ३६ ॥
sa evaṁ svāntaraṁ ninye
yugānām eka-saptatim
vāsudeva-prasaṅgena
paribhūta-gati-trayaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Svāyambhuva Manu); evam — thus; sva-antaram — his own period; ninye — passed; yugānām — of the cycles of four ages; eka-saptatim — seventy-one; vāsudeva — with Vāsudeva; prasaṅgena — by topics connected; paribhūta — transcended; gati-trayaḥ — the three destinations.

Translation
He passed his time, which lasted seventy-one cycles of the four ages [71 × 4,320,000 years], always thinking of Vāsudeva and always engaged in matters regarding Vāsudeva. Thus he transcended the three destinations.

Text 37
शारीरा मानसा दिव्या वैयासे ये च मानुषा: ।
भौतिकाश्च कथं क्लेशा बाधन्ते हरिसंश्रयम् ॥ ३७ ॥
śārīrā mānasā divyā
vaiyāse ye ca mānuṣāḥ
bhautikāś ca kathaṁ kleśā
bādhante hari-saṁśrayam
Synonyms
śārīrāḥ — pertaining to the body; mānasāḥ — pertaining to the mind; divyāḥ — pertaining to supernatural powers (demigods); vaiyāse — O Vidura; ye — those; ca — and; mānuṣāḥ — pertaining to other men; bhautikāḥ — pertaining to other living beings; ca — and; katham — how; kleśāḥ — miseries; bādhante — can trouble; hari-saṁśrayam — one who has taken shelter of Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Translation
Therefore, O Vidura, how can persons completely under the shelter of Lord Kṛṣṇa in devotional service be put into miseries pertaining to the body, the mind, nature, and other men and living creatures?

Text 38
य: पृष्टो मुनिभि: प्राह धर्मान्नानाविदाञ्छुभान् ।
नृणां वर्णाश्रमाणां च सर्वभूतहित: सदा ॥ ३८ ॥
yaḥ pṛṣṭo munibhiḥ prāha
dharmān nānā-vidhāñ chubhān
nṛṇāṁ varṇāśramāṇāṁ ca
sarva-bhūta-hitaḥ sadā
Synonyms
yaḥ — who; pṛṣṭaḥ — being questioned; munibhiḥ — by the sages; prāha — spoke; dharmān — the duties; nānā-vidhān — many varieties; śubhān — auspicious; nṛṇām — of human society; varṇa-āśramāṇām — of the varṇas and āśramas; ca — and; sarva-bhūta — for all living beings; hitaḥ — who does welfare; sadā — always.

Translation
In reply to questions asked by certain sages, he [Svāyambhuva Manu], out of compassion for all living entities, taught the diverse sacred duties of men in general and the different varṇas and āśramas.

Text 39
एतत्त आदिराजस्य मनोश्चरितमद्भुतम् ।
वर्णितं वर्णनीयस्य तदपत्योदयं श‍ृणु ॥ ३९ ॥
etat ta ādi-rājasya
manoś caritam adbhutam
varṇitaṁ varṇanīyasya
tad-apatyodayaṁ śṛṇu
Synonyms
etat — this; te — unto you; ādi-rājasya — of the first emperor; manoḥ — of Svāyambhuva Manu; caritam — the character; adbhutam — wonderful; varṇitam — described; varṇanīyasya — whose reputation is worthy of description; tat-apatya — of his daughter; udayam — to the flourishing; śṛṇu — please listen.

Translation
I have spoken to you of the wonderful character of Svāyambhuva Manu, the original king, whose reputation is worthy of description. Please hear as I speak of the flourishing of his daughter Devahūti.