Text 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
निर्वेदवादिनीमेवं मनोर्दुहितरं मुनि: ।
दयालु: शालिनीमाह शुक्लाभिव्याहृतं स्मरन् ॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvāca
nirveda-vādinīm evaṁ
manor duhitaraṁ muniḥ
dayāluḥ śālinīm āha
śuklābhivyāhṛtaṁ smaran
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ — the great sage Maitreya; uvāca — said; nirveda-vādinīm — who was speaking words full of renunciation; evam — thus; manoḥ — of Svāyambhuva Manu; duhitaram — to the daughter; muniḥ — the sage Kardama; dayāluḥ — merciful; śālinīm — who was worthy of praise; āha — replied; śukla — by Lord Viṣṇu; abhivyāhṛtam — what was said; smaran — recalling.

Translation
Recalling the words of Lord Viṣṇu, the merciful sage Kardama replied as follows to Svāyambhuva Manu’s praiseworthy daughter, Devahūti, who was speaking words full of renunciation.

Text 2
ऋषिरुवाच
मा खिदो राजपुत्रीत्थमात्मानं प्रत्यनिन्दिते ।
भगवांस्तेऽक्षरो गर्भमदूरात्सम्प्रपत्स्यते ॥ २ ॥
ṛṣir uvāca
mā khido rāja-putrīttham
ātmānaṁ praty anindite
bhagavāṁs te ’kṣaro garbham
adūrāt samprapatsyate
Synonyms
ṛṣiḥ uvāca — the sage said; mā khidaḥ — do not be disappointed; rāja-putri — O princess; ittham — in this way; ātmānam — yourself; prati — toward; anindite — O praiseworthy Devahūti; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; te — your; akṣaraḥ — infallible; garbham — womb; adūrāt — without delay; samprapatsyate — will enter.

Translation
The sage said: Do not be disappointed with yourself, O princess. You are actually praiseworthy. The infallible Supreme Personality of Godhead will shortly enter your womb as your son.

Text 3
धृतव्रतासि भद्रं ते दमेन नियमेन च ।
तपोद्रविणदानैश्च श्रद्धया चेश्वरं भज ॥ ३ ॥
dhṛta-vratāsi bhadraṁ te
damena niyamena ca
tapo-draviṇa-dānaiś ca
śraddhayā ceśvaraṁ bhaja
Synonyms
dhṛta-vratā asi — you have undertaken sacred vows; bhadram te — may God bless you; damena — by control of the senses; niyamena — by religious observances; ca — and; tapaḥ — austerities; draviṇa — of money; dānaiḥ — by giving in charity; ca — and; śraddhayā — with great faith; ca — and; īśvaram — the Supreme Lord; bhaja — worship.

Translation
You have undertaken sacred vows. God will bless you. Hence you should worship the Lord with great faith, through sensory control, religious observances, austerities and gifts of your money in charity.

Text 4
स त्वयाराधित: शुक्लो वितन्वन्मामकंयश: ।
छेत्ता ते हृदयग्रन्थिमौदर्यो ब्रह्मभावन: ॥ ४ ॥
sa tvayārādhitaḥ śuklo
vitanvan māmakaṁ yaśaḥ
chettā te hṛdaya-granthim
audaryo brahma-bhāvanaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — He; tvayā — by you; ārādhitaḥ — being worshiped; śuklaḥ — the Personality of Godhead; vitanvan — spreading; māmakam — my; yaśaḥ — fame; chettā — He will cut; te — your; hṛdaya — of the heart; granthim — knot; audaryaḥ — your son; brahma — knowledge of Brahman; bhāvanaḥ — teaching.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead, being worshiped by you, will spread my name and fame. He will vanquish the knot of your heart by becoming your son and teaching knowledge of Brahman.

Text 5
मैत्रेय उवाच
देवहूत्यपि संदेशं गौरवेण प्रजापते: ।
सम्यक् श्रद्धाय पुरुषं कूटस्थमभजद्गुरुम् ॥ ५ ॥
maitreya uvāca
devahūty api sandeśaṁ
gauraveṇa prajāpateḥ
samyak śraddhāya puruṣaṁ
kūṭa-stham abhajad gurum
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; devahūtī — Devahūti; api — also; sandeśam — the direction; gauraveṇa — with great respect; prajāpateḥ — of Kardama; samyak — complete; śraddhāya — having faith in; puruṣam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kūṭa-stham — situated in everyone’s heart; abhajat — worshiped; gurum — most worshipable.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya said: Devahūti was fully faithful and respectful toward the direction of her husband, Kardama, who was one of the Prajāpatis, or generators of human beings in the universe. O great sage, she thus began to worship the master of the universe, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in everyone’s heart.

Text 6
तस्यां बहुतिथे काले भगवान्मधुसूदन: ।
कार्दमं वीर्यमापन्नो जज्ञेऽग्निरिव दारुणि ॥ ६ ॥
tasyāṁ bahu-tithe kāle
bhagavān madhusūdanaḥ
kārdamaṁ vīryam āpanno
jajñe ’gnir iva dāruṇi
Synonyms
tasyām — in Devahūti; bahu-tithe kāle — after many years; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; madhu-sūdanaḥ — the killer of the demon Madhu; kārdamam — of Kardama; vīryam — the semen; āpannaḥ — entered; jajñe — He appeared; agniḥ — fire; iva — like; dāruṇi — in wood.

Translation
After many, many years, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Madhusūdana, the killer of the demon Madhu, having entered the semen of Kardama, appeared in Devahūti just as fire comes from wood in a sacrifice.

Text 7
अवादयंस्तदा व्योम्नि वादित्राणि घनाघना: ।
गायन्ति तं स्म गन्धर्वा नृत्यन्त्यप्सरसो मुदा ॥ ७ ॥
avādayaṁs tadā vyomni
vāditrāṇi ghanāghanāḥ
gāyanti taṁ sma gandharvā
nṛtyanty apsaraso mudā
Synonyms
avādayan — sounded; tadā — at that time; vyomni — in the sky; vāditrāṇi — musical instruments; ghanāghanāḥ — the rain clouds; gāyanti — sang; tam — to Him; sma — certainly; gandharvāḥ — the Gandharvas; nṛtyanti — danced; apsarasaḥ — the Apsarās; mudā — in joyful ecstasy.

Translation
At the time of His descent on earth, demigods in the form of raining clouds sounded musical instruments in the sky. The celestial musicians, the Gandharvas, sang the glories of the Lord, while celestial dancing girls known as Apsarās danced in joyful ecstasy.

Text 8
पेतु: सुमनसो दिव्या: खेचरैरपवर्जिता: ।
प्रसेदुश्च दिश: सर्वा अम्भांसि च मनांसि च ॥ ८ ॥
petuḥ sumanaso divyāḥ
khe-carair apavarjitāḥ
praseduś ca diśaḥ sarvā
ambhāṁsi ca manāṁsi ca
Synonyms
petuḥ — fell; sumanasaḥ — flowers; divyāḥ — beautiful; khe-caraiḥ — by the demigods who fly in the sky; apavarjitāḥ — dropped; praseduḥ — became satisfied; ca — and; diśaḥ — directions; sarvāḥ — all; ambhāṁsi — waters; ca — and; manāṁsi — minds; ca — and.

Translation
At the time of the Lord’s appearance, the demigods flying freely in the sky showered flowers. All the directions, all the waters and everyone’s mind became very satisfied.

Text 9
तत्कर्दमाश्रमपदं सरस्वत्या परिश्रितम् ।
स्वयम्भू: साकमृषिभिर्मरीच्यादिभिरभ्ययात् ॥ ९ ॥
tat kardamāśrama-padaṁ
sarasvatyā pariśritam
svayambhūḥ sākam ṛṣibhir
marīcy-ādibhir abhyayāt
Synonyms
tat — that; kardama — of Kardama; āśrama-padam — to the place of the hermitage; sarasvatyā — by the river Sarasvatī; pariśritam — surrounded; svayambhūḥ — Brahmā (the self-born); sākam — along with; ṛṣibhiḥ — the sages; marīci — the great sage Marīci; ādibhiḥ — and others; abhyayāt — he came there.

Translation
Brahmā, the first-born living being, went along with Marīci and other sages to the place of Kardama’s hermitage, which was surrounded by the river Sarasvatī.

Text 10
भगवन्तं परं ब्रह्म सत्त्वेनांशेन शत्रुहन् ।
तत्त्वसंख्यानविज्ञप्‍त्यै जातं विद्वानज: स्वराट् ॥ १० ॥
bhagavantaṁ paraṁ brahma
sattvenāṁśena śatru-han
tattva-saṅkhyāna-vijñaptyai
jātaṁ vidvān ajaḥ svarāṭ
Synonyms
bhagavantam — the Lord; param — supreme; brahma — Brahman; sattvena — having an uncontaminated existence; aṁśena — by a plenary portion; śatru-han — O killer of the enemy, Vidura; tattva-saṅkhyāna — the philosophy of the twenty-four material elements; vijñaptyai — for explaining; jātam — appeared; vidvān — knowing; ajaḥ — the unborn (Lord Brahmā); sva-rāṭ — independent.

Translation
Maitreya continued: O killer of the enemy, the unborn Lord Brahmā, who is almost independent in acquiring knowledge, could understand that a portion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in His quality of pure existence, had appeared in the womb of Devahūti just to explain the complete state of knowledge known as sāṅkhya-yoga.

Text 11
सभाजयन् विशुद्धेन चेतसा तच्चिकीर्षितम् ।
प्रहृष्यमाणैरसुभि: कर्दमं चेदमभ्यधात् ॥ ११ ॥
sabhājayan viśuddhena
cetasā tac-cikīrṣitam
prahṛṣyamāṇair asubhiḥ
kardamaṁ cedam abhyadhāt
Synonyms
sabhājayan — worshiping; viśuddhena — pure; cetasā — with a heart; tat — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; cikīrṣitam — the intended activities; prahṛṣyamāṇaiḥ — gladdened; asubhiḥ — with senses; kardamam — to Kardama Muni; ca — and Devahūti; idam — this; abhyadhāt — spoke.

Translation
After worshiping the Supreme Lord with gladdened senses and a pure heart for His intended activities as an incarnation, Brahmā spoke as follows to Kardama and Devahūti.

Text 12
ब्रह्मोवाच
त्वया मेऽपचितिस्तात कल्पिता निर्व्यलीकत: ।
यन्मे सञ्जगृहे वाक्यं भवान्मानद मानयन् ॥ १२ ॥
brahmovāca
tvayā me ’pacitis tāta
kalpitā nirvyalīkataḥ
yan me sañjagṛhe vākyaṁ
bhavān mānada mānayan
Synonyms
brahmā — Lord Brahmā; uvāca — said; tvayā — by you; me — my; apacitiḥ — worship; tāta — O son; kalpitā — is accomplished; nirvyalīkataḥ — without duplicity; yat — since; me — my; sañjagṛhe — have completely accepted; vākyam — instructions; bhavān — you; māna-da — O Kardama (one who offers honor to others); mānayan — respecting.

Translation
Lord Brahmā said: My dear son Kardama, since you have completely accepted my instructions without duplicity, showing them proper respect, you have worshiped me properly. Whatever instructions you took from me you have carried out, and thereby you have honored me.

Text 13
एतावत्येव शुश्रूषा कार्या पितरि पुत्रकै: ।
बाढमित्यनुमन्येत गौरवेण गुरोर्वच: ॥ १३ ॥
etāvaty eva śuśrūṣā
kāryā pitari putrakaiḥ
bāḍham ity anumanyeta
gauraveṇa guror vacaḥ
Synonyms
etāvatī — to this extent; eva — exactly; śuśrūṣā — service; kāryā — ought to be rendered; pitari — to the father; putrakaiḥ — by the sons; bāḍham iti — accepting, “Yes, sir”; anumanyeta — he should obey; gauraveṇa — with due deference; guroḥ — of the guru; vacaḥ — commands.

Translation
Sons ought to render service to their father exactly to this extent. One should obey the command of his father or spiritual master with due deference, saying, “Yes, sir.”

Text 14
इमा दुहितर: सत्यस्तव वत्स सुमध्यमा: ।
सर्गमेतं प्रभावै: स्वैर्बृंहयिष्यन्त्यनेकधा ॥ १४ ॥
imā duhitaraḥ satyas
tava vatsa sumadhyamāḥ
sargam etaṁ prabhāvaiḥ svair
bṛṁhayiṣyanty anekadhā
Synonyms
imāḥ — these; duhitaraḥ — daughters; satyaḥ — chaste; tava — your; vatsa — O my dear son; su-madhyamāḥ — thin-waisted; sargam — creation; etam — this; prabhāvaiḥ — by descendants; svaiḥ — their own; bṛṁhayiṣyanti — they will increase; aneka-dhā — in various ways.

Translation
Lord Brahmā then praised Kardama Muni’s nine daughters, saying: All your thin-waisted daughters are certainly very chaste. I am sure they will increase this creation by their own descendants in various ways.

Text 15
अतस्त्वमृषिमुख्येभ्यो यथाशीलं यथारुचि ।
आत्मजा: परिदेह्यद्य विस्तृणीहि यशो भुवि ॥ १५ ॥
atas tvam ṛṣi-mukhyebhyo
yathā-śīlaṁ yathā-ruci
ātmajāḥ paridehy adya
vistṛṇīhi yaśo bhuvi
Synonyms
ataḥ — therefore; tvam — you; ṛṣi-mukhyebhyaḥ — unto the foremost sages; yathā-śīlam — according to temperament; yathā-ruci — according to taste; ātma-jāḥ — your daughters; paridehi — please give away; adya — today; vistṛṇīhi — spread; yaśaḥ — fame; bhuvi — over the universe.

Translation
Therefore, today please give away your daughters to the foremost of the sages, with due regard for the girls’ temperaments and likings, and thereby spread your fame all over the universe.

Text 16
वेदाहमाद्यं पुरुषमवतीर्णं स्वमायया ।
भूतानां शेवधिं देहं बिभ्राणं कपिलं मुने ॥ १६ ॥
vedāham ādyaṁ puruṣam
avatīrṇaṁ sva-māyayā
bhūtānāṁ śevadhiṁ dehaṁ
bibhrāṇaṁ kapilaṁ mune
Synonyms
veda — know; aham — I; ādyam — the original; puruṣam — enjoyer; avatīrṇam — incarnated; sva-māyayā — by His own internal energy; bhūtānām — of all the living entities; śevadhim — the bestower of all that is desired, who is just like a vast treasure; deham — the body; bibhrāṇam — assuming; kapilam — Kapila Muni; mune — O sage (Kardama).

Translation
O Kardama, I know that the original Supreme Personality of Godhead has now appeared as an incarnation by His internal energy. He is the bestower of all that is desired by the living entities, and He has now assumed the body of Kapila Muni.

Text 17
ज्ञानविज्ञानयोगेन कर्मणामुद्धरन् जटा: ।
हिरण्यकेश: पद्माक्ष: पद्ममुद्रापदाम्बुज: ॥ १७ ॥
jñāna-vijñāna-yogena
karmaṇām uddharan jaṭāḥ
hiraṇya-keśaḥ padmākṣaḥ
padma-mudrā-padāmbujaḥ
Synonyms
jñāna — of scriptural knowledge; vijñāna — and application; yogena — by means of mystic yoga; karmaṇām — of material actions; uddharan — uprooting; jaṭāḥ — the roots; hiraṇya-keśaḥ — golden hair; padma-akṣaḥ — lotus-eyed; padma-mudrā — marked with the sign of the lotus; pada-ambujaḥ — having lotus feet.

Translation
By mystic yoga and the practical application of knowledge from the scriptures, Kapila Muni, who is characterized by His golden hair, His eyes just like lotus petals and His lotus feet, which bear the marks of lotus flowers, will uproot the deep-rooted desire for work in this material world.

Text 18
एष मानवि ते गर्भं प्रविष्ट: कैटभार्दन: ।
अविद्यासंशयग्रन्थिं छित्त्वा गां विचरिष्यति ॥ १८ ॥
eṣa mānavi te garbhaṁ
praviṣṭaḥ kaiṭabhārdanaḥ
avidyā-saṁśaya-granthiṁ
chittvā gāṁ vicariṣyati
Synonyms
eṣaḥ — the same Supreme Personality of Godhead; mānavi — O daughter of Manu; te — your; garbham — womb; praviṣṭaḥ — has entered; kaiṭabha-ardanaḥ — the killer of the demon Kaiṭabha; avidyā — of ignorance; saṁśaya — and of doubt; granthim — the knot; chittvā — cutting off; gām — the world; vicariṣyati — He will travel over.

Translation
Lord Brahmā then told Devahūti: My dear daughter of Manu, the same Supreme Personality of Godhead who killed the demon Kaiṭabha is now within your womb. He will cut off all the knots of your ignorance and doubt. Then He will travel all over the world.

Text 19
अयं सिद्धगणाधीश: साङ्ख्याचार्यै: सुसम्मत: ।
लोके कपिल इत्याख्यां गन्ता ते कीर्तिवर्धन: ॥ १९ ॥
ayaṁ siddha-gaṇādhīśaḥ
sāṅkhyācāryaiḥ susammataḥ
loke kapila ity ākhyāṁ
gantā te kīrti-vardhanaḥ
Synonyms
ayam — this Personality of Godhead; siddha-gaṇa — of the perfected sages; adhīśaḥ — the head; sāṅkhya-ācāryaiḥ — by ācāryas expert in Sāṅkhya philosophy; su-sammataḥ — approved according to Vedic principles; loke — in the world; kapilaḥ iti — as Kapila; ākhyām — celebrated; gantā — He will go about; te — your; kīrti — fame; vardhanaḥ — increasing.

Translation
Your son will be the head of all the perfected souls. He will be approved by the ācāryas expert in disseminating real knowledge, and among the people He will be celebrated by the name Kapila. As the son of Devahūti, He will increase your fame.

Text 20
मैत्रेय उवाच
तावाश्वास्य जगत्स्रष्टा कुमारै: सहनारद: ।
हंसो हंसेन यानेन त्रिधामपरमं ययौ ॥ २० ॥
maitreya uvāca
tāv āśvāsya jagat-sraṣṭā
kumāraiḥ saha-nāradaḥ
haṁso haṁsena yānena
tri-dhāma-paramaṁ yayau
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; tau — the couple; āśvāsya — having reassured; jagat-sraṣṭā — the creator of the universe; kumāraiḥ — along with the Kumāras; saha-nāradaḥ — with Nārada; haṁsaḥ — Lord Brahmā; haṁsena yānena — by his swan carrier; tri-dhāma-paramam — to the highest planetary system; yayau — went.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya said: After thus speaking to Kardama Muni and his wife Devahūti, Lord Brahmā, the creator of the universe, who is also known as Haṁsa, went back to the highest of the three planetary systems on his swan carrier with the four Kumāras and Nārada.

Text 21
गते शतधृतौ क्षत्त: कर्दमस्तेन चोदित: ।
यथोदितं स्वदुहितृ: प्रादाद्विश्वसृजां तत: ॥ २१ ॥
gate śata-dhṛtau kṣattaḥ
kardamas tena coditaḥ
yathoditaṁ sva-duhitṝḥ
prādād viśva-sṛjāṁ tataḥ
Synonyms
gate — after he departed; śata-dhṛtau — Lord Brahmā; kṣattaḥ — O Vidura; kardamaḥ — Kardama Muni; tena — by him; coditaḥ — ordered; yathā-uditam — as told; sva-duhitṝḥ — his own daughters; prādāt — handed over; viśva-sṛjām — to the creators of the world’s population; tataḥ — thereafter.

Translation
O Vidura, after the departure of Brahmā, Kardama Muni, having been ordered by Brahmā, handed over his nine daughters, as instructed, to the nine great sages who created the population of the world.

Texts 22-23
मरीचये कलां प्रादादनसूयामथात्रये ।
श्रद्धामङ्गिरसेऽयच्छत्पुलस्त्याय हविर्भुवम् ॥ २२ ॥
पुलहाय गतिं युक्तां क्रतवे च क्रियां सतीम् ।
ख्यातिं च भृगवेऽयच्छद्वसिष्ठायाप्यरुन्धतीम् ॥ २३ ॥
marīcaye kalāṁ prādād
anasūyām athātraye
śraddhām aṅgirase ’yacchat
pulastyāya havirbhuvam
pulahāya gatiṁ yuktāṁ
kratave ca kriyāṁ satīm
khyātiṁ ca bhṛgave ’yacchad
vasiṣṭhāyāpy arundhatīm
Synonyms
marīcaye — unto Marīci; kalām — Kalā; prādāt — he handed over; anasūyām — Anasūyā; atha — then; atraye — unto Atri; śraddhām — Śraddhā; aṅgirase — unto Aṅgirā; ayacchat — he gave away; pulastyāya — unto Pulastya; havirbhuvam — Havirbhū; pulahāya — unto Pulaha; gatim — Gati; yuktām — suitable; kratave — unto Kratu; ca — and; kriyām — Kriyā; satīm — virtuous; khyātim — Khyāti; ca — and; bhṛgave — unto Bhṛgu; ayacchat — he gave away; vasiṣṭhāya — unto the sage Vasiṣṭha; api — also; arundhatīm — Arundhatī.

Translation
Kardama Muni handed over his daughter Kalā to Marīci, and another daughter, Anasūyā, to Atri. He delivered Śraddhā to Aṅgirā, and Havirbhū to Pulastya. He delivered Gati to Pulaha, the chaste Kriyā to Kratu, Khyāti to Bhṛgu, and Arundhatī to Vasiṣṭha.

Text 24
अथर्वणेऽददाच्छान्तिं यया यज्ञो वितन्यते ।
विप्रर्षभान् कृतोद्वाहान् सदारान् समलालयत् ॥ २४ ॥
atharvaṇe ’dadāc chāntiṁ
yayā yajño vitanyate
viprarṣabhān kṛtodvāhān
sadārān samalālayat
Synonyms
atharvaṇe — to Atharvā; adadāt — he gave away; śāntim — Śānti; yayā — by whom; yajñaḥ — sacrifice; vitanyate — is performed; vipra-ṛṣabhān — the foremost brāhmaṇas; kṛta-udvāhān — married; sa-dārān — with their wives; samalālayat — maintained them.

Translation
He delivered Śānti to Atharvā. Because of Śānti, sacrificial ceremonies are well performed. Thus he got the foremost brāhmaṇas married, and he maintained them along with their wives.

Text 25
ततस्त ऋषय: क्षत्त कृतदारा निमन्‍त्र्‍य तम् ।
प्रातिष्ठन्नन्दिमापन्ना: स्वं स्वमाश्रममण्डलम् ॥ २५ ॥
tatas ta ṛṣayaḥ kṣattaḥ
kṛta-dārā nimantrya tam
prātiṣṭhan nandim āpannāḥ
svaṁ svam āśrama-maṇḍalam
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; te — they; ṛṣayaḥ — the sages; kṣattaḥ — O Vidura; kṛta-dārāḥ — thus married; nimantrya — taking leave of; tam — Kardama; prātiṣṭhan — they departed; nandim — joy; āpannāḥ — obtained; svam svam — each to his own; āśrama-maṇḍalam — hermitage.

Translation
Thus married, the sages took leave of Kardama and departed full of joy, each for his own hermitage, O Vidura.

Text 26
स चावतीर्णं त्रियुगमाज्ञाय विबुधर्षभम् ।
विविक्त उपसङ्गम्य प्रणम्य समभाषत ॥ २६ ॥
sa cāvatīrṇaṁ tri-yugam
ājñāya vibudharṣabham
vivikta upasaṅgamya
praṇamya samabhāṣata
Synonyms
saḥ — the sage Kardama; ca — and; avatīrṇam — descended; tri-yugam — Viṣṇu; ājñāya — having understood; vibudha-ṛṣabham — the chief of the demigods; vivikte — in a secluded place; upasaṅgamya — having approached; praṇamya — offering obeisances; samabhāṣata — he spoke.

Translation
When Kardama Muni understood that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the chief of all the demigods, Viṣṇu, had descended, Kardama approached Him in a secluded place, offered obeisances and spoke as follows.

Text 27
अहो पापच्यमानानां निरये स्वैरमङ्गलै: ।
कालेन भूयसा नूनं प्रसीदन्तीह देवता: ॥ २७ ॥
aho pāpacyamānānāṁ
niraye svair amaṅgalaiḥ
kālena bhūyasā nūnaṁ
prasīdantīha devatāḥ
Synonyms
aho — oh; pāpacyamānānām — with those being much afflicted; niraye — in the hellish material entanglement; svaiḥ — their own; amaṅgalaiḥ — by misdeeds; kālena bhūyasā — after a long time; nūnam — indeed; prasīdanti — they are pleased; iha — in this world; devatāḥ — the demigods.

Translation
Kardama Muni said: Oh, after a long time the demigods of this universe have become pleased with the suffering souls who are in material entanglement because of their own misdeeds.

Text 28
बहुजन्मविपक्‍वेन सम्यग्योगसमाधिना ।
द्रष्टुं यतन्ते यतय: शून्यागारेषु यत्पदम् ॥ २८ ॥
bahu-janma-vipakvena
samyag-yoga-samādhinā
draṣṭuṁ yatante yatayaḥ
śūnyāgāreṣu yat-padam
Synonyms
bahu — many; janma — after births; vipakvena — which is mature; samyak — perfect; yoga-samādhinā — by trance in yoga; draṣṭum — to see; yatante — they endeavor; yatayaḥ — the yogīs; śūnya-agāreṣu — in secluded places; yat — whose; padam — feet.

Translation
After many births, mature yogīs, by complete trance in yoga, endeavor in secluded places to see the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 29
स एव भगवानद्य हेलनं नगणय्य न: ।
गृहेषु जातो ग्राम्याणां य: स्वानां पक्षपोषण: ॥ २९ ॥
sa eva bhagavān adya
helanaṁ na gaṇayya naḥ
gṛheṣu jāto grāmyāṇāṁ
yaḥ svānāṁ pakṣa-poṣaṇaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ eva — that very same; bhagavān — Supreme Personality of Godhead; adya — today; helanam — negligence; na — not; gaṇayya — considering high and low; naḥ — our; gṛheṣu — in the houses; jātaḥ — appeared; grāmyāṇām — of ordinary householders; yaḥ — He who; svānām — of His own devotees; pakṣa-poṣaṇaḥ — who supports the party.

Translation
Not considering the negligence of ordinary householders like us, that very same Supreme Personality of Godhead appears in our homes just to support His devotees.

Text 30
स्वीयं वाक्यमृतं कर्तुमवतीर्णोऽसि मे गृहे ।
चिकीर्षुर्भगवान् ज्ञानं भक्तानां मानवर्धन: ॥ ३० ॥
svīyaṁ vākyam ṛtaṁ kartum
avatīrṇo ’si me gṛhe
cikīrṣur bhagavān jñānaṁ
bhaktānāṁ māna-vardhanaḥ
Synonyms
svīyam — Your own; vākyam — words; ṛtam — true; kartum — to make; avatīrṇaḥ — descended; asi — You are; me gṛhe — in my house; cikīrṣuḥ — desirous of disseminating; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; jñānam — knowledge; bhaktānām — of the devotees; māna — the honor; vardhanaḥ — who increases.

Translation
Kardama Muni said: You, my dear Lord, who are always increasing the honor of Your devotees, have descended in my home just to fulfill Your word and disseminate the process of real knowledge.

Text 31
तान्येव तेऽभिरूपाणि रूपाणि भगवंस्तव ।
यानि यानि च रोचन्ते स्वजनानामरूपिण: ॥ ३१ ॥
tāny eva te ’bhirūpāṇi
rūpāṇi bhagavaṁs tava
yāni yāni ca rocante
sva-janānām arūpiṇaḥ
Synonyms
tāni — those; eva — truly; te — Your; abhirūpāṇi — suitable; rūpāṇi — forms; bhagavan — O Lord; tava — Your; yāni yāni — whichever; ca — and; rocante — are pleasing; sva-janānām — to Your own devotees; arūpiṇaḥ — of one with no material form.

Translation
My dear Lord, although You have no material form, You have Your own innumerable forms. They truly are Your transcendental forms, which are pleasing to Your devotees.

Text 32
त्वां सूरिभिस्तत्त्वबुभुत्सयाद्धा
सदाभिवादार्हणपादपीठम् ।
ऐश्वर्यवैराग्ययशोऽवबोध-
वीर्यश्रिया पूर्तमहं प्रपद्ये ॥ ३२ ॥
tvāṁ sūribhis tattva-bubhutsayāddhā
sadābhivādārhaṇa-pāda-pīṭham
aiśvarya-vairāgya-yaśo-’vabodha-
vīrya-śriyā pūrtam ahaṁ prapadye
Synonyms
tvām — unto You; sūribhiḥ — by the great sages; tattva — the Absolute Truth; bubhutsayā — with a desire to understand; addhā — certainly; sadā — always; abhivāda — of worshipful respects; arhaṇa — which are worthy; pāda — of Your feet; pīṭham — to the seat; aiśvarya — opulence; vairāgya — renunciation; yaśaḥ — fame; avabodha — knowledge; vīrya — strength; śriyā — with beauty; pūrtam — who are full; aham — I; prapadye — surrender.

Translation
My dear Lord, Your lotus feet are the reservoir that always deserves to receive worshipful homage from all great sages eager to understand the Absolute Truth. You are full in opulence, renunciation, transcendental fame, knowledge, strength and beauty, and therefore I surrender myself unto Your lotus feet.

Text 33
परं प्रधानं पुरुषं महान्तं
कालं कविं त्रिवृतं लोकपालम् ।
आत्मानुभूत्यानुगतप्रपञ्चं
स्वच्छन्दशक्तिं कपिलं प्रपद्ये ॥ ३३ ॥
paraṁ pradhānaṁ puruṣaṁ mahāntaṁ
kālaṁ kaviṁ tri-vṛtaṁ loka-pālam
ātmānubhūtyānugata-prapañcaṁ
svacchanda-śaktiṁ kapilaṁ prapadye
Synonyms
param — transcendental; pradhānam — supreme; puruṣam — person; mahāntam — who is the origin of the material world; kālam — who is time; kavim — fully cognizant; tri-vṛtam — three modes of material nature; loka-pālam — who is the maintainer of all the universes; ātma — in Himself; anubhūtya — by internal potency; anugata — dissolved; prapañcam — whose material manifestations; sva-chanda — independently; śaktim — who is powerful; kapilam — to Lord Kapila; prapadye — I surrender.

Translation
I surrender unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, descended in the form of Kapila, who is independently powerful and transcendental, who is the Supreme Person and the Lord of the sum total of matter and the element of time, who is the fully cognizant maintainer of all the universes under the three modes of material nature, and who absorbs the material manifestations after their dissolution.

Text 34
आ स्माभिपृच्छेऽद्य पतिं प्रजानां
त्वयावतीर्णर्ण उताप्तकाम: ।
परिव्रजत्पदवीमास्थितोऽहं
चरिष्ये त्वां हृदि युञ्जन् विशोक: ॥ ३४ ॥
ā smābhipṛcche ’dya patiṁ prajānāṁ
tvayāvatīrṇarṇa utāpta-kāmaḥ
parivrajat-padavīm āsthito ’haṁ
cariṣye tvāṁ hṛdi yuñjan viśokaḥ
Synonyms
ā sma abhipṛcche — I am inquiring; adya — now; patim — the Lord; prajānām — of all created beings; tvayā — by You; avatīrṇa-ṛṇaḥ — free from debts; uta — and; āpta — fulfilled; kāmaḥ — desires; parivrajat — of an itinerant mendicant; padavīm — the path; āsthitaḥ — accepting; aham — I; cariṣye — I shall wander; tvām — You; hṛdi — in my heart; yuñjan — keeping; viśokaḥ — free from lamentation.

Translation
Today I have something to ask from You, who are the Lord of all living entities. Since I have now been liberated by You from my debts to my father, and since all my desires are fulfilled, I wish to accept the order of an itinerant mendicant. Renouncing this family life, I wish to wander about, free from lamentation, thinking always of You in my heart.

Text 35
श्री भगवानुवाच
मया प्रोक्तं हि लोकस्य प्रमाणं सत्यलौकिके ।
अथाजनि मया तुभ्यं यदवोचमृतं मुने ॥ ३५ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
mayā proktaṁ hi lokasya
pramāṇaṁ satya-laukike
athājani mayā tubhyaṁ
yad avocam ṛtaṁ mune
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; mayā — by Me; proktam — spoken; hi — in fact; lokasya — for the people; pramāṇam — authority; satya — spoken in scripture; laukike — and in ordinary speech; atha — therefore; ajani — there was birth; mayā — by Me; tubhyam — to you; yat — that which; avocam — I said; ṛtam — true; mune — O sage.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead Kapila said: Whatever I speak, whether directly or in the scriptures, is authoritative in all respects for the people of the world. O Muni, because I told you before that I would become your son, I have descended to fulfill this truth.

Text 36
एतन्मे जन्म लोकेऽस्मिन्मुमुक्षूणां दुराशयात् ।
प्रसंख्यानाय तत्त्वानां सम्मतायात्मदर्शने ॥ ३६ ॥
etan me janma loke ’smin
mumukṣūṇāṁ durāśayāt
prasaṅkhyānāya tattvānāṁ
sammatāyātma-darśane
Synonyms
etat — this; me — My; janma — birth; loke — in the world; asmin — in this; mumukṣūṇām — by those great sages seeking liberation; durāśayāt — from unnecessary material desires; prasaṅkhyānāya — for explaining; tattvānām — of the truths; sammatāya — which is highly esteemed; ātma-darśane — in self-realization.

Translation
My appearance in this world is especially to explain the philosophy of Sāṅkhya, which is highly esteemed for self-realization by those desiring freedom from the entanglement of unnecessary material desires.

Text 37
एष आत्मपथोऽव्यक्तो नष्ट: कालेन भूयसा ।
तं प्रवर्तयितुं देहमिमं विद्धि मया भृतम् ॥ ३७ ॥
eṣa ātma-patho ’vyakto
naṣṭaḥ kālena bhūyasā
taṁ pravartayituṁ deham
imaṁ viddhi mayā bhṛtam
Synonyms
eṣaḥ — this; ātma-pathaḥ — path of self-realization; avyaktaḥ — difficult to be known; naṣṭaḥ — lost; kālena bhūyasā — in the course of time; tam — this; pravartayitum — to introduce again; deham — body; imam — this; viddhi — please know; mayā — by Me; bhṛtam — assumed.

Translation
This path of self-realization, which is difficult to understand, has now been lost in the course of time. Please know that I have assumed this body of Kapila to introduce and explain this philosophy to human society again.

Text 38
गच्छ कामं मयापृष्टो मयि संन्यस्तकर्मणा ।
जित्वा सुदुर्जयं मृत्युममृतत्वाय मां भज ॥ ३८ ॥
gaccha kāmaṁ mayāpṛṣṭo
mayi sannyasta-karmaṇā
jitvā sudurjayaṁ mṛtyum
amṛtatvāya māṁ bhaja
Synonyms
gaccha — go; kāmam — as you wish; mayā — by Me; āpṛṣṭaḥ — sanctioned; mayi — to Me; sannyasta — completely surrendered; karmaṇā — with your activities; jitvā — having conquered; sudurjayam — insurmountable; mṛtyum — death; amṛtatvāya — for eternal life; mām — unto Me; bhaja — engage in devotional service.

Translation
Now, being sanctioned by Me, go as you desire, surrendering all your activities to Me. Conquering insurmountable death, worship Me for eternal life.

Text 39
मामात्मानं स्वयंज्योति: सर्वभूतगुहाशयम् ।
आत्मन्येवात्मना वीक्ष्य विशोकोऽभयमृच्छसि ॥ ३९ ॥
mām ātmānaṁ svayaṁ-jyotiḥ
sarva-bhūta-guhāśayam
ātmany evātmanā vīkṣya
viśoko ’bhayam ṛcchasi
Synonyms
mām — Me; ātmānam — the Supreme Soul, or Paramātmā; svayam-jyotiḥ — self-effulgent; sarva-bhūta — of all beings; guhā — in the hearts; āśayam — dwelling; ātmani — in your own heart; eva — indeed; ātmanā — through your intellect; vīkṣya — always seeing, always thinking; viśokaḥ — free from lamentation; abhayam — fearlessness; ṛcchasi — you will achieve.

Translation
In your own heart, through your intellect, you will always see Me, the supreme self-effulgent soul dwelling within the hearts of all living entities. Thus you will achieve the state of eternal life, free from all lamentation and fear.

Text 40
मात्र आध्यात्मिकीं विद्यां शमनीं सर्वकर्मणाम् ।
वितरिष्ये यया चासौ भयं चातितरिष्यति ॥ ४० ॥
mātra ādhyātmikīṁ vidyāṁ
śamanīṁ sarva-karmaṇām
vitariṣye yayā cāsau
bhayaṁ cātitariṣyati
Synonyms
mātre — to My mother; ādhyātmikīm — which opens the door of spiritual life; vidyām — knowledge; śamanīm — ending; sarva-karmaṇām — all fruitive activities; vitariṣye — I shall give; yayā — by which; ca — also; asau — she; bhayam — fear; ca — also; atitariṣyati — will overcome.

Translation
I shall also describe this sublime knowledge, which is the door to spiritual life, to My mother, so that she also can attain perfection and self-realization, ending all reactions to fruitive activities. Thus she also will be freed from all material fear.

Text 41
मैत्रेय उवाच
एवं समुदितस्तेन कपिलेन प्रजापति: ।
दक्षिणीकृत्य तं प्रीतो वनमेव जगाम ह ॥ ४१ ॥
maitreya uvāca
evaṁ samuditas tena
kapilena prajāpatiḥ
dakṣiṇī-kṛtya taṁ prīto
vanam eva jagāma ha
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya said; evam — thus; samuditaḥ — addressed; tena — by Him; kapilena — by Kapila; prajāpatiḥ — the progenitor of human society; dakṣiṇī-kṛtya — having circumambulated; tam — Him; prītaḥ — being pacified; vanam — to the forest; eva — indeed; jagāma — he left; ha — then.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya said: Thus when Kardama Muni, the progenitor of human society, was spoken to in fullness by his son, Kapila, he circumambulated Him, and with a good, pacified mind he at once left for the forest.

Text 42
व्रतं स आस्थितो मौनमात्मैकशरणो मुनि: ।
नि:सङ्गो व्यचरत्क्षोणीमनग्निरनिकेतन: ॥ ४२ ॥
vrataṁ sa āsthito maunam
ātmaika-śaraṇo muniḥ
niḥsaṅgo vyacarat kṣoṇīm
anagnir aniketanaḥ
Synonyms
vratam — vow; saḥ — he (Kardama); āsthitaḥ — accepted; maunam — silence; ātma — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; eka — exclusively; śaraṇaḥ — being sheltered; muniḥ — the sage; niḥsaṅgaḥ — without association; vyacarat — he traveled; kṣoṇīm — the earth; anagniḥ — without fire; aniketanaḥ — without shelter.

Translation
The sage Kardama accepted silence as a vow in order to think of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and take shelter of Him exclusively. Without association, he traveled over the surface of the globe as a sannyāsī, devoid of any relationship with fire or shelter.

Text 43
मनो ब्रह्मणि युञ्जानो यत्तत्सदसत: परम् ।
गुणावभासे विगुण एकभक्त्यानुभाविते ॥ ४३ ॥
mano brahmaṇi yuñjāno
yat tat sad-asataḥ param
guṇāvabhāse viguṇa
eka-bhaktyānubhāvite
Synonyms
manaḥ — mind; brahmaṇi — on the Supreme; yuñjānaḥ — fixing; yat — which; tat — that; sat-asataḥ — cause and effect; param — beyond; guṇa-avabhāse — who manifests the three modes of material nature; viguṇe — who is beyond the material modes; eka-bhaktyā — by exclusive devotion; anubhāvite — who is perceived.

Translation
He fixed his mind upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Parabrahman, who is beyond cause and effect, who manifests the three modes of material nature, who is beyond those three modes, and who is perceived only through unfailing devotional service.

Text 44
निरहंकृतिर्निर्ममश्च निर्द्वन्द्व: समद‍ृक् स्वद‍ृक् ।
प्रत्यक्प्रशान्तधीर्धीर: प्रशान्तोर्मिरिवोदधि: ॥ ४४ ॥
nirahaṅkṛtir nirmamaś ca
nirdvandvaḥ sama-dṛk sva-dṛk
pratyak-praśānta-dhīr dhīraḥ
praśāntormir ivodadhiḥ
Synonyms
nirahaṅkṛtiḥ — without false ego; nirmamaḥ — without material affection; ca — and; nirdvandvaḥ — without duality; sama-dṛk — seeing equality; sva-dṛk — seeing himself; pratyak — turned inward; praśānta — perfectly composed; dhīḥ — mind; dhīraḥ — sober, not disturbed; praśānta — calmed; ūrmiḥ — whose waves; iva — like; udadhiḥ — the ocean.

Translation
Thus he gradually became unaffected by the false ego of material identity and became free from material affection. Undisturbed, equal to everyone and without duality, he could indeed see himself also. His mind was turned inward and was perfectly calm, like an ocean unagitated by waves.

Text 45
वासुदेवे भगवति सर्वज्ञे प्रत्यगात्मनि ।
परेण भक्तिभावेन लब्धात्मा मुक्तबन्धन: ॥ ४५ ॥
vāsudeve bhagavati
sarva-jñe pratyag-ātmani
pareṇa bhakti-bhāvena
labdhātmā mukta-bandhanaḥ
Synonyms
vāsudeve — to Vāsudeva; bhagavati — the Personality of Godhead; sarva-jñe — omniscient; pratyak-ātmani — the Supersoul within everyone; pareṇa — transcendental; bhakti-bhāvena — by devotional service; labdha-ātmā — being situated in himself; mukta-bandhanaḥ — liberated from material bondage.

Translation
He thus became liberated from conditioned life and became self-situated in transcendental devotional service to the Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, the omniscient Supersoul within everyone.

Text 46
आत्मानं सर्वभूतेषु भगवन्तमवस्थितम् ।
अपश्यत्सर्वभूतानि भगवत्यपि चात्मनि ॥ ४६ ॥
ātmānaṁ sarva-bhūteṣu
bhagavantam avasthitam
apaśyat sarva-bhūtāni
bhagavaty api cātmani
Synonyms
ātmānam — the Supersoul; sarva-bhūteṣu — in all living beings; bhagavantam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; avasthitam — situated; apaśyat — he saw; sarva-bhūtāni — all living beings; bhagavati — in the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api — moreover; ca — and; ātmani — on the Supersoul.

Translation
He began to see that the Supreme Personality of Godhead is seated in everyone’s heart, and that everyone is existing on Him, because He is the Supersoul of everyone.

Text 47
इच्छाद्वेषविहीनेन सर्वत्र समचेतसा ।
भगवद्भक्तियुक्तेन प्राप्ता भागवती गति: ॥ ४७ ॥
icchā-dveṣa-vihīnena
sarvatra sama-cetasā
bhagavad-bhakti-yuktena
prāptā bhāgavatī gatiḥ
Synonyms
icchā — desire; dveṣa — and hatred; vihīnena — freed from; sarvatra — everywhere; sama — equal; cetasā — with the mind; bhagavat — unto the Personality of Godhead; bhakti-yuktena — by discharging devotional service; prāptā — was attained; bhāgavatī gatiḥ — the destination of the devotee (going back home, back to Godhead).

Translation
Freed from all hatred and desire, Kardama Muni, being equal to everyone because of discharging uncontaminated devotional service, ultimately attained the path back to Godhead.