Text 1
शौनक उवाच
कपिलस्तत्त्वसंख्याता भगवानात्ममायया ।
जात: स्वयमज: साक्षादात्मप्रज्ञप्तये नृणाम् ॥ १ ॥
śaunaka uvāca
kapilas tattva-saṅkhyātā
bhagavān ātma-māyayā
jātaḥ svayam ajaḥ sākṣād
ātma-prajñaptaye nṛṇām
Synonyms
śaunakaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śaunaka said; kapilaḥ — Lord Kapila; tattva — of the truth; saṅkhyātā — the expounder; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ātma-māyayā — by His internal potency; jātaḥ — took birth; svayam — Himself; ajaḥ — unborn; sākṣāt — in person; ātma-prajñaptaye — to disseminate transcendental knowledge; nṛṇām — for the human race.

Translation
Śrī Śaunaka said: Although He is unborn, the Supreme Personality of Godhead took birth as Kapila Muni by His internal potency. He descended to disseminate transcendental knowledge for the benefit of the whole human race.

Text 2
न ह्यस्य वर्ष्मण: पुंसां वरिम्ण: सर्वयोगिनाम् ।
विश्रुतौ श्रुतदेवस्य भूरि तृप्यन्ति मेऽसव: ॥ २ ॥
na hy asya varṣmaṇaḥ puṁsāṁ
varimṇaḥ sarva-yoginām
viśrutau śruta-devasya
bhūri tṛpyanti me ’savaḥ
Synonyms
na — not; hi — indeed; asya — about Him; varṣmaṇaḥ — the greatest; puṁsām — among men; varimṇaḥ — the foremost; sarva — all; yoginām — of yogīs; viśrutau — in hearing; śruta-devasya — the master of the Vedas; bhūri — repeatedly; tṛpyanti — are sated; me — my; asavaḥ — senses.

Translation
Śaunaka continued: There is no one who knows more than the Lord Himself. No one is more worshipable or more mature a yogī than He. He is therefore the master of the Vedas, and to hear about Him always is the actual pleasure of the senses.

Text 3
यद्यद्विधत्ते भगवान् स्वच्छन्दात्मात्ममायया ।
तानि मे श्रद्दधानस्य कीर्तन्यान्यनुकीर्तय ॥ ३ ॥
yad yad vidhatte bhagavān
svacchandātmātma-māyayā
tāni me śraddadhānasya
kīrtanyāny anukīrtaya
Synonyms
yat yat — whatever; vidhatte — He performs; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; sva-chanda-ātmā — full of self-desire; ātma-māyayā — by His internal potency; tāni — all of them; me — to me; śraddadhānasya — faithful; kīrtanyāni — worthy of praise; anukīrtaya — please describe.

Translation
Therefore please precisely describe all the activities and pastimes of the Personality of Godhead, who is full of self-desire and who assumes all these activities by His internal potency.

Text 4
सूत उवाच
द्वैपायनसखस्त्वेवं मैत्रेयो भगवांस्तथा ।
प्राहेदं विदुरं प्रीत आन्वीक्षिक्यां प्रचोदित: ॥ ४ ॥
sūta uvāca
dvaipāyana-sakhas tv evaṁ
maitreyo bhagavāṁs tathā
prāhedaṁ viduraṁ prīta
ānvīkṣikyāṁ pracoditaḥ
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Sūta Gosvāmī said; dvaipāyana-sakhaḥ — friend of Vyāsadeva; tu — then; evam — thus; maitreyaḥ — Maitreya; bhagavān — worshipful; tathā — in that way; prāha — spoke; idam — this; viduram — to Vidura; prītaḥ — being pleased; ānvīkṣikyām — about transcendental knowledge; pracoditaḥ — being asked.

Translation
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said: The most powerful sage Maitreya was a friend of Vyāsadeva. Being encouraged and pleased by Vidura’s inquiry about transcendental knowledge, Maitreya spoke as follows.

Text 5
मैत्रेय उवाच
पितरि प्रस्थितेऽरण्यं मातु: प्रियचिकीर्षया ।
तस्मिन् बिन्दुसरेऽवात्सीद्भगवान् कपिल: किल ॥ ५ ॥
maitreya uvāca
pitari prasthite ’raṇyaṁ
mātuḥ priya-cikīrṣayā
tasmin bindusare ’vātsīd
bhagavān kapilaḥ kila
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; pitari — when the father; prasthite — left; araṇyam — for the forest; mātuḥ — His mother; priya-cikīrṣayā — with a desire to please; tasmin — on that; bindusare — Lake Bindu-sarovara; avātsīt — He stayed; bhagavān — the Lord; kapilaḥ — Kapila; kila — indeed.

Translation
Maitreya said: When Kardama left for the forest, Lord Kapila stayed on the strand of the Bindu-sarovara to please His mother, Devahūti.

Text 6
तमासीनमकर्माणं तत्त्वमार्गाग्रदर्शनम् ।
स्वसुतं देवहूत्याह धातु: संस्मरती वच: ॥ ६ ॥
tam āsīnam akarmāṇaṁ
tattva-mārgāgra-darśanam
sva-sutaṁ devahūty āha
dhātuḥ saṁsmaratī vacaḥ
Synonyms
tam — to Him (Kapila); āsīnam — seated; akarmāṇam — at leisure; tattva — of the Absolute Truth; mārga-agra — the ultimate goal; darśanam — who could show; sva-sutam — her son; devahūtiḥ — Devahūti; āha — said; dhātuḥ — of Brahmā; saṁsmaratī — remembering; vacaḥ — the words.

Translation
When Kapila, who could show her the ultimate goal of the Absolute Truth, was sitting leisurely before her, Devahūti remembered the words Brahmā had spoken to her, and she therefore began to question Kapila as follows.

Text 7
देवहूतिरुवाच
निर्विण्णा नितरां भूमन्नसदिन्द्रियतर्षणात् ।
येन सम्भाव्यमानेन प्रपन्नान्धं तम: प्रभो ॥ ७ ॥
devahūtir uvāca
nirviṇṇā nitarāṁ bhūmann
asad-indriya-tarṣaṇāt
yena sambhāvyamānena
prapannāndhaṁ tamaḥ prabho
Synonyms
devahūtiḥ uvāca — Devahūti said; nirviṇṇā — disgusted; nitarām — very; bhūman — O my Lord; asat — impermanent; indriya — of the senses; tarṣaṇāt — from agitation; yena — by which; sambhāvyamānena — being prevalent; prapannā — I have fallen; andham tamaḥ — into the abyss of ignorance; prabho — O my Lord.

Translation
Devahūti said: I am very sick of the disturbance caused by my material senses, for because of this sense disturbance, my Lord, I have fallen into the abyss of ignorance.

Text 8
तस्य त्वं तमसोऽन्धस्य दुष्पारस्याद्य पारगम् ।
सच्चक्षुर्जन्मनामन्ते लब्धं मे त्वदनुग्रहात् ॥ ८ ॥
tasya tvaṁ tamaso ’ndhasya
duṣpārasyādya pāragam
sac-cakṣur janmanām ante
labdhaṁ me tvad-anugrahāt
Synonyms
tasya — that; tvam — You; tamasaḥ — ignorance; andhasya — darkness; duṣpārasya — difficult to cross; adya — now; pāra-gam — crossing over; sat — transcendental; cakṣuḥ — eye; janmanām — of births; ante — at the end; labdham — attained; me — my; tvat-anugrahāt — by Your mercy.

Translation
Your Lordship is my only means of getting out of this darkest region of ignorance because You are my transcendental eye, which, by Your mercy only, I have attained after many, many births.

Text 9
य आद्यो भगवान् पुंसामीश्वरो वै भवान् किल ।
लोकस्य तमसान्धस्य चक्षु: सूर्य इवोदित: ॥ ९ ॥
ya ādyo bhagavān puṁsām
īśvaro vai bhavān kila
lokasya tamasāndhasya
cakṣuḥ sūrya ivoditaḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — He who; ādyaḥ — the origin; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puṁsām — of all living entities; īśvaraḥ — the Lord; vai — in fact; bhavān — You; kila — indeed; lokasya — of the universe; tamasā — by the darkness of ignorance; andhasya — blinded; cakṣuḥ — eye; sūryaḥ — the sun; iva — like; uditaḥ — risen.

Translation
You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the origin and Supreme Lord of all living entities. You have arisen to disseminate the rays of the sun in order to dissipate the darkness of the ignorance of the universe.

Text 10
अथ मे देव सम्मोहमपाक्रष्टुं त्वमर्हसि ।
योऽवग्रहोऽहंममेतीत्येतस्मिन् योजितस्त्वया ॥ १० ॥
atha me deva sammoham
apākraṣṭuṁ tvam arhasi
yo ’vagraho ’haṁ mametīty
etasmin yojitas tvayā
Synonyms
atha — now; me — my; deva — O Lord; sammoham — delusion; apākraṣṭum — to dispel; tvam — You; arhasi — be pleased; yaḥ — which; avagrahaḥ — misconception; aham — I; mama — mine; iti — thus; iti — thus; etasmin — in this; yojitaḥ — engaged; tvayā — by You.

Translation
Now be pleased, my Lord, to dispel my great delusion. Due to my feeling of false ego, I have been engaged by Your māyā and have identified myself with the body and consequent bodily relations.

Text 11
तं त्वा गताहं शरणं शरण्यं
स्वभृत्यसंसारतरो: कुठारम् ।
जिज्ञासयाहं प्रकृते: पूरुषस्य
नमामि सद्धर्मविदां वरिष्ठम् ॥ ११ ॥
taṁ tvā gatāhaṁ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ
sva-bhṛtya-saṁsāra-taroḥ kuṭhāram
jijñāsayāhaṁ prakṛteḥ pūruṣasya
namāmi sad-dharma-vidāṁ variṣṭham
Synonyms
tam — that person; tvā — unto You; gatā — have gone; aham — I; śaraṇam — shelter; śaraṇyam — worth taking shelter of; sva-bhṛtya — for Your dependents; saṁsāra — of material existence; taroḥ — of the tree; kuṭhāram — the ax; jijñāsayā — with the desire to know; aham — I; prakṛteḥ — of matter (woman); pūruṣasya — of spirit (man); namāmi — I offer obeisances; sat-dharma — of the eternal occupation; vidām — of the knowers; variṣṭham — unto the greatest.

Translation
Devahūti continued: I have taken shelter of Your lotus feet because You are the only person of whom to take shelter. You are the ax which can cut the tree of material existence. I therefore offer my obeisances unto You, who are the greatest of all transcendentalists, and I inquire from You as to the relationship between man and woman and between spirit and matter.

Text 12
मैत्रेय उवाच
इति स्वमातुर्निरवद्यमीप्सितं
निशम्य पुंसामपवर्गवर्धनम् ।
धियाभिनन्द्यात्मवतां सतां गति-
र्बभाष ईषत्स्मितशोभितानन: ॥ १२ ॥
maitreya uvāca
iti sva-mātur niravadyam īpsitaṁ
niśamya puṁsām apavarga-vardhanam
dhiyābhinandyātmavatāṁ satāṁ gatir
babhāṣa īṣat-smita-śobhitānanaḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; iti — thus; sva-mātuḥ — of His mother; niravadyam — uncontaminated; īpsitam — desire; niśamya — after hearing; puṁsām — of people; apavarga — cessation of bodily existence; vardhanam — increasing; dhiyā — mentally; abhinandya — having thanked; ātma-vatām — interested in self-realization; satām — of the transcendentalists; gatiḥ — the path; babhāṣe — He explained; īṣat — slightly; smita — smiling; śobhita — beautiful; ānanaḥ — His face.

Translation
Maitreya said: After hearing of His mother’s uncontaminated desire for transcendental realization, the Lord thanked her within Himself for her questions, and thus, His face smiling, He explained the path of the transcendentalists, who are interested in self-realization.

Text 13
श्रीभगवानुवाच
योग आध्यात्मिक: पुंसां मतो नि:श्रेयसाय मे ।
अत्यन्तोपरतिर्यत्र दु:खस्य च सुखस्य च ॥ १३ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
yoga ādhyātmikaḥ puṁsāṁ
mato niḥśreyasāya me
atyantoparatir yatra
duḥkhasya ca sukhasya ca
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Personality of Godhead said; yogaḥ — the yoga system; ādhyātmikaḥ — relating to the soul; puṁsām — of living entities; mataḥ — is approved; niḥśreyasāya — for the ultimate benefit; me — by Me; atyanta — complete; uparatiḥ — detachment; yatra — where; duḥkhasya — from distress; ca — and; sukhasya — from happiness; ca — and.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead answered: The yoga system which relates to the Lord and the individual soul, which is meant for the ultimate benefit of the living entity, and which causes detachment from all happiness and distress in the material world, is the highest yoga system.

Text 14
तमिमं ते प्रवक्ष्यामि यमवोचं पुरानघे ।
ऋषीणां श्रोतुकामानां योगं सर्वाङ्गनैपुणम् ॥ १४ ॥
tam imaṁ te pravakṣyāmi
yam avocaṁ purānaghe
ṛṣīṇāṁ śrotu-kāmānāṁ
yogaṁ sarvāṅga-naipuṇam
Synonyms
tam imam — that very; te — to you; pravakṣyāmi — I shall explain; yam — which; avocam — I explained; purā — formerly; anaghe — O pious mother; ṛṣīṇām — to the sages; śrotu-kāmānām — eager to hear; yogam — yoga system; sarva-aṅga — in all respects; naipuṇam — serviceable and practical.

Translation
O most pious mother, I shall now explain unto you the ancient yoga system, which I explained formerly to the great sages. It is serviceable and practical in every way.

Text 15
चेत: खल्वस्य बन्धाय मुक्तये चात्मनो मतम् ।
गुणेषु सक्तं बन्धाय रतं वा पुंसि मुक्तये ॥ १५ ॥
cetaḥ khalv asya bandhāya
muktaye cātmano matam
guṇeṣu saktaṁ bandhāya
rataṁ vā puṁsi muktaye
Synonyms
cetaḥ — consciousness; khalu — indeed; asya — of him; bandhāya — for bondage; muktaye — for liberation; ca — and; ātmanaḥ — of the living entity; matam — is considered; guṇeṣu — in the three modes of nature; saktam — attracted; bandhāya — for conditional life; ratam — attached; vā — or; puṁsi — in the Supreme Personality of Godhead; muktaye — for liberation.

Translation
The stage in which the consciousness of the living entity is attracted by the three modes of material nature is called conditional life. But when that same consciousness is attached to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one is situated in the consciousness of liberation.

Text 16
अहंममाभिमानोत्थै: कामलोभादिभिर्मलै: ।
वीतं यदा मन: शुद्धमदु:खमसुखं समम् ॥ १६ ॥
ahaṁ mamābhimānotthaiḥ
kāma-lobhādibhir malaiḥ
vītaṁ yadā manaḥ śuddham
aduḥkham asukhaṁ samam
Synonyms
aham — I; mama — mine; abhimāna — from the misconception; utthaiḥ — produced; kāma — lust; lobha — greed; ādibhiḥ — and so on; malaiḥ — from the impurities; vītam — freed; yadā — when; manaḥ — the mind; śuddham — pure; aduḥkham — without distress; asukham — without happiness; samam — equipoised.

Translation
When one is completely cleansed of the impurities of lust and greed produced from the false identification of the body as “I” and bodily possessions as “mine,” one’s mind becomes purified. In that pure state he transcends the stage of so-called material happiness and distress.

Text 17
तदा पुरुष आत्मानं केवलं प्रकृते: परम् ।
निरन्तरं स्वयंज्योतिरणिमानमखण्डितम् ॥ १७ ॥
tadā puruṣa ātmānaṁ
kevalaṁ prakṛteḥ param
nirantaraṁ svayaṁ-jyotir
aṇimānam akhaṇḍitam
Synonyms
tadā — then; puruṣaḥ — the individual soul; ātmānam — himself; kevalam — pure; prakṛteḥ param — transcendental to material existence; nirantaram — nondifferent; svayam-jyotiḥ — self-effulgent; aṇimānam — infinitesimal; akhaṇḍitam — not fragmented.

Translation
At that time the soul can see himself to be transcendental to material existence and always self-effulgent, never fragmented, although very minute in size.

Text 18
ज्ञानवैराग्ययुक्तेन भक्तियुक्तेन चात्मना ।
परिपश्यत्युदासीनं प्रकृतिं च हतौजसम् ॥ १८ ॥
jñāna-vairāgya-yuktena
bhakti-yuktena cātmanā
paripaśyaty udāsīnaṁ
prakṛtiṁ ca hataujasam
Synonyms
jñāna — knowledge; vairāgya — renunciation; yuktena — equipped with; bhakti — devotional service; yuktena — equipped with; ca — and; ātmanā — by the mind; paripaśyati — one sees; udāsīnam — indifferent; prakṛtim — material existence; ca — and; hata-ojasam — reduced in strength.

Translation
In that position of self-realization, by practice of knowledge and renunciation in devotional service, one sees everything in the right perspective; he becomes indifferent to material existence, and the material influence acts less powerfully upon him.

Text 19
न युज्यमानया भक्त्या भगवत्यखिलात्मनि ।
सद‍ृशोऽस्ति शिव: पन्था योगिनां ब्रह्मसिद्धये ॥ १९ ॥
na yujyamānayā bhaktyā
bhagavaty akhilātmani
sadṛśo ’sti śivaḥ panthā
yogināṁ brahma-siddhaye
Synonyms
na — not; yujyamānayā — being performed; bhaktyā — devotional service; bhagavati — towards the Supreme Personality of Godhead; akhila-ātmani — the Supersoul; sadṛśaḥ — like; asti — there is; śivaḥ — auspicious; panthāḥ — path; yoginām — of the yogīs; brahma-siddhaye — for perfection in self-realization.

Translation
Perfection in self-realization cannot be attained by any kind of yogī unless he engages in devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for that is the only auspicious path.

Text 20
प्रसङ्गमजरं पाशमात्मन: कवयो विदु: ।
स एव साधुषु कृतो मोक्षद्वारमपावृतम् ॥ २० ॥
prasaṅgam ajaraṁ pāśam
ātmanaḥ kavayo viduḥ
sa eva sādhuṣu kṛto
mokṣa-dvāram apāvṛtam
Synonyms
prasaṅgam — attachment; ajaram — strong; pāśam — entanglement; ātmanaḥ — of the soul; kavayaḥ — learned men; viduḥ — know; saḥ eva — that same; sādhuṣu — to the devotees; kṛtaḥ — applied; mokṣa-dvāram — the door of liberation; apāvṛtam — opened.

Translation
Every learned man knows very well that attachment for the material is the greatest entanglement of the spirit soul. But that same attachment, when applied to the self-realized devotees, opens the door of liberation.

Text 21
तितिक्षव: कारुणिका: सुहृद: सर्वदेहिनाम् ।
अजातशत्रव: शान्ता: साधव: साधुभूषणा: ॥ २१ ॥
titikṣavaḥ kāruṇikāḥ
suhṛdaḥ sarva-dehinām
ajāta-śatravaḥ śāntāḥ
sādhavaḥ sādhu-bhūṣaṇāḥ
Synonyms
titikṣavaḥ — tolerant; kāruṇikāḥ — merciful; suhṛdaḥ — friendly; sarva-dehinām — to all living entities; ajāta-śatravaḥ — inimical to none; śāntāḥ — peaceful; sādhavaḥ — abiding by scriptures; sādhu-bhūṣaṇāḥ — adorned with sublime characteristics.

Translation
The symptoms of a sādhu are that he is tolerant, merciful and friendly to all living entities. He has no enemies, he is peaceful, he abides by the scriptures, and all his characteristics are sublime.

Text 22
मय्यनन्येन भावेन भक्तिं कुर्वन्ति ये द‍ृढाम् ।
मत्कृते त्यक्तकर्माणस्त्यक्तस्वजनबान्धवा: ॥ २२ ॥
mayy ananyena bhāvena
bhaktiṁ kurvanti ye dṛḍhām
mat-kṛte tyakta-karmāṇas
tyakta-svajana-bāndhavāḥ
Synonyms
mayi — unto Me; ananyena bhāvena — with undeviated mind; bhaktim — devotional service; kurvanti — perform; ye — those who; dṛḍhām — staunch; mat-kṛte — for My sake; tyakta — renounced; karmāṇaḥ — activities; tyakta — renounced; sva-jana — family relationships; bāndhavāḥ — friendly acquaintances.

Translation
Such a sādhu engages in staunch devotional service to the Lord without deviation. For the sake of the Lord he renounces all other connections, such as family relationships and friendly acquaintances within the world.

Text 23
मदाश्रया: कथा मृष्टा:श‍ृण्वन्ति कथयन्ति च ।
तपन्ति विविधास्तापा नैतान्मद्गतचेतस: ॥ २३ ॥
mad-āśrayāḥ kathā mṛṣṭāḥ
śṛṇvanti kathayanti ca
tapanti vividhās tāpā
naitān mad-gata-cetasaḥ
Synonyms
mat-āśrayāḥ — about Me; kathāḥ — stories; mṛṣṭāḥ — delightful; śṛṇvanti — they hear; kathayanti — they chant; ca — and; tapanti — inflict suffering; vividhāḥ — various; tāpāḥ — the material miseries; na — do not; etān — unto them; mat-gata — fixed on Me; cetasaḥ — their thoughts.

Translation
Engaged constantly in chanting and hearing about Me, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the sādhus do not suffer from material miseries because they are always filled with thoughts of My pastimes and activities.

Text 24
त एते साधव: साध्वि सर्वसङ्गविवर्जिता: ।
सङ्गस्तेष्वथ ते प्रार्थ्य: सङ्गदोषहरा हि ते ॥ २४ ॥
ta ete sādhavaḥ sādhvi
sarva-saṅga-vivarjitāḥ
saṅgas teṣv atha te prārthyaḥ
saṅga-doṣa-harā hi te
Synonyms
te ete — those very; sādhavaḥ — devotees; sādhvi — virtuous lady; sarva — all; saṅga — attachments; vivarjitāḥ — freed from; saṅgaḥ — attachment; teṣu — unto them; atha — hence; te — by you; prārthyaḥ — must be sought; saṅga-doṣa — the pernicious effects of material attachment; harāḥ — counteracters of; hi — indeed; te — they.

Translation
O My mother, O virtuous lady, these are the qualities of great devotees who are free from all attachment. You must seek attachment to such holy men, for this counteracts the pernicious effects of material attachment.

Text 25
सतां प्रसङ्गान्मम वीर्यसंविदो
भवन्ति हृत्कर्णरसायना: कथा: ।
तज्जोषणादाश्वपवर्गवर्त्मनि
श्रद्धा रतिर्भक्तिरनुक्रमिष्यति ॥ २५ ॥
satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido
bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ
taj-joṣaṇād āśv apavarga-vartmani
śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati
Synonyms
satām — of pure devotees; prasaṅgāt — through the association; mama — My; vīrya — wonderful activities; saṁvidaḥ — by discussion of; bhavanti — become; hṛt — to the heart; karṇa — to the ear; rasa-ayanāḥ — pleasing; kathāḥ — the stories; tat — of that; joṣaṇāt — by cultivation; āśu — quickly; apavarga — of liberation; vartmani — on the path; śraddhā — firm faith; ratiḥ — attraction; bhaktiḥ — devotion; anukramiṣyati — will follow in order.

Translation
In the association of pure devotees, discussion of the pastimes and activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is very pleasing and satisfying to the ear and the heart. By cultivating such knowledge one gradually becomes advanced on the path of liberation, and thereafter he is freed, and his attraction becomes fixed. Then real devotion and devotional service begin.

Text 26
भक्त्या पुमाञ्जातविराग ऐन्द्रियाद्
द‍ृष्टश्रुतान्मद्रचनानुचिन्तया ।
चित्तस्य यत्तो ग्रहणे योगयुक्तो
यतिष्यते ऋजुभिर्योगमार्गै: ॥ २६ ॥
bhaktyā pumāñ jāta-virāga aindriyād
dṛṣṭa-śrutān mad-racanānucintayā
cittasya yatto grahaṇe yoga-yukto
yatiṣyate ṛjubhir yoga-mārgaiḥ
Synonyms
bhaktyā — by devotional service; pumān — a person; jāta-virāgaḥ — having developed distaste; aindriyāt — for sense gratification; dṛṣṭa — seen (in this world); śrutāt — heard (in the next world); mat-racana — My activities of creation and so on; anucintayā — by constantly thinking about; cittasya — of the mind; yattaḥ — engaged; grahaṇe — in the control; yoga-yuktaḥ — situated in devotional service; yatiṣyate — will endeavor; ṛjubhiḥ — easy; yoga-mārgaiḥ — by the processes of mystic power.

Translation
Thus consciously engaged in devotional service in the association of devotees, a person gains distaste for sense gratification, both in this world and in the next, by constantly thinking about the activities of the Lord. This process of Kṛṣṇa consciousness is the easiest process of mystic power; when one is actually situated on that path of devotional service, he is able to control the mind.

Text 27
असेवयायं प्रकृतेर्गुणानां
ज्ञानेन वैराग्यविजृम्भितेन ।
योगेन मय्यर्पितया च भक्त्या
मां प्रत्यगात्मानमिहावरुन्धे ॥ २७ ॥
asevayāyaṁ prakṛter guṇānāṁ
jñānena vairāgya-vijṛmbhitena
yogena mayy arpitayā ca bhaktyā
māṁ pratyag-ātmānam ihāvarundhe
Synonyms
asevayā — by not engaging in the service; ayam — this person; prakṛteḥ guṇānām — of the modes of material nature; jñānena — by knowledge; vairāgya — with renunciation; vijṛmbhitena — developed; yogena — by practicing yoga; mayi — unto Me; arpitayā — fixed; ca — and; bhaktyā — with devotion; mām — unto Me; pratyak-ātmānam — the Absolute Truth; iha — in this very life; avarundhe — one attains.

Translation
Thus by not engaging in the service of the modes of material nature but by developing Kṛṣṇa consciousness, knowledge in renunciation, and by practicing yoga, in which the mind is always fixed in devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one achieves My association in this very life, for I am the Supreme Personality, the Absolute Truth.

Text 28
देवहूतिरुवाच
काचित्त्वय्युचिता भक्ति: कीद‍ृशी मम गोचरा ।
यया पदं ते निर्वाणमञ्जसान्वाश्नवा अहम् ॥ २८ ॥
devahūtir uvāca
kācit tvayy ucitā bhaktiḥ
kīdṛśī mama gocarā
yayā padaṁ te nirvāṇam
añjasānvāśnavā aham
Synonyms
devahūtiḥ uvāca — Devahūti said; kācit — what; tvayi — unto You; ucitā — proper; bhaktiḥ — devotional service; kīdṛśī — what kind; mama — by me; go-carā — fit to be practiced; yayā — by which; padam — feet; te — Your; nirvāṇam — liberation; añjasā — immediately; anvāśnavai — shall attain; aham — I.

Translation
On hearing this statement of the Lord, Devahūti inquired: What kind of devotional service is worth developing and practicing to help me easily and immediately attain the service of Your lotus feet?

Text 29
यो योगो भगवद्बाणो निर्वाणात्मंस्त्वयोदित: ।
कीद‍ृश: कति चाङ्गानि यतस्तत्त्वावबोधनम् ॥ २९ ॥
yo yogo bhagavad-bāṇo
nirvāṇātmaṁs tvayoditaḥ
kīdṛśaḥ kati cāṅgāni
yatas tattvāvabodhanam
Synonyms
yaḥ — which; yogaḥ — mystic yoga process; bhagavat-bāṇaḥ — aiming at the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nirvāṇa-ātman — O embodiment of nirvāṇa; tvayā — by You; uditaḥ — explained; kīdṛśaḥ — of what nature; kati — how many; ca — and; aṅgāni — branches; yataḥ — by which; tattva — of the truth; avabodhanam — understanding.

Translation
The mystic yoga system, as You have explained, aims at the Supreme Personality of Godhead and is meant for completely ending material existence. Please let me know the nature of that yoga system. How many ways are there by which one can understand in truth that sublime yoga?

Text 30
तदेतन्मे विजानीहि यथाहं मन्दधीर्हरे ।
सुखं बुद्ध्येय दुर्बोधं योषा भवदनुग्रहात् ॥ ३० ॥
tad etan me vijānīhi
yathāhaṁ manda-dhīr hare
sukhaṁ buddhyeya durbodhaṁ
yoṣā bhavad-anugrahāt
Synonyms
tat etat — that same; me — to me; vijānīhi — please explain; yathā — so that; aham — I; manda — slow; dhīḥ — whose intelligence; hare — O my Lord; sukham — easily; buddhyeya — may understand; durbodham — very difficult to understand; yoṣā — a woman; bhavat-anugrahāt — by Your grace.

Translation
My dear son, Kapila, after all, I am a woman. It is very difficult for me to understand the Absolute Truth because my intelligence is not very great. But if You will kindly explain it to me, even though I am not very intelligent, I can understand it and thereby feel transcendental happiness.

Text 31
मैत्रेय उवाच
विदित्वार्थं कपिलो मातुरित्थं
जातस्‍नेहो यत्र तन्वाभिजात: ।
तत्त्वाम्नायं यत्प्रवदन्ति सांख्यं
प्रोवाच वै भक्तिवितानयोगम् ॥ ३१ ॥
maitreya uvāca
viditvārthaṁ kapilo mātur itthaṁ
jāta-sneho yatra tanvābhijātaḥ
tattvāmnāyaṁ yat pravadanti sāṅkhyaṁ
provāca vai bhakti-vitāna-yogam
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; viditvā — having known; artham — purpose; kapilaḥ — Lord Kapila; mātuḥ — of His mother; ittham — thus; jāta-snehaḥ — became compassionate; yatra — upon her; tanvā — from her body; abhijātaḥ — born; tattva-āmnāyam — truths received by disciplic succession; yat — which; pravadanti — they call; sāṅkhyam — Sāṅkhya philosophy; provāca — He described; vai — in fact; bhakti — devotional service; vitāna — spreading; yogam — mystic yoga.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya said: After hearing the statement of His mother, Kapila could understand her purpose, and He became compassionate towards her because of being born of her body. He described the Sāṅkhya system of philosophy, which is a combination of devotional service and mystic realization, as received by disciplic succession.

Text 32
श्रीभगवानुवाच
देवानां गुणलिङ्गानामानुश्रविककर्मणाम् ।
सत्त्व एवैकमनसो वृत्ति: स्वाभाविकी तु या ।
अनिमित्ता भागवती भक्ति: सिद्धेर्गरीयसी ॥ ३२ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
devānāṁ guṇa-liṅgānām
ānuśravika-karmaṇām
sattva evaika-manaso
vṛttiḥ svābhāvikī tu yā
animittā bhāgavatī
bhaktiḥ siddher garīyasī
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; devānām — of the senses or of the presiding deities of the senses; guṇa-liṅgānām — which detect sense objects; ānuśravika — according to scripture; karmaṇām — which work; sattve — unto the mind or unto the Lord; eva — only; eka-manasaḥ — of a man of undivided mind; vṛttiḥ — inclination; svābhāvikī — natural; tu — in fact; yā — which; animittā — without motive; bhāgavatī — to the Personality of Godhead; bhaktiḥ — devotional service; siddheḥ — than salvation; garīyasī — better.

Translation
Lord Kapila said: The senses are symbolic representations of the demigods, and their natural inclination is to work under the direction of the Vedic injunctions. As the senses are representatives of the demigods, so the mind is the representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. The mind’s natural duty is to serve. When that service spirit is engaged in devotional service to the Personality of Godhead, without any motive, that is far better even than salvation.

Text 33
जरयत्याशु या कोशं निगीर्णमनलो यथा ॥ ३३ ॥
jarayaty āśu yā kośaṁ
nigīrṇam analo yathā
Synonyms
jarayati — dissolves; āśu — quickly; yā — which; kośam — the subtle body; nigīrṇam — things eaten; analaḥ — fire; yathā — as.

Translation
Bhakti, devotional service, dissolves the subtle body of the living entity without separate effort, just as fire in the stomach digests all that we eat.

Text 34
नैकात्मतां मे स्पृहयन्ति केचिन्
मत्पादसेवाभिरता मदीहा: ।
येऽन्योन्यतो भागवता: प्रसज्य
सभाजयन्ते मम पौरुषाणि ॥ ३४ ॥
naikātmatāṁ me spṛhayanti kecin
mat-pāda-sevābhiratā mad-īhāḥ
ye ’nyonyato bhāgavatāḥ prasajya
sabhājayante mama pauruṣāṇi
Synonyms
na — never; eka-ātmatām — merging into oneness; me — My; spṛhayanti — they desire; kecit — any; mat-pāda-sevā — the service of My lotus feet; abhiratāḥ — engaged in; mat-īhāḥ — endeavoring to attain Me; ye — those who; anyonyataḥ — mutually; bhāgavatāḥ — pure devotees; prasajya — assembling; sabhājayante — glorify; mama — My; pauruṣāṇi — glorious activities.

Translation
A pure devotee, who is attached to the activities of devotional service and who always engages in the service of My lotus feet, never desires to become one with Me. Such a devotee, who is unflinchingly engaged, always glorifies My pastimes and activities.

Text 35
पश्यन्ति ते मे रुचिराण्यम्ब सन्त:
प्रसन्नवक्त्रारुणलोचनानि ।
रूपाणि दिव्यानि वरप्रदानि
साकं वाचं स्पृहणीयां वदन्ति ॥ ३५ ॥
paśyanti te me rucirāṇy amba santaḥ
prasanna-vaktrāruṇa-locanāni
rūpāṇi divyāni vara-pradāni
sākaṁ vācaṁ spṛhaṇīyāṁ vadanti
Synonyms
paśyanti — see; te — they; me — My; rucirāṇi — beautiful; amba — O mother; santaḥ — devotees; prasanna — smiling; vaktra — face; aruṇa — like the morning sun; locanāni — eyes; rūpāṇi — forms; divyāni — transcendental; vara-pradāni — benevolent; sākam — with Me; vācam — words; spṛhaṇīyām — favorable; vadanti — they speak.

Translation
O My mother, My devotees always see the smiling face of My form, with eyes like the rising morning sun. They like to see My various transcendental forms, which are all benevolent, and they also talk favorably with Me.

Text 36
तैर्दर्शनीयावयवैरुदार-
विलासहासेक्षितवामसूक्तै: ।
हृतात्मनो हृतप्राणांश्च भक्ति-
रनिच्छतो मे गतिमण्वीं प्रयुङ्क्ते‍ ॥ ३६ ॥
tair darśanīyāvayavair udāra-
vilāsa-hāsekṣita-vāma-sūktaiḥ
hṛtātmano hṛta-prāṇāṁś ca bhaktir
anicchato me gatim aṇvīṁ prayuṅkte
Synonyms
taiḥ — by those forms; darśanīya — charming; avayavaiḥ — whose limbs; udāra — exalted; vilāsa — pastimes; hāsa — smiling; īkṣita — glances; vāma — pleasing; sūktaiḥ — whose delightful words; hṛta — captivated; ātmanaḥ — their minds; hṛta — captivated; prāṇān — their senses; ca — and; bhaktiḥ — devotional service; anicchataḥ — unwilling; me — My; gatim — abode; aṇvīm — subtle; prayuṅkte — secures.

Translation
Upon seeing the charming forms of the Lord, smiling and attractive, and hearing His very pleasing words, the pure devotee almost loses all other consciousness. His senses are freed from all other engagements, and he becomes absorbed in devotional service. Thus in spite of his unwillingness, he attains liberation without separate endeavor.

Text 37
अथो विभूतिं मम मायाविनस्ता-
मैश्वर्यमष्टाङ्गमनुप्रवृत्तम् ।
श्रियं भागवतीं वास्पृहयन्ति भद्रां
परस्य मे तेऽश्नुवते तु लोके ॥ ३७ ॥
atho vibhūtiṁ mama māyāvinas tām
aiśvaryam aṣṭāṅgam anupravṛttam
śriyaṁ bhāgavatīṁ vāspṛhayanti bhadrāṁ
parasya me te ’śnuvate tu loke
Synonyms
atho — then; vibhūtim — opulence; mama — of Me; māyāvinaḥ — of the Lord of māyā; tām — that; aiśvaryam — mystic perfection; aṣṭa-aṅgam — consisting of eight parts; anupravṛttam — following; śriyam — splendor; bhāgavatīm — of the kingdom of God; vā — or; aspṛhayanti — they do not desire; bhadrām — blissful; parasya — of the Supreme Lord; me — of Me; te — those devotees; aśnuvate — enjoy; tu — but; loke — in this life.

Translation
Thus because he is completely absorbed in thought of Me, the devotee does not desire even the highest benediction obtainable in the upper planetary systems, including Satyaloka. He does not desire the eight material perfections obtained from mystic yoga, nor does he desire to be elevated to the kingdom of God. Yet even without desiring them, the devotee enjoys, even in this life, all the offered benedictions.

Text 38
न कर्हिचिन्मत्परा: शान्तरूपे
नङ्‍क्ष्यन्ति नो मेऽनिमिषो लेढि हेति: ।
येषामहं प्रिय आत्मा सुतश्च
सखा गुरु: सुहृदो दैवमिष्टम् ॥ ३८ ॥
na karhicin mat-parāḥ śānta-rūpe
naṅkṣyanti no me ’nimiṣo leḍhi hetiḥ
yeṣām ahaṁ priya ātmā sutaś ca
sakhā guruḥ suhṛdo daivam iṣṭam
Synonyms
na — not; karhicit — ever; mat-parāḥ — My devotees; śānta-rūpe — O mother; naṅkṣyanti — will lose; no — not; me — My; animiṣaḥ — time; leḍhi — destroys; hetiḥ — weapon; yeṣām — of whom; aham — I; priyaḥ — dear; ātmā — self; sutaḥ — son; ca — and; sakhā — friend; guruḥ — preceptor; suhṛdaḥ — benefactor; daivam — Deity; iṣṭam — chosen.

Translation
The Lord continued: My dear mother, devotees who receive such transcendental opulences are never bereft of them; neither weapons nor the change of time can destroy such opulences. Because the devotees accept Me as their friend, their relative, their son, preceptor, benefactor and Supreme Deity, they cannot be deprived of their possessions at any time.

Texts 39-40
इमं लोकं तथैवामुमात्मानमुभयायिनम् ।
आत्मानमनु ये चेह ये राय: पशवो गृहा: ॥ ३९ ॥
विसृज्य सर्वानन्यांश्च मामेवं विश्वतोमुखम् ।
भजन्त्यनन्यया भक्त्या तान्मृत्योरतिपारये ॥ ४० ॥
imaṁ lokaṁ tathaivāmum
ātmānam ubhayāyinam
ātmānam anu ye ceha
ye rāyaḥ paśavo gṛhāḥ
visṛjya sarvān anyāṁś ca
mām evaṁ viśvato-mukham
bhajanty ananyayā bhaktyā
tān mṛtyor atipāraye
Synonyms
imam — this; lokam — world; tathā — accordingly; eva — certainly; amum — that world; ātmānam — the subtle body; ubhaya — in both; ayinam — traveling; ātmānam — the body; anu — in relationship with; ye — those who; ca — also; iha — in this world; ye — that which; rāyaḥ — wealth; paśavaḥ — cattle; gṛhāḥ — houses; visṛjya — having given up; sarvān — all; anyān — other; ca — and; mām — Me; evam — thus; viśvataḥ-mukham — the all-pervading Lord of the universe; bhajanti — they worship; ananyayā — unflinching; bhaktyā — by devotional service; tān — them; mṛtyoḥ — of death; atipāraye — I take to the other side.

Translation
Thus the devotee who worships Me, the all-pervading Lord of the universe, in unflinching devotional service, gives up all aspirations to be promoted to heavenly planets or to become happy in this world with wealth, children, cattle, home or anything in relationship with the body. I take him to the other side of birth and death.

Text 41
नान्यत्र मद्भगवत: प्रधानपुरुषेश्वरात् ।
आत्मन: सर्वभूतानां भयं तीव्रं निवर्तते ॥ ४१ ॥
nānyatra mad bhagavataḥ
pradhāna-puruṣeśvarāt
ātmanaḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
bhayaṁ tīvraṁ nivartate
Synonyms
na — not; anyatra — otherwise; mat — than Myself; bhagavataḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pradhāna-puruṣa-īśvarāt — the Lord of both prakṛti and puruṣa; ātmanaḥ — the soul; sarva-bhūtānām — of all living beings; bhayam — fear; tīvram — terrible; nivartate — is forsaken.

Translation
The terrible fear of birth and death can never be forsaken by anyone who resorts to any shelter other than Myself, for I am the almighty Lord, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the original source of all creation, and also the Supreme Soul of all souls.

Text 42
मद्भयाद्वाति वातोऽयं सूर्यस्तपति मद्भयात् ।
वर्षतीन्द्रो दहत्यग्निर्मृत्युश्चरति मद्भयात् ॥ ४२ ॥
mad-bhayād vāti vāto ’yaṁ
sūryas tapati mad-bhayāt
varṣatīndro dahaty agnir
mṛtyuś carati mad-bhayāt
Synonyms
mat-bhayāt — out of fear of Me; vāti — blows; vātaḥ — wind; ayam — this; sūryaḥ — the sun; tapati — shines; mat-bhayāt — out of fear of Me; varṣati — showers rain; indraḥ — Indra; dahati — burns; agniḥ — fire; mṛtyuḥ — death; carati — goes; mat-bhayāt — out of fear of Me.

Translation
It is because of My supremacy that the wind blows, out of fear of Me; the sun shines out of fear of Me, and the lord of the clouds, Indra, sends forth showers out of fear of Me. Fire burns out of fear of Me, and death goes about taking its toll out of fear of Me.

Text 43
ज्ञानवैराग्ययुक्तेन भक्तियोगेन योगिन: ।
क्षेमाय पादमूलं मे प्रविशन्त्यकुतोभयम् ॥ ४३ ॥
jñāna-vairāgya-yuktena
bhakti-yogena yoginaḥ
kṣemāya pāda-mūlaṁ me
praviśanty akuto-bhayam
Synonyms
jñāna — with knowledge; vairāgya — and renunciation; yuktena — equipped; bhakti-yogena — by devotional service; yoginaḥ — the yogīs; kṣemāya — for eternal benefit; pāda-mūlam — feet; me — My; praviśanti — take shelter of; akutaḥ-bhayam — without fear.

Translation
The yogīs, equipped with transcendental knowledge and renunciation and engaged in devotional service for their eternal benefit, take shelter of My lotus feet, and since I am the Lord, they are thus eligible to enter into the kingdom of Godhead without fear.

Text 44
एतावानेव लोकेऽस्मिन् पुंसां नि:श्रेयसोदय: ।
तीव्रेण भक्तियोगेन मनो मय्यर्पितं स्थिरम् ॥ ४४ ॥
etāvān eva loke ’smin
puṁsāṁ niḥśreyasodayaḥ
tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena
mano mayy arpitaṁ sthiram
Synonyms
etāvān eva — only so far; loke asmin — in this world; puṁsām — of men; niḥśreyasa — final perfection of life; udayaḥ — the attainment of; tīvreṇa — intense; bhakti-yogena — by practice of devotional service; manaḥ — mind; mayi — in Me; arpitam — fixed; sthiram — steady.

Translation
Therefore persons whose minds are fixed on the Lord engage in the intensive practice of devotional service. That is the only means for attainment of the final perfection of life.