Text 1
श्रीभगवानुवाच
प्रकृतिस्थोऽपि पुरुषो नाज्यते प्राकृतैर्गुणै: ।
अविकारादकर्तृत्वान्निर्गुणत्वाज्जलार्कवत् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
prakṛti-stho ’pi puruṣo
nājyate prākṛtair guṇaiḥ
avikārād akartṛtvān
nirguṇatvāj jalārkavat
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Personality of Godhead said; prakṛti-sthaḥ — residing in the material body; api — although; puruṣaḥ — the living entity; na — not; ajyate — is affected; prākṛtaiḥ — of material nature; guṇaiḥ — by the modes; avikārāt — from being without change; akartṛtvāt — by freedom from proprietorship; nirguṇatvāt — from being unaffected by the qualities of material nature; jala — on water; arkavat — like the sun.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead Kapila continued: When the living entity is thus unaffected by the modes of material nature, because he is unchanging and does not claim proprietorship, he remains apart from the reactions of the modes, although abiding in a material body, just as the sun remains aloof from its reflection on water.

Text 2
स एष यर्हि प्रकृतेर्गुणेष्वभिविषज्जते ।
अहंक्रियाविमूढात्मा कर्तास्मीत्यभिमन्यते ॥ २ ॥
sa eṣa yarhi prakṛter
guṇeṣv abhiviṣajjate
ahaṅkriyā-vimūḍhātmā
kartāsmīty abhimanyate
Synonyms
saḥ — that very living entity; eṣaḥ — this; yarhi — when; prakṛteḥ — of material nature; guṇeṣu — in the modes; abhiviṣajjate — is absorbed; ahaṅkriyā — by false ego; vimūḍha — bewildered; ātmā — the individual soul; kartā — the doer; asmi — I am; iti — thus; abhimanyate — he thinks.

Translation
When the soul is under the spell of material nature and false ego, identifying his body as the self, he becomes absorbed in material activities, and by the influence of false ego he thinks that he is the proprietor of everything.

Text 3
तेन संसारपदवीमवशोऽभ्येत्यनिर्वृत: ।
प्रासङ्गिकै: कर्मदोषै: सदसन्मिश्रयोनिषु ॥ ३ ॥
tena saṁsāra-padavīm
avaśo ’bhyety anirvṛtaḥ
prāsaṅgikaiḥ karma-doṣaiḥ
sad-asan-miśra-yoniṣu
Synonyms
tena — by this; saṁsāra — of repeated birth and death; padavīm — the path; avaśaḥ — helplessly; abhyeti — he undergoes; anirvṛtaḥ — discontented; prāsaṅgikaiḥ — resulting from association with material nature; karma-doṣaiḥ — by faulty actions; sat — good; asat — bad; miśra — mixed; yoniṣu — in different species of life.

Translation
The conditioned soul therefore transmigrates into different species of life, higher and lower, because of his association with the modes of material nature. Unless he is relieved of material activities, he has to accept this position because of his faulty work.

Text 4
अर्थे ह्यविद्यमानेऽपि संसृतिर्न निवर्तते ।
ध्यायतो विषयानस्य स्वप्नेऽनर्थागमो यथा ॥ ४ ॥
arthe hy avidyamāne ’pi
saṁsṛtir na nivartate
dhyāyato viṣayān asya
svapne ’narthāgamo yathā
Synonyms
arthe — real cause; hi — certainly; avidyamāne — not existing; api — although; saṁsṛtiḥ — the material existential condition; na — not; nivartate — does cease; dhyāyataḥ — contemplating; viṣayān — objects of the senses; asya — of the living entity; svapne — in a dream; anartha — of disadvantages; āgamaḥ — arrival; yathā — like.

Translation
Actually a living entity is transcendental to material existence, but because of his mentality of lording it over material nature, his material existential condition does not cease, and just as in a dream, he is affected by all sorts of disadvantages.

Text 5
अत एव शनैश्चित्तं प्रसक्तमसतां पथि ।
भक्तियोगेन तीव्रेण विरक्त्या च नयेद्वशम् ॥ ५ ॥
ata eva śanaiś cittaṁ
prasaktam asatāṁ pathi
bhakti-yogena tīvreṇa
viraktyā ca nayed vaśam
Synonyms
ataḥ eva — therefore; śanaiḥ — gradually; cittam — mind, consciousness; prasaktam — attached; asatām — of material enjoyments; pathi — on the path; bhakti-yogena — by devotional service; tīvreṇa — very serious; viraktyā — without attachment; ca — and; nayet — he must bring; vaśam — under control.

Translation
It is the duty of every conditioned soul to engage his polluted consciousness, which is now attached to material enjoyment, in very serious devotional service with detachment. Thus his mind and consciousness will be under full control.

Text 6
यमादिभिर्योगपथैरभ्यसन्श्रद्धयान्वित: ।
मयि भावेन सत्येन मत्कथाश्रवणेन च ॥ ६ ॥
yamādibhir yoga-pathair
abhyasañ śraddhayānvitaḥ
mayi bhāvena satyena
mat-kathā-śravaṇena ca
Synonyms
yama-ādibhiḥ — beginning with yama; yoga-pathaiḥ — by the yoga system; abhyasan — practicing; śraddhayā anvitaḥ — with great faith; mayi — unto Me; bhāvena — with devotion; satyena — unalloyed; mat-kathā — stories about Me; śravaṇena — by hearing; ca — and.

Translation
One has to become faithful by practicing the controlling process of the yoga system and must elevate himself to the platform of unalloyed devotional service by chanting and hearing about Me.

Text 7
सर्वभूतसमत्वेन निर्वैरेणाप्रसङ्गत: ।
ब्रह्मचर्येण मौनेन स्वधर्मेण बलीयसा ॥ ७ ॥
sarva-bhūta-samatvena
nirvaireṇāprasaṅgataḥ
brahmacaryeṇa maunena
sva-dharmeṇa balīyasā
Synonyms
sarva — all; bhūta — living entities; samatvena — by seeing equally; nirvaireṇa — without enmity; aprasaṅgataḥ — without intimate connections; brahma-caryeṇa — by celibacy; maunena — by silence; sva-dharmeṇa — by one’s occupation; balīyasā — by offering the result.

Translation
In executing devotional service, one has to see every living entity equally, without enmity towards anyone yet without intimate connections with anyone. One has to observe celibacy, be grave and execute his eternal activities, offering the results to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 8
यद‍ृच्छयोपलब्धेन सन्तुष्टो मितभुङ्‍मुनि: ।
विविक्तशरण: शान्तो मैत्र: करुण आत्मवान् ॥ ८ ॥
yadṛcchayopalabdhena
santuṣṭo mita-bhuṅ muniḥ
vivikta-śaraṇaḥ śānto
maitraḥ karuṇa ātmavān
Synonyms
yadṛcchayā — without difficulty; upalabdhena — with what is obtained; santuṣṭaḥ — satisfied; mita — little; bhuk — eating; muniḥ — thoughtful; vivikta-śaraṇaḥ — living in a secluded place; śāntaḥ — peaceful; maitraḥ — friendly; karuṇaḥ — compassionate; ātma-vān — self-possessed, self-realized.

Translation
For his income a devotee should be satisfied with what he earns without great difficulty. He should not eat more than what is necessary. He should live in a secluded place and always be thoughtful, peaceful, friendly, compassionate and self-realized.

Text 9
सानुबन्धे च देहेऽस्मिन्नकुर्वन्नसदाग्रहम् ।
ज्ञानेन द‍ृष्टतत्त्वेन प्रकृते: पुरुषस्य च ॥ ९ ॥
sānubandhe ca dehe ’sminn
akurvann asad-āgraham
jñānena dṛṣṭa-tattvena
prakṛteḥ puruṣasya ca
Synonyms
sa-anubandhe — with bodily relationships; ca — and; dehe — towards the body; asmin — this; akurvan — not doing; asat-āgraham — bodily concept of life; jñānena — through knowledge; dṛṣṭa — having seen; tattvena — the reality; prakṛteḥ — of matter; puruṣasya — of spirit; ca — and.

Translation
One’s seeing power should be increased through knowledge of spirit and matter, and one should not unnecessarily identify himself with the body and thus become attracted by bodily relationships.

Text 10
निवृत्तबुद्ध्यवस्थानो दूरीभूतान्यदर्शन: ।
उपलभ्यात्मनात्मानं चक्षुषेवार्कमात्मद‍ृक् ॥ १० ॥
nivṛtta-buddhy-avasthāno
dūrī-bhūtānya-darśanaḥ
upalabhyātmanātmānaṁ
cakṣuṣevārkam ātma-dṛk
Synonyms
nivṛtta — transcended; buddhi-avasthānaḥ — the stages of material consciousness; dūrī-bhūta — far off; anya — other; darśanaḥ — conceptions of life; upalabhya — having realized; ātmanā — by his purified intellect; ātmānam — his own self; cakṣuṣā — with his eyes; iva — as; arkam — the sun; ātma-dṛk — the self-realized.

Translation
One should be situated in the transcendental position, beyond the stages of material consciousness, and should be aloof from all other conceptions of life. Thus realizing freedom from false ego, one should see his own self just as he sees the sun in the sky.

Text 11
मुक्तलिङ्गं सदाभासमसति प्रतिपद्यते ।
सतो बन्धुमसच्चक्षु: सर्वानुस्यूतमद्वयम् ॥ ११ ॥
mukta-liṅgaṁ sad-ābhāsam
asati pratipadyate
sato bandhum asac-cakṣuḥ
sarvānusyūtam advayam
Synonyms
mukta-liṅgam — transcendental; sat-ābhāsam — manifest as a reflection; asati — in the false ego; pratipadyate — he realizes; sataḥ bandhum — the support of the material cause; asat-cakṣuḥ — the eye (revealer) of the illusory energy; sarva-anusyūtam — entered into everything; advayam — without a second.

Translation
A liberated soul realizes the Absolute Personality of Godhead, who is transcendental and who is manifest as a reflection even in the false ego. He is the support of the material cause and He enters into everything. He is absolute, one without a second, and He is the eyes of the illusory energy.

Text 12
यथा जलस्थ आभास: स्थलस्थेनावद‍ृश्यते ।
स्वाभासेन तथा सूर्यो जलस्थेन दिवि स्थित: ॥ १२ ॥
yathā jala-stha ābhāsaḥ
sthala-sthenāvadṛśyate
svābhāsena tathā sūryo
jala-sthena divi sthitaḥ
Synonyms
yathā — as; jala-sthaḥ — situated on water; ābhāsaḥ — a reflection; sthala-sthena — situated on the wall; avadṛśyate — is perceived; sva-ābhāsena — by its reflection; tathā — in that way; sūryaḥ — the sun; jala-sthena — situated on the water; divi — in the sky; sthitaḥ — situated.

Translation
The presence of the Supreme Lord can be realized just as the sun is realized first as a reflection on water, and again as a second reflection on the wall of a room, although the sun itself is situated in the sky.

Text 13
एवं त्रिवृदहङ्कारो भूतेन्द्रियमनोमयै: ।
स्वाभासैर्लक्षितोऽनेन सदाभासेन सत्यद‍ृक् ॥ १३ ॥
evaṁ trivṛd-ahaṅkāro
bhūtendriya-manomayaiḥ
svābhāsair lakṣito ’nena
sad-ābhāsena satya-dṛk
Synonyms
evam — thus; tri-vṛt — the threefold; ahaṅkāraḥ — false ego; bhūta-indriya-manaḥ-mayaiḥ — consisting of body, senses and mind; sva-ābhāsaiḥ — by its own reflections; lakṣitaḥ — is revealed; anena — by this; sat-ābhāsena — by a reflection of Brahman; satya-dṛk — the self-realized soul.

Translation
The self-realized soul is thus reflected first in the threefold ego and then in the body, senses and mind.

Text 14
भूतसूक्ष्मेन्द्रियमनोबुद्ध्यादिष्विह निद्रया ।
लीनेष्वसति यस्तत्र विनिद्रो निरहंक्रिय: ॥ १४ ॥
bhūta-sūkṣmendriya-mano-
buddhy-ādiṣv iha nidrayā
līneṣv asati yas tatra
vinidro nirahaṅkriyaḥ
Synonyms
bhūta — the material elements; sūkṣma — the objects of enjoyment; indriya — the material senses; manaḥ — mind; buddhi — intelligence; ādiṣu — and so on; iha — here; nidrayā — by sleep; līneṣu — merged; asati — in the unmanifest; yaḥ — who; tatra — there; vinidraḥ — awake; nirahaṅkriyaḥ — freed from false ego.

Translation
Although a devotee appears to be merged in the five material elements, the objects of material enjoyment, the material senses and material mind and intelligence, he is understood to be awake and to be freed from the false ego.

Text 15
मन्यमानस्तदात्मानमनष्टो नष्टवन्मृषा ।
नष्टेऽहङ्करणे द्रष्टा नष्टवित्त इवातुर: ॥ १५ ॥
manyamānas tadātmānam
anaṣṭo naṣṭavan mṛṣā
naṣṭe ’haṅkaraṇe draṣṭā
naṣṭa-vitta ivāturaḥ
Synonyms
manyamānaḥ — thinking; tadā — then; ātmānam — himself; anaṣṭaḥ — although not lost; naṣṭa-vat — as lost; mṛṣā — falsely; naṣṭe ahaṅkaraṇe — because of the disappearance of the ego; draṣṭā — the seer; naṣṭa-vittaḥ — one who has lost his fortune; iva — like; āturaḥ — distressed.

Translation
The living entity can vividly feel his existence as the seer, but because of the disappearance of the ego during the state of deep sleep, he falsely takes himself to be lost, like a man who has lost his fortune and feels distressed, thinking himself to be lost.

Text 16
एवं प्रत्यवमृश्यासावात्मानं प्रतिपद्यते ।
साहङ्कारस्य द्रव्यस्य योऽवस्थानमनुग्रह: ॥ १६ ॥
evaṁ pratyavamṛśyāsāv
ātmānaṁ pratipadyate
sāhaṅkārasya dravyasya
yo ’vasthānam anugrahaḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; pratyavamṛśya — after understanding; asau — that person; ātmānam — his self; pratipadyate — realizes; sa-ahaṅkārasya — accepted under false ego; dravyasya — of the situation; yaḥ — who; avasthānam — resting place; anugrahaḥ — the manifester.

Translation
When, by mature understanding, one can realize his individuality, then the situation he accepts under false ego becomes manifest to him.

Text 17
देवहूतिरुवाच
पुरुषं प्रकृतिर्ब्रह्मन्न विमुञ्चति कर्हिचित् ।
अन्योन्यापाश्रयत्वाच्च नित्यत्वादनयो: प्रभो ॥ १७ ॥
devahūtir uvāca
puruṣaṁ prakṛtir brahman
na vimuñcati karhicit
anyonyāpāśrayatvāc ca
nityatvād anayoḥ prabho
Synonyms
devahūtiḥ uvāca — Devahūti said; puruṣam — the spirit soul; prakṛtiḥ — material nature; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; na — not; vimuñcati — does release; karhicit — at any time; anyonya — to one another; apāśrayatvāt — from attraction; ca — and; nityatvāt — from eternality; anayoḥ — of them both; prabho — O my Lord.

Translation
Śrī Devahūti inquired: My dear brāhmaṇa, does material nature ever give release to the spirit soul? Since one is attracted to the other eternally, how is their separation possible?

Text 18
यथा गन्धस्य भूमेश्च न भावो व्यतिरेकत: ।
अपां रसस्य च यथा तथा बुद्धे: परस्य च ॥ १८ ॥
yathā gandhasya bhūmeś ca
na bhāvo vyatirekataḥ
apāṁ rasasya ca yathā
tathā buddheḥ parasya ca
Synonyms
yathā — as; gandhasya — of aroma; bhūmeḥ — of earth; ca — and; na — no; bhāvaḥ — existence; vyatirekataḥ — separate; apām — of water; rasasya — of taste; ca — and; yathā — as; tathā — so; buddheḥ — of intelligence; parasya — of consciousness, spirit; ca — and.

Translation
As there is no separate existence of the earth and its aroma or of water and its taste, there cannot be any separate existence of intelligence and consciousness.

Text 19
अकर्तु: कर्मबन्धोऽयं पुरुषस्य यदाश्रय: ।
गुणेषु सत्सु प्रकृते: कैवल्यं तेष्वत: कथम् ॥ १९ ॥
akartuḥ karma-bandho ’yaṁ
puruṣasya yad-āśrayaḥ
guṇeṣu satsu prakṛteḥ
kaivalyaṁ teṣv ataḥ katham
Synonyms
akartuḥ — of the passive performer, the nondoer; karma-bandhaḥ — bondage to fruitive activities; ayam — this; puruṣasya — of the soul; yat-āśrayaḥ — caused by attachment to the modes; guṇeṣu — while the modes; satsu — are existing; prakṛteḥ — of material nature; kaivalyam — freedom; teṣu — those; ataḥ — hence; katham — how.

Translation
Hence even though he is the passive performer of all activities, how can there be freedom for the soul as long as material nature acts on him and binds him?

Text 20
क्‍वचित्तत्त्वावमर्शेन निवृत्तं भयमुल्बणम् ।
अनिवृत्तनिमित्तत्वात्पुन: प्रत्यवतिष्ठते ॥ २० ॥
kvacit tattvāvamarśena
nivṛttaṁ bhayam ulbaṇam
anivṛtta-nimittatvāt
punaḥ pratyavatiṣṭhate
Synonyms
kvacit — in a certain case; tattva — the fundamental principles; avamarśena — by reflecting upon; nivṛttam — avoided; bhayam — fear; ulbaṇam — great; anivṛtta — not ceased; nimittatvāt — since the cause; punaḥ — again; pratyavatiṣṭhate — it appears.

Translation
Even if the great fear of bondage is avoided by mental speculation and inquiry into the fundamental principles, it may still appear again, since its cause has not ceased.

Text 21
श्रीभगवानुवाच
अनिमित्तनिमित्तेन स्वधर्मेणामलात्मना ।
तीव्रया मयि भक्त्या च श्रुतसम्भृतया चिरम् ॥ २१ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
animitta-nimittena
sva-dharmeṇāmalātmanā
tīvrayā mayi bhaktyā ca
śruta-sambhṛtayā ciram
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; animitta-nimittena — without desiring the fruits of activities; sva-dharmeṇa — by executing one’s prescribed duties; amala-ātmanā — with a pure mind; tīvrayā — serious; mayi — unto Me; bhaktyā — by devotional service; ca — and; śruta — hearing; sambhṛtayā — endowed with; ciram — for a long time.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: One can get liberation by seriously discharging devotional service unto Me and thereby hearing for a long time about Me or from Me. By thus executing one’s prescribed duties, there will be no reaction, and one will be freed from the contamination of matter.

Text 22
ज्ञानेन द‍ृष्टतत्त्वेन वैराग्येण बलीयसा ।
तपोयुक्तेन योगेन तीव्रेणात्मसमाधिना ॥ २२ ॥
jñānena dṛṣṭa-tattvena
vairāgyeṇa balīyasā
tapo-yuktena yogena
tīvreṇātma-samādhinā
Synonyms
jñānena — in knowledge; dṛṣṭa-tattvena — with vision of the Absolute Truth; vairāgyeṇa — with renunciation; balīyasā — very strong; tapaḥ-yuktena — by engagement in austerity; yogena — by mystic yoga; tīvreṇa — firmly fixed; ātma-samādhinā — by self-absorption.

Translation
This devotional service has to be performed strongly in perfect knowledge and with transcendental vision. One must be strongly renounced and must engage in austerity and perform mystic yoga in order to be firmly fixed in self-absorption.

Text 23
प्रकृति: पुरुषस्येह दह्यमाना त्वहर्निशम् ।
तिरोभवित्री शनकैरग्नेर्योनिरिवारणि: ॥ २३ ॥
prakṛtiḥ puruṣasyeha
dahyamānā tv ahar-niśam
tiro-bhavitrī śanakair
agner yonir ivāraṇiḥ
Synonyms
prakṛtiḥ — the influence of material nature; puruṣasya — of the living entity; iha — here; dahyamānā — being consumed; tu — but; ahaḥ-niśam — day and night; tiraḥ-bhavitrī — disappearing; śanakaiḥ — gradually; agneḥ — of fire; yoniḥ — the cause of appearance; iva — as; araṇiḥ — wooden sticks.

Translation
The influence of material nature has covered the living entity, and thus it is as if the living entity were always in a blazing fire. But by the process of seriously discharging devotional service, this influence can be removed, just as wooden sticks which cause a fire are themselves consumed by it.

Text 24
भुक्तभोगा परित्यक्ता द‍ृष्टदोषा च नित्यश: ।
नेश्वरस्याशुभं धत्ते स्वे महिम्नि स्थितस्य च ॥ २४ ॥
bhukta-bhogā parityaktā
dṛṣṭa-doṣā ca nityaśaḥ
neśvarasyāśubhaṁ dhatte
sve mahimni sthitasya ca
Synonyms
bhukta — enjoyed; bhogā — enjoyment; parityaktā — given up; dṛṣṭa — discovered; doṣā — faultiness; ca — and; nityaśaḥ — always; na — not; īśvarasya — of the independent; aśubham — harm; dhatte — she inflicts; sve mahimni — in his own glory; sthitasya — situated; ca — and.

Translation
By discovering the faultiness of his desiring to lord it over material nature and by therefore giving it up, the living entity becomes independent and stands in his own glory.

Text 25
यथा ह्यप्रतिबुद्धस्य प्रस्वापो बह्वनर्थभृत् ।
स एव प्रतिबुद्धस्य न वै मोहाय कल्पते ॥ २५ ॥
yathā hy apratibuddhasya
prasvāpo bahv-anartha-bhṛt
sa eva pratibuddhasya
na vai mohāya kalpate
Synonyms
yathā — as; hi — indeed; apratibuddhasya — of one who is sleeping; prasvāpaḥ — the dream; bahu-anartha-bhṛt — bearing many inauspicious things; saḥ eva — that very dream; pratibuddhasya — of one who is awake; na — not; vai — certainly; mohāya — for bewildering; kalpate — is capable.

Translation
In the dreaming state one’s consciousness is almost covered, and one sees many inauspicious things, but when he is awakened and fully conscious, such inauspicious things cannot bewilder him.

Text 26
एवं विदिततत्त्वस्य प्रकृतिर्मयि मानसम् ।
युञ्जतो नापकुरुत आत्मारामस्य कर्हिचित् ॥ २६ ॥
evaṁ vidita-tattvasya
prakṛtir mayi mānasam
yuñjato nāpakuruta
ātmārāmasya karhicit
Synonyms
evam — thus; vidita-tattvasya — to one who knows the Absolute Truth; prakṛtiḥ — material nature; mayi — on Me; mānasam — the mind; yuñjataḥ — fixing; na — not; apakurute — can do harm; ātma-ārāmasya — to one who rejoices in the self; karhicit — at any time.

Translation
The influence of material nature cannot harm an enlightened soul, even though he engages in material activities, because he knows the truth of the Absolute, and his mind is fixed on the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 27
यदैवमध्यात्मरत: कालेन बहुजन्मना ।
सर्वत्र जातवैराग्य आब्रह्मभुवनान्मुनि: ॥ २७ ॥
yadaivam adhyātma-rataḥ
kālena bahu-janmanā
sarvatra jāta-vairāgya
ābrahma-bhuvanān muniḥ
Synonyms
yadā — when; evam — thus; adhyātma-rataḥ — engaged in self-realization; kālena — for many years; bahu-janmanā — for many births; sarvatra — everywhere; jāta-vairāgyaḥ — detachment is born; ā-brahma-bhuvanāt — up to Brahmaloka; muniḥ — a thoughtful person.

Translation
When a person thus engages in devotional service and self-realization for many, many years and births, he becomes completely reluctant to enjoy any one of the material planets, even up to the highest planet, which is known as Brahmaloka; he becomes fully developed in consciousness.

Texts 28-29
मद्भक्त: प्रतिबुद्धार्थो मत्प्रसादेन भूयसा ।
नि:श्रेयसं स्वसंस्थानं कैवल्याख्यं मदाश्रयम् ॥ २८ ॥
प्राप्नोतीहाञ्जसा धीर: स्वद‍ृशाच्छिन्नसंशय: ।
यद्गत्वा न निवर्तेत योगी लिङ्गाद्विनिर्गमे ॥ २९ ॥
mad-bhaktaḥ pratibuddhārtho
mat-prasādena bhūyasā
niḥśreyasaṁ sva-saṁsthānaṁ
kaivalyākhyaṁ mad-āśrayam
prāpnotīhāñjasā dhīraḥ
sva-dṛśā cchinna-saṁśayaḥ
yad gatvā na nivarteta
yogī liṅgād vinirgame
Synonyms
mat-bhaktaḥ — My devotee; pratibuddha-arthaḥ — self-realized; mat-prasādena — by My causeless mercy; bhūyasā — unlimited; niḥśreyasam — the ultimate perfectional goal; sva-saṁsthānam — his abode; kaivalya-ākhyam — called kaivalya; mat-āśrayam — under My protection; prāpnoti — attains; iha — in this life; añjasā — truly; dhīraḥ — steady; sva-dṛśā — by knowledge of the self; chinna-saṁśayaḥ — freed from doubts; yat — to that abode; gatvā — having gone; na — never; nivarteta — comes back; yogī — the mystic devotee; liṅgāt — from the subtle and gross material bodies; vinirgame — after departing.

Translation
My devotee actually becomes self-realized by My unlimited causeless mercy, and thus, when freed from all doubts, he steadily progresses towards his destined abode, which is directly under the protection of My spiritual energy of unadulterated bliss. That is the ultimate perfectional goal of the living entity. After giving up the present material body, the mystic devotee goes to that transcendental abode and never comes back.

Text 30
यदा न योगोपचितासु चेतो
मायासु सिद्धस्य विषज्जतेऽङ्ग ।
अनन्यहेतुष्वथ मे गति: स्याद्
आत्यन्तिकी यत्र न मृत्युहास: ॥ ३० ॥
yadā na yogopacitāsu ceto
māyāsu siddhasya viṣajjate ’ṅga
ananya-hetuṣv atha me gatiḥ syād
ātyantikī yatra na mṛtyu-hāsaḥ
Synonyms
yadā — when; na — not; yoga-upacitāsu — to powers developed by yoga; cetaḥ — the attention; māyāsu — manifestations of māyā; siddhasya — of a perfect yogī; viṣajjate — is attracted; aṅga — My dear mother; ananya-hetuṣu — having no other cause; atha — then; me — to Me; gatiḥ — his progress; syāt — becomes; ātyantikī — unlimited; yatra — where; na — not; mṛtyu-hāsaḥ — power of death.

Translation
When a perfect yogī’s attention is no longer attracted to the by-products of mystic powers, which are manifestations of the external energy, his progress towards Me becomes unlimited, and thus the power of death cannot overcome him.