Texts 1-2
देवहूतिरुवाच
लक्षणं महदादीनां प्रकृते: पुरुषस्य च ।
स्वरूपं लक्ष्यतेऽमीषां येन तत्पारमार्थिकम् ॥ १ ॥
यथा साङ्ख्येषु कथितं यन्मूलं तत्प्रचक्षते ।
भक्तियोगस्य मे मार्गं ब्रूहि विस्तरश: प्रभो ॥ २ ॥
devahūtir uvāca
lakṣaṇaṁ mahad-ādīnāṁ
prakṛteḥ puruṣasya ca
svarūpaṁ lakṣyate ’mīṣāṁ
yena tat-pāramārthikam
yathā sāṅkhyeṣu kathitaṁ
yan-mūlaṁ tat pracakṣate
bhakti-yogasya me mārgaṁ
brūhi vistaraśaḥ prabho
Synonyms
devahūtiḥ uvāca — Devahūti said; lakṣaṇam — symptoms; mahat-ādīnām — of the mahat-tattva and so on; prakṛteḥ — of material nature; puruṣasya — of the spirit; ca — and; svarūpam — the nature; lakṣyate — is described; amīṣām — of those; yena — by which; tat-pārama-arthikam — the true nature of them; yathā — as; sāṅkhyeṣu — in Sāṅkhya philosophy; kathitam — is explained; yat — of which; mūlam — ultimate end; tat — that; pracakṣate — they call; bhakti-yogasya — of devotional service; me — to me; mārgam — the path; brūhi — please explain; vistaraśaḥ — at length; prabho — my dear Lord Kapila.

Translation
Devahūti inquired: My dear Lord, You have already very scientifically described the symptoms of the total material nature and the characteristics of the spirit according to the Sāṅkhya system of philosophy. Now I shall request You to explain the path of devotional service, which is the ultimate end of all philosophical systems.

Text 3
विरागो येन पुरुषो भगवन्सर्वतो भवेत् ।
आचक्ष्व जीवलोकस्य विविधा मम संसृती: ॥ ३ ॥
virāgo yena puruṣo
bhagavan sarvato bhavet
ācakṣva jīva-lokasya
vividhā mama saṁsṛtīḥ
Synonyms
virāgaḥ — detached; yena — by which; puruṣaḥ — a person; bhagavan — my dear Lord; sarvataḥ — completely; bhavet — may become; ācakṣva — please describe; jīva-lokasya — for the people in general; vividhāḥ — manifold; mama — for myself; saṁsṛtīḥ — repetition of birth and death.

Translation
Devahūti continued: My dear Lord, please also describe in detail, both for me and for people in general, the continual process of birth and death, for by hearing of such calamities we may become detached from the activities of this material world.

Text 4
कालस्येश्वररूपस्य परेषां च परस्य ते ।
स्वरूपं बत कुर्वन्ति यद्धेतो: कुशलं जना: ॥ ४ ॥
kālasyeśvara-rūpasya
pareṣāṁ ca parasya te
svarūpaṁ bata kurvanti
yad-dhetoḥ kuśalaṁ janāḥ
Synonyms
kālasya — of time; īśvara-rūpasya — a representation of the Lord; pareṣām — of all others; ca — and; parasya — the chief; te — of You; svarūpam — the nature; bata — oh; kurvanti — perform; yat-hetoḥ — by whose influence; kuśalam — pious activities; janāḥ — people in general.

Translation
Please also describe eternal time, which is a representation of Your form and by whose influence people in general engage in the performance of pious activities.

Text 5
लोकस्य मिथ्याभिमतेरचक्षुष-
श्चिरं प्रसुप्तस्य तमस्यनाश्रये ।
श्रान्तस्य कर्मस्वनुविद्धया धिया
त्वमाविरासी: किल योगभास्कर: ॥ ५ ॥
lokasya mithyābhimater acakṣuṣaś
ciraṁ prasuptasya tamasy anāśraye
śrāntasya karmasv anuviddhayā dhiyā
tvam āvirāsīḥ kila yoga-bhāskaraḥ
Synonyms
lokasya — of the living entities; mithyā-abhimateḥ — deluded by false ego; acakṣuṣaḥ — blind; ciram — for a very long time; prasuptasya — sleeping; tamasi — in darkness; anāśraye — without shelter; śrāntasya — fatigued; karmasu — to material activities; anuviddhayā — attached; dhiyā — with the intelligence; tvam — You; āvirāsīḥ — have appeared; kila — indeed; yoga — of the yoga system; bhāskaraḥ — the sun.

Translation
My dear Lord, You are just like the sun, for You illuminate the darkness of the conditional life of the living entities. Because their eyes of knowledge are not open, they are sleeping eternally in that darkness without Your shelter, and therefore they are falsely engaged by the actions and reactions of their material activities, and they appear to be very fatigued.

Text 6
मैत्रेय उवाच
इति मातुर्वच: श्लक्ष्णं प्रतिनन्द्य महामुनि: ।
आबभाषे कुरुश्रेष्ठ प्रीतस्तां करुणार्दित: ॥ ६ ॥
maitreya uvāca
iti mātur vacaḥ ślakṣṇaṁ
pratinandya mahā-muniḥ
ābabhāṣe kuru-śreṣṭha
prītas tāṁ karuṇārditaḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; iti — thus; mātuḥ — of His mother; vacaḥ — the words; ślakṣṇam — gentle; pratinandya — welcoming; mahā-muniḥ — the great sage Kapila; ābabhāṣe — spoke; kuru-śreṣṭha — O best among the Kurus, Vidura; prītaḥ — pleased; tām — to her; karuṇā — with compassion; arditaḥ — moved.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya said: O best amongst the Kurus, the great sage Kapila, moved by great compassion and pleased by the words of His glorious mother, spoke as follows.

Text 7
श्रीभगवानुवाच
भक्तियोगो बहुविधो मार्गैर्भामिनि भाव्यते ।
स्वभावगुणमार्गेण पुंसां भावो विभिद्यते ॥ ७ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
bhakti-yogo bahu-vidho
mārgair bhāmini bhāvyate
svabhāva-guṇa-mārgeṇa
puṁsāṁ bhāvo vibhidyate
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Personality of Godhead replied; bhakti-yogaḥ — devotional service; bahu-vidhaḥ — multifarious; mārgaiḥ — with paths; bhāmini — O noble lady; bhāvyate — is manifest; svabhāva — nature; guṇa — qualities; mārgeṇa — in terms of behavior; puṁsām — of the executors; bhāvaḥ — the appearance; vibhidyate — is divided.

Translation
Lord Kapila, the Personality of Godhead, replied: O noble lady, there are multifarious paths of devotional service in terms of the different qualities of the executor.

Text 8
अभिसन्धाय यो हिंसां दम्भं मात्सर्यमेव वा ।
संरम्भी भिन्नद‍ृग्भावं मयि कुर्यात्स तामस: ॥ ८ ॥
abhisandhāya yo hiṁsāṁ
dambhaṁ mātsaryam eva vā
saṁrambhī bhinna-dṛg bhāvaṁ
mayi kuryāt sa tāmasaḥ
Synonyms
abhisandhāya — having in view; yaḥ — he who; hiṁsām — violence; dambham — pride; mātsaryam — envy; eva — indeed; vā — or; saṁrambhī — angry; bhinna — separate; dṛk — whose vision; bhāvam — devotional service; mayi — to Me; kuryāt — may do; saḥ — he; tāmasaḥ — in the mode of ignorance.

Translation
Devotional service executed by a person who is envious, proud, violent and angry, and who is a separatist, is considered to be in the mode of darkness.

Text 9
विषयानभिसन्धाय यश ऐश्वर्यमेव वा ।
अर्चादावर्चयेद्यो मां पृथग्भाव: स राजस: ॥ ९ ॥
viṣayān abhisandhāya
yaśa aiśvaryam eva vā
arcādāv arcayed yo māṁ
pṛthag-bhāvaḥ sa rājasaḥ
Synonyms
viṣayān — sense objects; abhisandhāya — aiming at; yaśaḥ — fame; aiśvaryam — opulence; eva — indeed; vā — or; arcā-ādau — in worship of the Deity and so on; arcayet — may worship; yaḥ — he who; mām — Me; pṛthak-bhāvaḥ — a separatist; saḥ — he; rājasaḥ — in the mode of passion.

Translation
The worship of Deities in the temple by a separatist, with a motive for material enjoyment, fame and opulence, is devotion in the mode of passion.

Text 10
कर्मनिर्हारमुद्दिश्य परस्मिन्वा तदर्पणम् ।
यजेद्यष्टव्यमिति वा पृथग्भाव: स सात्त्विक: ॥ १० ॥
karma-nirhāram uddiśya
parasmin vā tad-arpaṇam
yajed yaṣṭavyam iti vā
pṛthag-bhāvaḥ sa sāttvikaḥ
Synonyms
karma — fruitive activities; nirhāram — freeing himself from; uddiśya — with the purpose of; parasmin — to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vā — or; tat-arpaṇam — offering the result of activities; yajet — may worship; yaṣṭavyam — to be worshiped; iti — thus; vā — or; pṛthak-bhāvaḥ — separatist; saḥ — he; sāttvikaḥ — in the mode of goodness.

Translation
When a devotee worships the Supreme Personality of Godhead and offers the results of his activities in order to free himself from the inebrieties of fruitive activities, his devotion is in the mode of goodness.

Texts 11-12
मद्गुणश्रुतिमात्रेण मयि सर्वगुहाशये ।
मनोगतिरविच्छिन्ना यथा गङ्गाम्भसोऽम्बुधौ ॥ ११ ॥
लक्षणं भक्तियोगस्य निर्गुणस्य ह्युदाहृतम् ।
अहैतुक्यव्यवहिता या भक्ति: पुरुषोत्तमे ॥ १२ ॥
mad-guṇa-śruti-mātreṇa
mayi sarva-guhāśaye
mano-gatir avicchinnā
yathā gaṅgāmbhaso ’mbudhau
lakṣaṇaṁ bhakti-yogasya
nirguṇasya hy udāhṛtam
ahaituky avyavahitā
yā bhaktiḥ puruṣottame
Synonyms
mat — of Me; guṇa — qualities; śruti — by hearing; mātreṇa — just; mayi — towards Me; sarva-guhā-āśaye — residing in everyone’s heart; manaḥ-gatiḥ — the heart’s course; avicchinnā — continuous; yathā — as; gaṅgā — of the Ganges; ambhasaḥ — of the water; ambudhau — towards the ocean; lakṣaṇam — the manifestation; bhakti-yogasya — of devotional service; nirguṇasya — unadulterated; hi — indeed; udāhṛtam — exhibited; ahaitukī — causeless; avyavahitā — not separated; yā — which; bhaktiḥ — devotional service; puruṣa-uttame — towards the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
The manifestation of unadulterated devotional service is exhibited when one’s mind is at once attracted to hearing the transcendental name and qualities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is residing in everyone’s heart. Just as the water of the Ganges flows naturally down towards the ocean, such devotional ecstasy, uninterrupted by any material condition, flows towards the Supreme Lord.

Text 13
सालोक्यसार्ष्टिसामीप्यसारूप्यैकत्वमप्युत ।
दीयमानं न गृह्णन्ति विना मत्सेवनं जना: ॥ १३ ॥
sālokya-sārṣṭi-sāmīpya-
sārūpyaikatvam apy uta
dīyamānaṁ na gṛhṇanti
vinā mat-sevanaṁ janāḥ
Synonyms
sālokya — living on the same planet; sārṣṭi — having the same opulence; sāmīpya — to be a personal associate; sārūpya — having the same bodily features; ekatvam — oneness; api — also; uta — even; dīyamānam — being offered; na — not; gṛhṇanti — do accept; vinā — without; mat — My; sevanam — devotional service; janāḥ — pure devotees.

Translation
A pure devotee does not accept any kind of liberation — sālokya, sārṣṭi, sāmīpya, sārūpya or ekatva — even though they are offered by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 14
स एव भक्तियोगाख्य आत्यन्तिक उदाहृत: ।
येनातिव्रज्य त्रिगुणं मद्भावायोपपद्यते ॥ १४ ॥
sa eva bhakti-yogākhya
ātyantika udāhṛtaḥ
yenātivrajya tri-guṇaṁ
mad-bhāvāyopapadyate
Synonyms
saḥ — this; eva — indeed; bhakti-yoga — devotional service; ākhyaḥ — called; ātyantikaḥ — the highest platform; udāhṛtaḥ — explained; yena — by which; ativrajya — overcoming; tri-guṇam — the three modes of material nature; mat-bhāvāya — to My transcendental stage; upapadyate — one attains.

Translation
By attaining the highest platform of devotional service, as I have explained, one can overcome the influence of the three modes of material nature and be situated in the transcendental stage, as is the Lord.

Text 15
निषेवितेनानिमित्तेन स्वधर्मेण महीयसा ।
क्रियायोगेन शस्तेन नातिहिंस्रेण नित्यश: ॥ १५ ॥
niṣevitenānimittena
sva-dharmeṇa mahīyasā
kriyā-yogena śastena
nātihiṁsreṇa nityaśaḥ
Synonyms
niṣevitena — executed; animittena — without attachment to the result; sva-dharmeṇa — by one’s prescribed duties; mahīyasā — glorious; kriyā-yogena — by devotional activities; śastena — auspicious; na — without; atihiṁsreṇa — excessive violence; nityaśaḥ — regularly.

Translation
A devotee must execute his prescribed duties, which are glorious, without material profit. Without excessive violence, one should regularly perform one’s devotional activities.

Text 16
मद्धिष्ण्यदर्शनस्पर्शपूजास्तुत्यभिवन्दनै: ।
भूतेषु मद्भावनया सत्त्वेनासङ्गमेन च ॥ १६ ॥
mad-dhiṣṇya-darśana-sparśa-
pūjā-stuty-abhivandanaiḥ
bhūteṣu mad-bhāvanayā
sattvenāsaṅgamena ca
Synonyms
mat — My; dhiṣṇya — statue; darśana — seeing; sparśa — touching; pūjā — worshiping; stuti — praying to; abhivandanaiḥ — by offering obeisances; bhūteṣu — in all living entities; mat — of Me; bhāvanayā — with thought; sattvena — by the mode of goodness; asaṅgamena — with detachment; ca — and.

Translation
The devotee should regularly see My statues in the temple, touch My lotus feet and offer worshipable paraphernalia and prayer. He should see in the spirit of renunciation, from the mode of goodness, and see every living entity as spiritual.

Text 17
महतां बहुमानेन दीनानामनुकम्पया ।
मैत्र्या चैवात्मतुल्येषु यमेन नियमेन च ॥ १७ ॥
mahatāṁ bahu-mānena
dīnānām anukampayā
maitryā caivātma-tulyeṣu
yamena niyamena ca
Synonyms
mahatām — to the great souls; bahu-mānena — with great respect; dīnānām — to the poor; anukampayā — with compassion; maitryā — with friendship; ca — also; eva — certainly; ātma-tulyeṣu — to persons who are equals; yamena — with control of the senses; niyamena — with regulation; ca — and.

Translation
The pure devotee should execute devotional service by giving the greatest respect to the spiritual master and the ācāryas. He should be compassionate to the poor and make friendship with persons who are his equals, but all his activities should be executed under regulation and with control of the senses.

Text 18
आध्यात्मिकानुश्रवणान्नामसङ्कीर्तनाच्च मे ।
आर्जवेनार्यसङ्गेन निरहङ्‍‌क्रियया तथा ॥ १८ ॥
ādhyātmikānuśravaṇān
nāma-saṅkīrtanāc ca me
ārjavenārya-saṅgena
nirahaṅkriyayā tathā
Synonyms
ādhyātmika — spiritual matters; anuśravaṇāt — from hearing; nāma-saṅkīrtanāt — from chanting the holy name; ca — and; me — My; ārjavena — with straightforward behavior; ārya-saṅgena — with association of saintly persons; nirahaṅkriyayā — without false ego; tathā — thus.

Translation
A devotee should always try to hear about spiritual matters and should always utilize his time in chanting the holy name of the Lord. His behavior should always be straightforward and simple, and although he is not envious but friendly to everyone, he should avoid the company of persons who are not spiritually advanced.

Text 19
मद्धर्मणो गुणैरेतै: परिसंशुद्ध आशय: ।
पुरुषस्याञ्जसाभ्येति श्रुतमात्रगुणं हि माम् ॥ १९ ॥
mad-dharmaṇo guṇair etaiḥ
parisaṁśuddha āśayaḥ
puruṣasyāñjasābhyeti
śruta-mātra-guṇaṁ hi mām
Synonyms
mat-dharmaṇaḥ — of My devotee; guṇaiḥ — with the attributes; etaiḥ — these; parisaṁśuddhaḥ — completely purified; āśayaḥ — consciousness; puruṣasya — of a person; añjasā — instantly; abhyeti — approaches; śruta — by hearing; mātra — simply; guṇam — quality; hi — certainly; mām — Me.

Translation
When one is fully qualified with all these transcendental attributes and his consciousness is thus completely purified, he is immediately attracted simply by hearing My name or hearing of My transcendental quality.

Text 20
यथा वातरथो घ्राणमावृङ्क्ते गन्ध आशयात् ।
एवं योगरतं चेत आत्मानमविकारि यत् ॥ २० ॥
yathā vāta-ratho ghrāṇam
āvṛṅkte gandha āśayāt
evaṁ yoga-rataṁ ceta
ātmānam avikāri yat
Synonyms
yathā — as; vāta — of air; rathaḥ — the chariot; ghrāṇam — sense of smell; āvṛṅkte — catches; gandhaḥ — aroma; āśayāt — from the source; evam — similarly; yoga-ratam — engaged in devotional service; cetaḥ — consciousness; ātmānam — the Supreme Soul; avikāri — unchanging; yat — which.

Translation
As the chariot of air carries an aroma from its source and immediately catches the sense of smell, similarly, one who constantly engages in devotional service, in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, can catch the Supreme Soul, who is equally present everywhere.

Text 21
अहं सर्वेषु भूतेषु भूतात्मावस्थित: सदा ।
तमवज्ञाय मां मर्त्य: कुरुतेऽर्चाविडम्बनम् ॥ २१ ॥
ahaṁ sarveṣu bhūteṣu
bhūtātmāvasthitaḥ sadā
tam avajñāya māṁ martyaḥ
kurute ’rcā-viḍambanam
Synonyms
aham — I; sarveṣu — in all; bhūteṣu — living entities; bhūta-ātmā — the Supersoul in all beings; avasthitaḥ — situated; sadā — always; tam — that Supersoul; avajñāya — disregarding; mām — Me; martyaḥ — a mortal man; kurute — performs; arcā — of worship of the Deity; viḍambanam — imitation.

Translation
I am present in every living entity as the Supersoul. If someone neglects or disregards that Supersoul everywhere and engages himself in the worship of the Deity in the temple, that is simply imitation.

Text 22
यो मां सर्वेषु भूतेषु सन्तमात्मानमीश्वरम् ।
हित्वार्चां भजते मौढ्याद्भस्मन्येव जुहोति स: ॥ २२ ॥
yo māṁ sarveṣu bhūteṣu
santam ātmānam īśvaram
hitvārcāṁ bhajate mauḍhyād
bhasmany eva juhoti saḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — one who; mām — Me; sarveṣu — in all; bhūteṣu — living entities; santam — being present; ātmānam — the Paramātmā; īśvaram — the Supreme Lord; hitvā — disregarding; arcām — the Deity; bhajate — worships; mauḍhyāt — because of ignorance; bhasmani — into ashes; eva — only; juhoti — offers oblations; saḥ — he.

Translation
One who worships the Deity of Godhead in the temples but does not know that the Supreme Lord, as Paramātmā, is situated in every living entity’s heart, must be in ignorance and is compared to one who offers oblations into ashes.

Text 23
द्विषत: परकाये मां मानिनो भिन्नदर्शिन: ।
भूतेषु बद्धवैरस्य न मन: शान्तिमृच्छति ॥ २३ ॥
dviṣataḥ para-kāye māṁ
mānino bhinna-darśinaḥ
bhūteṣu baddha-vairasya
na manaḥ śāntim ṛcchati
Synonyms
dviṣataḥ — of one who is envious; para-kāye — towards the body of another; mām — unto Me; māninaḥ — offering respect; bhinna-darśinaḥ — of a separatist; bhūteṣu — towards living entities; baddha-vairasya — of one who is inimical; na — not; manaḥ — the mind; śāntim — peace; ṛcchati — attains.

Translation
One who offers Me respect but is envious of the bodies of others and is therefore a separatist never attains peace of mind, because of his inimical behavior towards other living entities.

Text 24
अहमुच्चावचैर्द्रव्यै: क्रिययोत्पन्नयानघे ।
नैव तुष्येऽर्चितोऽर्चायां भूतग्रामावमानिन: ॥ २४ ॥
aham uccāvacair dravyaiḥ
kriyayotpannayānaghe
naiva tuṣye ’rcito ’rcāyāṁ
bhūta-grāmāvamāninaḥ
Synonyms
aham — I; ucca-avacaiḥ — with various; dravyaiḥ — paraphernalia; kriyayā — by religious rituals; utpannayā — accomplished; anaghe — O sinless mother; na — not; eva — certainly; tuṣye — am pleased; arcitaḥ — worshiped; arcāyām — in the Deity form; bhūta-grāma — to other living entities; avamāninaḥ — with those who are disrespectful.

Translation
My dear mother, even if he worships with proper rituals and paraphernalia, a person who is ignorant of My presence in all living entities never pleases Me by the worship of My Deities in the temple.

Text 25
अर्चादावर्चयेत्तावदीश्वरं मां स्वकर्मकृत् ।
यावन्न वेद स्वहृदि सर्वभूतेष्ववस्थितम् ॥ २५ ॥
arcādāv arcayet tāvad
īśvaraṁ māṁ sva-karma-kṛt
yāvan na veda sva-hṛdi
sarva-bhūteṣv avasthitam
Synonyms
arcā-ādau — beginning with worship of the Deity; arcayet — one should worship; tāvat — so long; īśvaram — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mām — Me; sva — his own; karma — prescribed duties; kṛt — performing; yāvat — as long as; na — not; veda — he realizes; sva-hṛdi — in his own heart; sarva-bhūteṣu — in all living entities; avasthitam — situated.

Translation
Performing his prescribed duties, one should worship the Deity of the Supreme Personality of Godhead until one realizes My presence in his own heart and in the hearts of other living entities as well.

Text 26
आत्मनश्च परस्यापि य: करोत्यन्तरोदरम् ।
तस्य भिन्नद‍ृशो मृत्युर्विदधे भयमुल्बणम् ॥ २६ ॥
ātmanaś ca parasyāpi
yaḥ karoty antarodaram
tasya bhinna-dṛśo mṛtyur
vidadhe bhayam ulbaṇam
Synonyms
ātmanaḥ — of himself; ca — and; parasya — of another; api — also; yaḥ — one who; karoti — discriminates; antarā — between; udaram — the body; tasya — of him; bhinna-dṛśaḥ — having a differential outlook; mṛtyuḥ — as death; vidadhe — I cause; bhayam — fear; ulbaṇam — great.

Translation
As the blazing fire of death, I cause great fear to whoever makes the least discrimination between himself and other living entities because of a differential outlook.

Text 27
अथ मां सर्वभूतेषु भूतात्मानं कृतालयम् ।
अर्हयेद्दानमानाभ्यां मैत्र्याभिन्नेन चक्षुषा ॥ २७ ॥
atha māṁ sarva-bhūteṣu
bhūtātmānaṁ kṛtālayam
arhayed dāna-mānābhyāṁ
maitryābhinnena cakṣuṣā
Synonyms
atha — therefore; mām — Me; sarva-bhūteṣu — in all creatures; bhūta-ātmānam — the Self in all beings; kṛta-ālayam — abiding; arhayet — one should propitiate; dāna-mānābhyām — through charity and respect; maitryā — through friendship; abhinnena — equal; cakṣuṣā — by viewing.

Translation
Therefore, through charitable gifts and attention, as well as through friendly behavior and by viewing all to be alike, one should propitiate Me, who abide in all creatures as their very Self.

Text 28
जीवा: श्रेष्ठा ह्यजीवानां तत: प्राणभृत: शुभे ।
त: सचित्ता: प्रवरास्ततश्चेन्द्रियवृत्तय: ॥ २८ ॥
jīvāḥ śreṣṭhā hy ajīvānāṁ
tataḥ prāṇa-bhṛtaḥ śubhe
tataḥ sa-cittāḥ pravarās
tataś cendriya-vṛttayaḥ
Synonyms
jīvāḥ — living entities; śreṣṭhāḥ — better; hi — indeed; ajīvānām — than inanimate objects; tataḥ — than them; prāṇa-bhṛtaḥ — entities with life symptoms; śubhe — O blessed mother; tataḥ — than them; sa-cittāḥ — entities with developed consciousness; pravarāḥ — better; tataḥ — than them; ca — and; indriya-vṛttayaḥ — those with sense perception.

Translation
Living entities are superior to inanimate objects, O blessed mother, and among them, living entities who display life symptoms are better. Animals with developed consciousness are better than them, and better still are those who have developed sense perception.

Text 29
तत्रापि स्पर्शवेदिभ्य: प्रवरा रसवेदिन: ।
तेभ्यो गन्धविद: श्रेष्ठास्तत: शब्दविदो वरा: ॥ २९ ॥
tatrāpi sparśa-vedibhyaḥ
pravarā rasa-vedinaḥ
tebhyo gandha-vidaḥ śreṣṭhās
tataḥ śabda-vido varāḥ
Synonyms
tatra — among them; api — moreover; sparśa-vedibhyaḥ — than those perceiving touch; pravarāḥ — better; rasa-vedinaḥ — those perceiving taste; tebhyaḥ — than them; gandha-vidaḥ — those perceiving smell; śreṣṭhāḥ — better; tataḥ — than them; śabda-vidaḥ — those perceiving sound; varāḥ — better.

Translation
Among the living entities who have developed sense perception, those who have developed the sense of taste are better than those who have developed only the sense of touch. Better than them are those who have developed the sense of smell, and better still are those who have developed the sense of hearing.

Text 30
रूपभेदविदस्तत्र ततश्चोभयतोदत: ।
तेषां बहुपदा: श्रेष्ठाश्चतुष्पादस्ततो द्विपात् ॥ ३० ॥
rūpa-bheda-vidas tatra
tataś cobhayato-dataḥ
teṣāṁ bahu-padāḥ śreṣṭhāś
catuṣ-pādas tato dvi-pāt
Synonyms
rūpa-bheda — distinctions of form; vidaḥ — those who perceive; tatra — than them; tataḥ — than them; ca — and; ubhayataḥ — in both jaws; dataḥ — those with teeth; teṣām — of them; bahu-padāḥ — those who have many legs; śreṣṭhāḥ — better; catuḥ-pādaḥ — four-legged; tataḥ — than them; dvi-pāt — two-legged.

Translation
Better than those living entities who can perceive sound are those who can distinguish between one form and another. Better than them are those who have developed upper and lower sets of teeth, and better still are those who have many legs. Better than them are the quadrupeds, and better still are the human beings.

Text 31
ततो वर्णाश्च चत्वारस्तेषां ब्राह्मण उत्तम: ।
ब्राह्मणेष्वपि वेदज्ञो ह्यर्थज्ञोऽभ्यधिकस्तत: ॥ ३१ ॥
tato varṇāś ca catvāras
teṣāṁ brāhmaṇa uttamaḥ
brāhmaṇeṣv api veda-jño
hy artha-jño ’bhyadhikas tataḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — among them; varṇāḥ — classes; ca — and; catvāraḥ — four; teṣām — of them; brāhmaṇaḥ — a brāhmaṇa; uttamaḥ — best; brāhmaṇeṣu — among the brāhmaṇas; api — moreover; veda — the Vedas; jñaḥ — one who knows; hi — certainly; artha — the purpose; jñaḥ — one who knows; abhyadhikaḥ — better; tataḥ — than him.

Translation
Among human beings, the society which is divided according to quality and work is best, and in that society, the intelligent men, who are designated as brāhmaṇas, are best. Among the brāhmaṇas, one who has studied the Vedas is the best, and among the brāhmaṇas who have studied the Vedas, one who knows the actual purport of Veda is the best.

Text 32
अर्थज्ञात्संशयच्छेत्ता तत: श्रेयान्स्वकर्मकृत् ।
मुक्तसङ्गस्ततो भूयानदोग्धा धर्ममात्मन: ॥ ३२ ॥
artha-jñāt saṁśaya-cchettā
tataḥ śreyān sva-karma-kṛt
mukta-saṅgas tato bhūyān
adogdhā dharmam ātmanaḥ
Synonyms
artha-jñāt — than one who knows the purpose of the Vedas; saṁśaya — doubts; chettā — one who cuts off; tataḥ — than him; śreyān — better; sva-karma — his prescribed duties; kṛt — one who executes; mukta-saṅgaḥ — liberated from material association; tataḥ — than him; bhūyān — better; adogdhā — not executing; dharmam — devotional service; ātmanaḥ — for himself.

Translation
Better than the brāhmaṇa who knows the purpose of the Vedas is he who can dissipate all doubts, and better than him is one who strictly follows the brahminical principles. Better than him is one who is liberated from all material contamination, and better than him is a pure devotee, who executes devotional service without expectation of reward.

Text 33
तस्मान्मय्यर्पिताशेषक्रियार्थात्मा निरन्तर: ।
मय्यर्पितात्मन: पुंसो मयि संन्यस्तकर्मण: ।
न पश्यामि परं भूतमकर्तु: समदर्शनात् ॥ ३३ ॥
tasmān mayy arpitāśeṣa-
kriyārthātmā nirantaraḥ
mayy arpitātmanaḥ puṁso
mayi sannyasta-karmaṇaḥ
na paśyāmi paraṁ bhūtam
akartuḥ sama-darśanāt
Synonyms
tasmāt — than him; mayi — unto Me; arpita — offered; aśeṣa — all; kriyā — actions; artha — wealth; ātmā — life, soul; nirantaraḥ — without cessation; mayi — unto Me; arpita — offered; ātmanaḥ — whose mind; puṁsaḥ — than a person; mayi — unto Me; sannyasta — dedicated; karmaṇaḥ — whose activities; na — not; paśyāmi — I see; param — greater; bhūtam — living entity; akartuḥ — without proprietorship; sama — same; darśanāt — whose vision.

Translation
Therefore I do not find a greater person than he who has no interest outside of Mine and who therefore engages and dedicates all his activities and all his life — everything — unto Me without cessation.

Text 34
मनसैतानि भूतानि प्रणमेद्बहुमानयन् ।
ईश्वरो जीवकलया प्रविष्टो भगवानिति ॥ ३४ ॥
manasaitāni bhūtāni
praṇamed bahu-mānayan
īśvaro jīva-kalayā
praviṣṭo bhagavān iti
Synonyms
manasā — with the mind; etāni — to these; bhūtāni — living entities; praṇamet — he offers respects; bahu-mānayan — showing regard; īśvaraḥ — the controller; jīva — of the living entities; kalayā — by His expansion as the Supersoul; praviṣṭaḥ — has entered; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; iti — thus.

Translation
Such a perfect devotee offers respects to every living entity because he is under the firm conviction that the Supreme Personality of Godhead has entered the body of every living entity as the Supersoul, or controller.

Text 35
भक्तियोगश्च योगश्च मया मानव्युदीरित: ।
ययोरेकतरेणैव पुरुष: पुरुषं व्रजेत् ॥ ३५ ॥
bhakti-yogaś ca yogaś ca
mayā mānavy udīritaḥ
yayor ekatareṇaiva
puruṣaḥ puruṣaṁ vrajet
Synonyms
bhakti-yogaḥ — devotional service; ca — and; yogaḥ — mystic yoga; ca — also; mayā — by Me; mānavi — O daughter of Manu; udīritaḥ — described; yayoḥ — of which two; ekatareṇa — by either one; eva — alone; puruṣaḥ — a person; puruṣam — the Supreme Person; vrajet — can achieve.

Translation
My dear mother, O daughter of Manu, a devotee who applies the science of devotional service and mystic yoga in this way can achieve the abode of the Supreme Person simply by that devotional service.

Text 36
एतद्भगवतो रूपं ब्रह्मण: परमात्मन: ।
परं प्रधानं पुरुषं दैवं कर्मविचेष्टितम् ॥ ३६ ॥
etad bhagavato rūpaṁ
brahmaṇaḥ paramātmanaḥ
paraṁ pradhānaṁ puruṣaṁ
daivaṁ karma-viceṣṭitam
Synonyms
etat — this; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rūpam — form; brahmaṇaḥ — of Brahman; parama-ātmanaḥ — of Paramātmā; param — transcendental; pradhānam — chief; puruṣam — personality; daivam — spiritual; karma-viceṣṭitam — whose activities.

Translation
This puruṣa whom the individual soul must approach is the eternal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is known as Brahman and Paramātmā. He is the transcendental chief personality, and His activities are all spiritual.

Text 37
रूपभेदास्पदं दिव्यं काल इत्यभिधीयते ।
भूतानां महदादीनां यतो भिन्नद‍ृशां भयम् ॥ ३७ ॥
rūpa-bhedāspadaṁ divyaṁ
kāla ity abhidhīyate
bhūtānāṁ mahad-ādīnāṁ
yato bhinna-dṛśāṁ bhayam
Synonyms
rūpa-bheda — of the transformation of forms; āspadam — the cause; divyam — divine; kālaḥ — time; iti — thus; abhidhīyate — is known; bhūtānām — of living entities; mahat-ādīnām — beginning with Lord Brahmā; yataḥ — because of which; bhinna-dṛśām — with separate vision; bhayam — fear.

Translation
The time factor, who causes the transformation of the various material manifestations, is another feature of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Anyone who does not know that time is the same Supreme Personality is afraid of the time factor.

Text 38
योऽन्त: प्रविश्य भूतानि भूतैरत्त्यखिलाश्रय: ।
स विष्ण्वाख्योऽधियज्ञोऽसौ काल: कलयतां प्रभु: ॥ ३८ ॥
yo ’ntaḥ praviśya bhūtāni
bhūtair atty akhilāśrayaḥ
sa viṣṇv-ākhyo ’dhiyajño ’sau
kālaḥ kalayatāṁ prabhuḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — He who; antaḥ — within; praviśya — entering; bhūtāni — living entities; bhūtaiḥ — by living entities; atti — annihilates; akhila — of everyone; āśrayaḥ — the support; saḥ — He; viṣṇu — Viṣṇu; ākhyaḥ — named; adhiyajñaḥ — the enjoyer of all sacrifices; asau — that; kālaḥ — time factor; kalayatām — of all masters; prabhuḥ — the master.

Translation
Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the enjoyer of all sacrifices, is the time factor and the master of all masters. He enters everyone’s heart, He is the support of everyone, and He causes every being to be annihilated by another.

Text 39
न चास्य कश्चिद्दयितो न द्वेष्यो न च बान्धव: ।
आविशत्यप्रमत्तोऽसौ प्रमत्तं जनमन्तकृत् ॥ ३९ ॥
na cāsya kaścid dayito
na dveṣyo na ca bāndhavaḥ
āviśaty apramatto ’sau
pramattaṁ janam anta-kṛt
Synonyms
na — not; ca — and; asya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kaścit — anyone; dayitaḥ — dear; na — not; dveṣyaḥ — enemy; na — not; ca — and; bāndhavaḥ — friend; āviśati — approaches; apramattaḥ — attentive; asau — He; pramattam — inattentive; janam — persons; anta-kṛt — the destroyer.

Translation
No one is dear to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, nor is anyone His enemy or friend. But He gives inspiration to those who have not forgotten Him and destroys those who have.

Text 40
यद्भयाद्वाति वातोऽयं सूर्यस्तपति यद्भयात् ।
यद्भयाद्वर्षते देवो भगणो भाति यद्भयात् ॥ ४० ॥
yad-bhayād vāti vāto ’yaṁ
sūryas tapati yad-bhayāt
yad-bhayād varṣate devo
bha-gaṇo bhāti yad-bhayāt
Synonyms
yat — of whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); bhayāt — out of fear; vāti — blows; vātaḥ — the wind; ayam — this; sūryaḥ — sun; tapati — shines; yat — of whom; bhayāt — out of fear; yat — of whom; bhayāt — out of fear; varṣate — sends rains; devaḥ — the god of rain; bha-gaṇaḥ — the host of heavenly bodies; bhāti — shine; yat — of whom; bhayāt — out of fear.

Translation
Out of fear of the Supreme Personality of Godhead the wind blows, out of fear of Him the sun shines, out of fear of Him the rain pours forth showers, and out of fear of Him the host of heavenly bodies shed their luster.

Text 41
यद्वनस्पतयो भीता लताश्चौषधिभि: सह ।
स्वे स्वे कालेऽभिगृह्णन्ति पुष्पाणि च फलानि च ॥ ४१ ॥
yad vanaspatayo bhītā
latāś cauṣadhibhiḥ saha
sve sve kāle ’bhigṛhṇanti
puṣpāṇi ca phalāni ca
Synonyms
yat — because of whom; vanaḥ-patayaḥ — the trees; bhītāḥ — fearful; latāḥ — creepers; ca — and; oṣadhibhiḥ — herbs; saha — with; sve sve kāle — each in its own season; abhigṛhṇanti — bear; puṣpāṇi — flowers; ca — and; phalāni — fruits; ca — also.

Translation
Out of fear of the Supreme Personality of Godhead the trees, creepers, herbs and seasonal plants and flowers blossom and fructify, each in its own season.

Text 42
स्रवन्ति सरितो भीता नोत्सर्पत्युदधिर्यत: ।
अग्निरिन्धे सगिरिभिर्भूर्न मज्जति यद्भयात् ॥ ४२ ॥
sravanti sarito bhītā
notsarpaty udadhir yataḥ
agnir indhe sa-giribhir
bhūr na majjati yad-bhayāt
Synonyms
sravanti — flow; saritaḥ — rivers; bhītāḥ — fearful; na — not; utsarpati — overflows; uda-dhiḥ — the ocean; yataḥ — because of whom; agniḥ — fire; indhe — burns; sa-giribhiḥ — with its mountains; bhūḥ — the earth; na — not; majjati — sinks; yat — of whom; bhayāt — out of fear.

Translation
Out of fear of the Supreme Personality of Godhead the rivers flow, and the ocean never overflows. Out of fear of Him only does fire burn and does the earth, with its mountains, not sink in the water of the universe.

Text 43
नभो ददाति श्वसतां पदं यन्नियमादद: ।
लोकं स्वदेहं तनुते महान् सप्तभिरावृतम् ॥ ४३ ॥
nabho dadāti śvasatāṁ
padaṁ yan-niyamād adaḥ
lokaṁ sva-dehaṁ tanute
mahān saptabhir āvṛtam
Synonyms
nabhaḥ — the sky; dadāti — gives; śvasatām — to the living entities; padam — abode; yat — of whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); niyamāt — under the control; adaḥ — that; lokam — the universe; sva-deham — own body; tanute — expands; mahān — the mahat-tattva; saptabhiḥ — with the seven (layers); āvṛtam — covered.

Translation
Subject to the control of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the sky allows outer space to accommodate all the various planets, which hold innumerable living entities. The total universal body expands with its seven coverings under His supreme control.

Text 44
गुणाभिमानिनो देवा: सर्गादिष्वस्य यद्भयात् ।
वर्तन्तेऽनुयुगं येषां वश एतच्चराचरम् ॥ ४४ ॥
guṇābhimānino devāḥ
sargādiṣv asya yad-bhayāt
vartante ’nuyugaṁ yeṣāṁ
vaśa etac carācaram
Synonyms
guṇa — the modes of material nature; abhimāninaḥ — in charge of; devāḥ — the demigods; sarga-ādiṣu — in the matter of creation and so on; asya — of this world; yat-bhayāt — out of fear of whom; vartante — carry out functions; anuyugam — according to the yugas; yeṣām — of whom; vaśe — under the control; etat — this; cara-acaram — everything animate and inanimate.

Translation
Out of fear of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the directing demigods in charge of the modes of material nature carry out the functions of creation, maintenance and destruction; everything animate and inanimate within this material world is under their control.

Text 45
सोऽनन्तोऽन्तकर: कालोऽनादिरादिकृदव्यय: ।
जनं जनेन जनयन्मारयन्मृत्युनान्तकम् ॥ ४५ ॥
so ’nanto ’nta-karaḥ kālo
’nādir ādi-kṛd avyayaḥ
janaṁ janena janayan
mārayan mṛtyunāntakam
Synonyms
saḥ — that; anantaḥ — endless; anta-karaḥ — destroyer; kālaḥ — time; anādiḥ — without beginning; ādi-kṛt — the creator; avyayaḥ — not liable to change; janam — persons; janena — by persons; janayan — creating; mārayan — destroying; mṛtyunā — by death; antakam — the lord of death.

Translation
The eternal time factor has no beginning and no end. It is the representative of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the maker of the criminal world. It brings about the end of the phenomenal world, it carries on the work of creation by bringing one individual into existence from another, and likewise it dissolves the universe by destroying even the lord of death, Yamarāja.