Text 1
कपिल उवाच
तस्यैतस्य जनो नूनं नायं वेदोरुविक्रमम् ।
काल्यमानोऽपि बलिनो वायोरिव घनावलि: ॥ १ ॥
kapila uvāca
tasyaitasya jano nūnaṁ
nāyaṁ vedoru-vikramam
kālyamāno ’pi balino
vāyor iva ghanāvaliḥ
Synonyms
kapilaḥ uvāca — Lord Kapila said; tasya etasya — of this very time factor; janaḥ — person; nūnam — certainly; na — not; ayam — this; veda — knows; uru-vikramam — the great strength; kālyamānaḥ — being carried off; api — although; balinaḥ — powerful; vāyoḥ — of the wind; iva — like; ghana — of clouds; āvaliḥ — a mass.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead said: As a mass of clouds does not know the powerful influence of the wind, a person engaged in material consciousness does not know the powerful strength of the time factor, by which he is being carried.

Text 2
यं यमर्थमुपादत्ते दु:खेन सुखहेतवे ।
तं तं धुनोति भगवान्पुमाञ्छोचति यत्कृते ॥ २ ॥
yaṁ yam artham upādatte
duḥkhena sukha-hetave
taṁ taṁ dhunoti bhagavān
pumāñ chocati yat-kṛte
Synonyms
yam yam — whatever; artham — object; upādatte — one acquires; duḥkhena — with difficulty; sukha-hetave — for happiness; tam tam — that; dhunoti — destroys; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pumān — the person; śocati — laments; yat-kṛte — for which reason.

Translation
Whatever is produced by the materialist with great pain and labor for so-called happiness, the Supreme Personality, as the time factor, destroys, and for this reason the conditioned soul laments.

Text 3
यदध्रुवस्य देहस्य सानुबन्धस्य दुर्मति: ।
ध्रुवाणि मन्यते मोहाद् गृहक्षेत्रवसूनि च ॥ ३ ॥
yad adhruvasya dehasya
sānubandhasya durmatiḥ
dhruvāṇi manyate mohād
gṛha-kṣetra-vasūni ca
Synonyms
yat — because; adhruvasya — temporary; dehasya — of the body; sa-anubandhasya — with that which is related; durmatiḥ — a misguided person; dhruvāṇi — permanent; manyate — thinks; mohāt — because of ignorance; gṛha — home; kṣetra — land; vasūni — wealth; ca — and.

Translation
The misguided materialist does not know that his very body is impermanent and that the attractions of home, land and wealth, which are in relationship to that body, are also temporary. Out of ignorance only, he thinks that everything is permanent.

Text 4
जन्तुर्वै भव एतस्मिन्यां यां योनिमनुव्रजेत् ।
तस्यां तस्यां स लभते निर्वृतिं न विरज्यते ॥ ४ ॥
jantur vai bhava etasmin
yāṁ yāṁ yonim anuvrajet
tasyāṁ tasyāṁ sa labhate
nirvṛtiṁ na virajyate
Synonyms
jantuḥ — the living entity; vai — certainly; bhave — in worldly existence; etasmin — this; yām yām — whatever; yonim — species; anuvrajet — he may obtain; tasyām tasyām — in that; saḥ — he; labhate — achieves; nirvṛtim — satisfaction; na — not; virajyate — is averse.

Translation
The living entity, in whatever species of life he appears, finds a particular type of satisfaction in that species, and he is never averse to being situated in such a condition.

Text 5
नरकस्थोऽपि देहं वै न पुमांस्त्यक्तुमिच्छति ।
नारक्यां निर्वृतौ सत्यां देवमायाविमोहित: ॥ ५ ॥
naraka-stho ’pi dehaṁ vai
na pumāṁs tyaktum icchati
nārakyāṁ nirvṛtau satyāṁ
deva-māyā-vimohitaḥ
Synonyms
naraka — in hell; sthaḥ — situated; api — even; deham — body; vai — indeed; na — not; pumān — person; tyaktum — to leave; icchati — wishes; nārakyām — hellish; nirvṛtau — enjoyment; satyām — when existing; deva-māyā — by the illusory energy of Viṣṇu; vimohitaḥ — deluded.

Translation
The conditioned living entity is satisfied in his own particular species of life; while deluded by the covering influence of the illusory energy, he feels little inclined to cast off his body, even when in hell, for he takes delight in hellish enjoyment.

Text 6
आत्मजायासुतागारपशुद्रविणबन्धुषु ।
निरूढमूलहृदय आत्मानं बहु मन्यते ॥ ६ ॥
ātma-jāyā-sutāgāra-
paśu-draviṇa-bandhuṣu
nirūḍha-mūla-hṛdaya
ātmānaṁ bahu manyate
Synonyms
ātma — body; jāyā — wife; suta — children; agāra — home; paśu — animals; draviṇa — wealth; bandhuṣu — in friends; nirūḍha-mūla — deep-rooted; hṛdayaḥ — his heart; ātmānam — himself; bahu — highly; manyate — he thinks.

Translation
Such satisfaction with one’s standard of living is due to deep-rooted attraction for body, wife, home, children, animals, wealth and friends. In such association, the conditioned soul thinks himself quite perfect.

Text 7
सन्दह्यमानसर्वाङ्ग एषामुद्वहनाधिना ।
करोत्यविरतं मूढो दुरितानि दुराशय: ॥ ७ ॥
sandahyamāna-sarvāṅga
eṣām udvahanādhinā
karoty avirataṁ mūḍho
duritāni durāśayaḥ
Synonyms
sandahyamāna — burning; sarva — all; aṅgaḥ — his limbs; eṣām — these family members; udvahana — for maintaining; ādhinā — with anxiety; karoti — he performs; aviratam — always; mūḍhaḥ — the fool; duritāni — sinful activities; durāśayaḥ — evil-minded.

Translation
Although he is always burning with anxiety, such a fool always performs all kinds of mischievous activities, with a hope which is never to be fulfilled, in order to maintain his so-called family and society.

Text 8
आक्षिप्तात्मेन्द्रिय: स्त्रीणामसतीनां च मायया । रहो रचितयालापै: शिशूनां कलभाषिणाम् ॥ ८ ॥
ākṣiptātmendriyaḥ strīṇām
asatīnāṁ ca māyayā
raho racitayālāpaiḥ
śiśūnāṁ kala-bhāṣiṇām
Synonyms
ākṣipta — charmed; ātma — heart; indriyaḥ — his senses; strīṇām — of women; asatīnām — false; ca — and; māyayā — by māyā; rahaḥ — in a solitary place; racitayā — displayed; ālāpaiḥ — by the talking; śiśūnām — of the children; kala-bhāṣiṇām — with sweet words.

Translation
He gives heart and senses to a woman, who falsely charms him with māyā. He enjoys solitary embraces and talking with her, and he is enchanted by the sweet words of the small children.

Text 9
गृहेषु कूटधर्मेषु दु:खतन्त्रेष्वतन्द्रित: ।
कुर्वन्दु:खप्रतीकारं सुखवन्मन्यते गृही ॥ ९ ॥
gṛheṣu kūṭa-dharmeṣu
duḥkha-tantreṣv atandritaḥ
kurvan duḥkha-pratīkāraṁ
sukhavan manyate gṛhī
Synonyms
gṛheṣu — in family life; kūṭa-dharmeṣu — involving the practice of falsehood; duḥkha-tantreṣu — spreading miseries; atandritaḥ — attentive; kurvan — doing; duḥkha-pratīkāram — counteraction of miseries; sukha-vat — as happiness; manyate — thinks; gṛhī — the householder.

Translation
The attached householder remains in his family life, which is full of diplomacy and politics. Always spreading miseries and controlled by acts of sense gratification, he acts just to counteract the reactions of all his miseries, and if he can successfully counteract such miseries, he thinks that he is happy.

Text 10
अर्थैरापादितैर्गुर्व्या हिंसयेतस्ततश्च तान् ।
पुष्णाति येषां पोषेण शेषभुग्यात्यध: स्वयम् ॥ १० ॥
arthair āpāditair gurvyā
hiṁsayetas-tataś ca tān
puṣṇāti yeṣāṁ poṣeṇa
śeṣa-bhug yāty adhaḥ svayam
Synonyms
arthaiḥ — by wealth; āpāditaiḥ — secured; gurvyā — great; hiṁsayā — by violence; itaḥ-tataḥ — here and there; ca — and; tān — them (family members); puṣṇāti — he maintains; yeṣām — of whom; poṣeṇa — because of the maintenance; śeṣa — remnants; bhuk — eating; yāti — he goes; adhaḥ — downwards; svayam — himself.

Translation
He secures money by committing violence here and there, and although he employs it in the service of his family, he himself eats only a little portion of the food thus purchased, and he goes to hell for those for whom he earned the money in such an irregular way.

Text 11
वार्तायां लुप्यमानायामारब्धायां पुन: पुन: ।
लोभाभिभूतो नि:सत्त्व: परार्थे कुरुते स्पृहाम् ॥ ११ ॥
vārtāyāṁ lupyamānāyām
ārabdhāyāṁ punaḥ punaḥ
lobhābhibhūto niḥsattvaḥ
parārthe kurute spṛhām
Synonyms
vārtāyām — when his occupation; lupyamānāyām — is hampered; ārabdhāyām — undertaken; punaḥ punaḥ — again and again; lobha — by greed; abhibhūtaḥ — overwhelmed; niḥsattvaḥ — ruined; para-arthe — for the wealth of others; kurute spṛhām — he longs.

Translation
When he suffers reverses in his occupation, he tries again and again to improve himself, but when he is baffled in all attempts and is ruined, he accepts money from others because of excessive greed.

Text 12
कुटुम्बभरणाकल्पो मन्दभाग्यो वृथोद्यम: ।
श्रिया विहीन: कृपणो ध्यायञ्‍छ्वसिति मूढधी: ॥ १२ ॥
kuṭumba-bharaṇākalpo
manda-bhāgyo vṛthodyamaḥ
śriyā vihīnaḥ kṛpaṇo
dhyāyañ chvasiti mūḍha-dhīḥ
Synonyms
kuṭumba — his family; bharaṇa — in maintaining; akalpaḥ — unable; manda-bhāgyaḥ — the unfortunate man; vṛthā — in vain; udyamaḥ — whose effort; śriyā — beauty, wealth; vihīnaḥ — bereft of; kṛpaṇaḥ — wretched; dhyāyan — grieving; śvasiti — he sighs; mūḍha — bewildered; dhīḥ — his intelligence.

Translation
Thus the unfortunate man, unsuccessful in maintaining his family members, is bereft of all beauty. He always thinks of his failure, grieving very deeply.

Text 13
एवं स्वभरणाकल्पं तत्कलत्रादयस्तथा ।
नाद्रियन्ते यथापूर्वं कीनाशा इव गोजरम् ॥ १३ ॥
evaṁ sva-bharaṇākalpaṁ
tat-kalatrādayas tathā
nādriyante yathā pūrvaṁ
kīnāśā iva go-jaram
Synonyms
evam — thus; sva-bharaṇa — to maintain them; akalpam — unable; tat — his; kalatra — wife; ādayaḥ — and so on; tathā — so; na — not; ādriyante — do respect; yathā — as; pūrvam — before; kīnāśāḥ — farmers; iva — like; go-jaram — an old ox.

Translation
Seeing him unable to support them, his wife and others do not treat him with the same respect as before, even as miserly farmers do not accord the same treatment to their old and worn-out oxen.

Text 14
तत्राप्यजातनिर्वेदो भ्रियमाण: स्वयम्भृतै: ।
जरयोपात्तवैरूप्यो मरणाभिमुखो गृहे ॥ १४ ॥
tatrāpy ajāta-nirvedo
bhriyamāṇaḥ svayam bhṛtaiḥ
jarayopātta-vairūpyo
maraṇābhimukho gṛhe
Synonyms
tatra — there; api — although; ajāta — not arisen; nirvedaḥ — aversion; bhriyamāṇaḥ — being maintained; svayam — by himself; bhṛtaiḥ — by those who were maintained; jarayā — by old age; upātta — obtained; vairūpyaḥ — deformation; maraṇa — death; abhimukhaḥ — approaching; gṛhe — at home.

Translation
The foolish family man does not become averse to family life although he is maintained by those whom he once maintained. Deformed by the influence of old age, he prepares himself to meet ultimate death.

Text 15
आस्तेऽवमत्योपन्यस्तं गृहपाल इवाहरन् ।
आमयाव्यप्रदीप्ताग्निरल्पाहारोऽल्पचेष्टित: ॥ १५ ॥
āste ’vamatyopanyastaṁ
gṛha-pāla ivāharan
āmayāvy apradīptāgnir
alpāhāro ’lpa-ceṣṭitaḥ
Synonyms
āste — he remains; avamatyā — negligently; upanyastam — what is placed; gṛha-pālaḥ — a dog; iva — like; āharan — eating; āmayāvī — diseased; apradīpta-agniḥ — having dyspepsia; alpa — little; āhāraḥ — eating; alpa — little; ceṣṭitaḥ — his activity.

Translation
Thus he remains at home just like a pet dog and eats whatever is so negligently given to him. Afflicted with many illnesses, such as dyspepsia and loss of appetite, he eats only very small morsels of food, and he becomes an invalid who cannot work any more.

Text 16
वायुनोत्क्रमतोत्तार: कफसंरुद्धनाडिक: ।
कासश्वासकृतायास: कण्ठे घुरघुरायते ॥ १६ ॥
vāyunotkramatottāraḥ
kapha-saṁruddha-nāḍikaḥ
kāsa-śvāsa-kṛtāyāsaḥ
kaṇṭhe ghura-ghurāyate
Synonyms
vāyunā — by air; utkramatā — bulging out; uttāraḥ — his eyes; kapha — with mucus; saṁruddha — congested; nāḍikaḥ — his windpipe; kāsa — coughing; śvāsa — breathing; kṛta — done; āyāsaḥ — difficulty; kaṇṭhe — in the throat; ghura-ghurāyate — he produces a sound like ghura-ghura.

Translation
In that diseased condition, one’s eyes bulge due to the pressure of air from within, and his glands become congested with mucus. He has difficulty breathing, and upon exhaling and inhaling he produces a sound like ghura-ghura, a rattling within the throat.

Text 17
शयान: परिशोचद्‌भि: परिवीत: स्वबन्धुभि: ।
वाच्यमानोऽपि न ब्रूते कालपाशवशं गत: ॥ १७ ॥
śayānaḥ pariśocadbhiḥ
parivītaḥ sva-bandhubhiḥ
vācyamāno ’pi na brūte
kāla-pāśa-vaśaṁ gataḥ
Synonyms
śayānaḥ — lying down; pariśocadbhiḥ — lamenting; parivītaḥ — surrounded; sva-bandhubhiḥ — by his relatives and friends; vācyamānaḥ — being urged to speak; api — although; na — not; brūte — he speaks; kāla — of time; pāśa — the noose; vaśam — under the control of; gataḥ — gone.

Translation
In this way he comes under the clutches of death and lies down, surrounded by lamenting friends and relatives, and although he wants to speak with them, he no longer can because he is under the control of time.

Text 18
एवं कुटुम्बभरणे व्यापृतात्माजितेन्द्रिय: ।
म्रियते रुदतां स्वानामुरुवेदनयास्तधी: ॥ १८ ॥
evaṁ kuṭumba-bharaṇe
vyāpṛtātmājitendriyaḥ
mriyate rudatāṁ svānām
uru-vedanayāsta-dhīḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; kuṭumba-bharaṇe — in maintaining a family; vyāpṛta — engrossed; ātmā — his mind; ajita — uncontrolled; indriyaḥ — his senses; mriyate — he dies; rudatām — while crying; svānām — his relatives; uru — great; vedanayā — with pain; asta — bereft of; dhīḥ — consciousness.

Translation
Thus the man, who engaged with uncontrolled senses in maintaining a family, dies in great grief, seeing his relatives crying. He dies most pathetically, in great pain and without consciousness.

Text 19
यमदूतौ तदा प्राप्तौ भीमौ सरभसेक्षणौ ।
स दृष्ट्वा त्रस्तहृदय: शकृन्मूत्रं विमुञ्चति ॥ १९ ॥
yama-dūtau tadā prāptau
bhīmau sarabhasekṣaṇau
sa dṛṣṭvā trasta-hṛdayaḥ
śakṛn-mūtraṁ vimuñcati
Synonyms
yama-dūtau — two messengers of Yamarāja; tadā — at that time; prāptau — arrived; bhīmau — terrible; sa-rabhasa — full of wrath; īkṣaṇau — their eyes; saḥ — he; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; trasta — frightened; hṛdayaḥ — his heart; śakṛt — stool; mūtram — urine; vimuñcati — he passes.

Translation
At death, he sees the messengers of the lord of death come before him, their eyes full of wrath, and in great fear he passes stool and urine.

Text 20
यातनादेह आवृत्य पाशैर्बद्ध्वा गले बलात् ।
नयतो दीर्घमध्वानं दण्ड्यं राजभटा यथा ॥ २० ॥
yātanā-deha āvṛtya
pāśair baddhvā gale balāt
nayato dīrgham adhvānaṁ
daṇḍyaṁ rāja-bhaṭā yathā
Synonyms
yātanā — for punishment; dehe — his body; āvṛtya — covering; pāśaiḥ — with ropes; baddhvā — binding; gale — by the neck; balāt — by force; nayataḥ — they lead; dīrgham — long; adhvānam — distance; daṇḍyam — a criminal; rāja-bhaṭāḥ — the king’s soldiers; yathā — as.

Translation
As a criminal is arrested for punishment by the constables of the state, a person engaged in criminal sense gratification is similarly arrested by the Yamadūtas, who bind him by the neck with strong rope and cover his subtle body so that he may undergo severe punishment.

Text 21
तयोर्निर्भिन्नहृदयस्तर्जनैर्जातवेपथु: ।
पथि श्वभिर्भक्ष्यमाण आर्तोऽघं स्वमनुस्मरन् ॥ २१ ॥
tayor nirbhinna-hṛdayas
tarjanair jāta-vepathuḥ
pathi śvabhir bhakṣyamāṇa
ārto ’ghaṁ svam anusmaran
Synonyms
tayoḥ — of the Yamadūtas; nirbhinna — broken; hṛdayaḥ — his heart; tarjanaiḥ — by the threatening; jāta — arisen; vepathuḥ — trembling; pathi — on the road; śvabhiḥ — by dogs; bhakṣyamāṇaḥ — being bitten; ārtaḥ — distressed; agham — sins; svam — his; anusmaran — remembering.

Translation
While carried by the constables of Yamarāja, he is overwhelmed and trembles in their hands. While passing on the road he is bitten by dogs, and he can remember the sinful activities of his life. He is thus terribly distressed.

Text 22
क्षुत्तृट्परीतोऽर्कदवानलानिलै:
सन्तप्यमान: पथि तप्तवालुके ।
कृच्छ्रेण पृष्ठे कशया च ताडितश्
चलत्यशक्तोऽपि निराश्रमोदके ॥ २२ ॥
kṣut-tṛṭ-parīto ’rka-davānalānilaiḥ
santapyamānaḥ pathi tapta-vāluke
kṛcchreṇa pṛṣṭhe kaśayā ca tāḍitaś
calaty aśakto ’pi nirāśramodake
Synonyms
kṣut-tṛṭ — by hunger and thirst; parītaḥ — afflicted; arka — sun; dava-anala — forest fires; anilaiḥ — by winds; santapyamānaḥ — being scorched; pathi — on a road; tapta-vāluke — of hot sand; kṛcchreṇa — painfully; pṛṣṭhe — on the back; kaśayā — with a whip; ca — and; tāḍitaḥ — beaten; calati — he moves; aśaktaḥ — unable; api — although; nirāśrama-udake — without shelter or water.

Translation
Under the scorching sun, the criminal has to pass through roads of hot sand with forest fires on both sides. He is whipped on the back by the constables because of his inability to walk, and he is afflicted by hunger and thirst, but unfortunately there is no drinking water, no shelter and no place for rest on the road.

Text 23
तत्र तत्र पतञ्छ्रान्तो मूर्च्छित: पुनरुत्थित: ।
पथा पापीयसा नीतस्तरसा यमसादनम् ॥ २३ ॥
tatra tatra patañ chrānto
mūrcchitaḥ punar utthitaḥ
pathā pāpīyasā nītas
tarasā yama-sādanam
Synonyms
tatra tatra — here and there; patan — falling; śrāntaḥ — fatigued; mūrcchitaḥ — unconscious; punaḥ — again; utthitaḥ — risen; pathā — by the road; pāpīyasā — very inauspicious; nītaḥ — brought; tarasā — quickly; yama-sādanam — to the presence of Yamarāja.

Translation
While passing on that road to the abode of Yamarāja, he falls down in fatigue, and sometimes he becomes unconscious, but he is forced to rise again. In this way he is very quickly brought to the presence of Yamarāja.

Text 24
योजनानां सहस्राणि नवतिं नव चाध्वन: ।
त्रिभिर्मुहूर्तैर्द्वाभ्यां वा नीत: प्राप्नोति यातना: ॥ २४ ॥
yojanānāṁ sahasrāṇi
navatiṁ nava cādhvanaḥ
tribhir muhūrtair dvābhyāṁ vā
nītaḥ prāpnoti yātanāḥ
Synonyms
yojanānām — of yojanas; sahasrāṇi — thousands; navatim — ninety; nava — nine; ca — and; adhvanaḥ — from a distance; tribhiḥ — three; muhūrtaiḥ — within moments; dvābhyām — two; vā — or; nītaḥ — brought; prāpnoti — he receives; yātanāḥ — punishments.

Translation
Thus he has to pass ninety-nine thousand yojanas within two or three moments, and then he is at once engaged in the torturous punishment which he is destined to suffer.

Text 25
आदीपनं स्वगात्राणां वेष्टयित्वोल्मुकादिभि: ।
आत्ममांसादनं क्‍वापि स्वकृत्तं परतोऽपि वा ॥ २५ ॥
ādīpanaṁ sva-gātrāṇāṁ
veṣṭayitvolmukādibhiḥ
ātma-māṁsādanaṁ kvāpi
sva-kṛttaṁ parato ’pi vā
Synonyms
ādīpanam — setting on fire; sva-gātrāṇām — of his own limbs; veṣṭayitvā — having been surrounded; ulmuka-ādibhiḥ — by pieces of burning wood and so on; ātma-māṁsa — of his own flesh; adanam — eating; kva api — sometimes; sva-kṛttam — done by himself; parataḥ — by others; api — else; vā — or.

Translation
He is placed in the midst of burning pieces of wood, and his limbs are set on fire. In some cases he is made to eat his own flesh or have it eaten by others.

Text 26
जीवतश्चान्त्राभ्युद्धार: श्वगृध्रैर्यमसादने ।
सर्पवृश्चिकदंशाद्यैर्दशद्‌भिश्चात्मवैशसम् ॥ २६ ॥
jīvataś cāntrābhyuddhāraḥ
śva-gṛdhrair yama-sādane
sarpa-vṛścika-daṁśādyair
daśadbhiś cātma-vaiśasam
Synonyms
jīvataḥ — alive; ca — and; antra — of his entrails; abhyuddhāraḥ — pulling out; śva-gṛdhraiḥ — by dogs and vultures; yama-sādane — in the abode of Yamarāja; sarpa — by serpents; vṛścika — scorpions; daṁśa — gnats; ādyaiḥ — and so on; daśadbhiḥ — biting; ca — and; ātma-vaiśasam — torment of himself.

Translation
His entrails are pulled out by the hounds and vultures of hell, even though he is still alive to see it, and he is subjected to torment by serpents, scorpions, gnats and other creatures that bite him.

Text 27
kṛntanaṁ cāvayavaśo
gajādibhyo bhidāpanam
pātanaṁ giri-śṛṅgebhyo
rodhanaṁ cāmbu-gartayoḥ
Synonyms
kṛntanam — cutting off; ca — and; avayavaśaḥ — limb by limb; gaja-ādibhyaḥ — by elephants and so on; bhidāpanam — tearing; pātanam — hurling down; giri — of hills; śṛṅgebhyaḥ — from the tops; rodhanam — enclosing; ca — and; ambu-gartayoḥ — in water or in a cave.

Translation
Next his limbs are lopped off and torn asunder by elephants. He is hurled down from hilltops, and he is also held captive either in water or in a cave.

Text 28
यास्तामिस्रान्धतामिस्रा रौरवाद्याश्च यातना: ।
भुङ्क्ते नरो वा नारी वा मिथ: सङ्गेन निर्मिता: ॥ २८ ॥
yās tāmisrāndha-tāmisrā
rauravādyāś ca yātanāḥ
bhuṅkte naro vā nārī vā
mithaḥ saṅgena nirmitāḥ
Synonyms
yāḥ — which; tāmisra — the name of a hell; andha-tāmisrāḥ — the name of a hell; raurava — the name of a hell; ādyāḥ — and so on; ca — and; yātanāḥ — punishments; bhuṅkte — undergoes; naraḥ — man; vā — or; nārī — woman; vā — or; mithaḥ — mutual; saṅgena — by association; nirmitāḥ — caused.

Translation
Men and women whose lives were built upon indulgence in illicit sex life are put into many kinds of miserable conditions in the hells known as Tāmisra, Andha-tāmisra and Raurava.

Text 29
अत्रैव नरक: स्वर्ग इति मात: प्रचक्षते ।
या यातना वै नारक्यस्ता इहाप्युपलक्षिता: ॥ २९ ॥
atraiva narakaḥ svarga
iti mātaḥ pracakṣate
yā yātanā vai nārakyas
tā ihāpy upalakṣitāḥ
Synonyms
atra — in this world; eva — even; narakaḥ — hell; svargaḥ — heaven; iti — thus; mātaḥ — O mother; pracakṣate — they say; yāḥ — which; yātanāḥ — punishments; vai — certainly; nārakyaḥ — hellish; tāḥ — they; iha — here; api — also; upalakṣitāḥ — visible.

Translation
Lord Kapila continued: My dear mother, it is sometimes said that we experience hell or heaven on this planet, for hellish punishments are sometimes visible on this planet also.

Text 30
एवं कुटुम्बं बिभ्राण उदरम्भर एव वा ।
विसृज्येहोभयं प्रेत्य भुङ्क्ते तत्फलमीद‍ृशम् ॥ ३० ॥
evaṁ kuṭumbaṁ bibhrāṇa
udaram bhara eva vā
visṛjyehobhayaṁ pretya
bhuṅkte tat-phalam īdṛśam
Synonyms
evam — in this way; kuṭumbam — family; bibhrāṇaḥ — he who maintained; udaram — stomach; bharaḥ — he who maintained; eva — only; vā — or; visṛjya — after giving up; iha — here; ubhayam — both of them; pretya — after death; bhuṅkte — he undergoes; tat — of that; phalam — result; īdṛśam — such.

Translation
After leaving this body, the man who maintained himself and his family members by sinful activities suffers a hellish life, and his relatives suffer also.

Text 31
एक: प्रपद्यते ध्वान्तं हित्वेदं स्वकलेवरम् ।
कुशलेतरपाथेयो भूतद्रोहेण यद्भृतम् ॥ ३१ ॥
ekaḥ prapadyate dhvāntaṁ
hitvedaṁ sva-kalevaram
kuśaletara-pātheyo
bhūta-droheṇa yad bhṛtam
Synonyms
ekaḥ — alone; prapadyate — he enters; dhvāntam — darkness; hitvā — after quitting; idam — this; sva — his; kalevaram — body; kuśala-itara — sin; pātheyaḥ — his passage money; bhūta — to other living entities; droheṇa — by injury; yat — which body; bhṛtam — was maintained.

Translation
He goes alone to the darkest regions of hell after quitting the present body, and the money he acquired by envying other living entities is the passage money with which he leaves this world.

Text 32
दैवेनासादितं तस्य शमलं निरये पुमान् ।
भुङ्क्ते कुटुम्बपोषस्य हृतवित्त इवातुर: ॥ ३२ ॥
daivenāsāditaṁ tasya
śamalaṁ niraye pumān
bhuṅkte kuṭumba-poṣasya
hṛta-vitta ivāturaḥ
Synonyms
daivena — by the arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; āsāditam — obtained; tasya — his; śamalam — sinful reaction; niraye — in a hellish condition; pumān — the man; bhuṅkte — undergoes; kuṭumba-poṣasya — of maintaining a family; hṛta-vittaḥ — one whose wealth is lost; iva — like; āturaḥ — suffering.

Translation
Thus, by the arrangement of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the maintainer of kinsmen is put into a hellish condition to suffer for his sinful activities, like a man who has lost his wealth.

Text 33
केवलेन ह्यधर्मेण कुटुम्बभरणोत्सुक: ।
याति जीवोऽन्धतामिस्रं चरमं तमस: पदम् ॥ ३३ ॥
kevalena hy adharmeṇa
kuṭumba-bharaṇotsukaḥ
yāti jīvo ’ndha-tāmisraṁ
caramaṁ tamasaḥ padam
Synonyms
kevalena — simply; hi — certainly; adharmeṇa — by irreligious activities; kuṭumba — family; bharaṇa — to maintain; utsukaḥ — eager; yāti — goes; jīvaḥ — a person; andha-tāmisram — to Andha-tāmisra; caramam — ultimate; tamasaḥ — of darkness; padam — region.

Translation
Therefore a person who is very eager to maintain his family and kinsmen simply by black methods certainly goes to the darkest region of hell, which is known as Andha-tāmisra.

Text 34
अधस्तान्नरलोकस्य यावतीर्यातनादय: ।
क्रमश: समनुक्रम्य पुनरत्राव्रजेच्छुचि: ॥ ३४ ॥
adhastān nara-lokasya
yāvatīr yātanādayaḥ
kramaśaḥ samanukramya
punar atrāvrajec chuciḥ
Synonyms
adhastāt — from below; nara-lokasya — human birth; yāvatīḥ — as many; yātanā — punishments; ādayaḥ — and so on; kramaśaḥ — in a regular order; samanukramya — having gone through; punaḥ — again; atra — here, on this earth; āvrajet — he may return; śuciḥ — pure.

Translation
Having gone through all the miserable, hellish conditions and having passed in a regular order through the lowest forms of animal life prior to human birth, and having thus been purged of his sins, one is reborn again as a human being on this earth.