Text 1
श्रीभगवानुवाच
कर्मणा दैवनेत्रेण जन्तुर्देहोपपत्तये ।
स्त्रिया: प्रविष्ट उदरं पुंसो रेत:कणाश्रय: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
karmaṇā daiva-netreṇa
jantur dehopapattaye
striyāḥ praviṣṭa udaraṁ
puṁso retaḥ-kaṇāśrayaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; karmaṇā — by the result of work; daiva-netreṇa — under the supervision of the Lord; jantuḥ — the living entity; deha — a body; upapattaye — for obtaining; striyāḥ — of a woman; praviṣṭaḥ — enters; udaram — the womb; puṁsaḥ — of a man; retaḥ — of semen; kaṇa — a particle; āśrayaḥ — dwelling in.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead said: Under the supervision of the Supreme Lord and according to the result of his work, the living entity, the soul, is made to enter into the womb of a woman through the particle of male semen to assume a particular type of body.

Text 2
कललं त्वेकरात्रेण पञ्चरात्रेण बुद्बुदम् ।
दशाहेन तु कर्कन्धू: पेश्यण्डं वा तत: परम् ॥ २ ॥
kalalaṁ tv eka-rātreṇa
pañca-rātreṇa budbudam
daśāhena tu karkandhūḥ
peśy aṇḍaṁ vā tataḥ param
Synonyms
kalalam — mixing of the sperm and ovum; tu — then; eka-rātreṇa — on the first night; pañca-rātreṇa — by the fifth night; budbudam — a bubble; daśa-ahena — in ten days; tu — then; karkandhūḥ — like a plum; peśī — a lump of flesh; aṇḍam — an egg; vā — or; tataḥ — thence; param — afterwards.

Translation
On the first night, the sperm and ovum mix, and on the fifth night the mixture ferments into a bubble. On the tenth night it develops into a form like a plum, and after that, it gradually turns into a lump of flesh or an egg, as the case may be.

Text 3
मासेन तु शिरो द्वाभ्यां बाह्वङ्‌घ्र्याद्यङ्गविग्रह: ।
नखलोमास्थिचर्माणि लिङ्गच्छिद्रोद्भवस्त्रिभि: ॥ ३ ॥
māsena tu śiro dvābhyāṁ
bāhv-aṅghry-ādy-aṅga-vigrahaḥ
nakha-lomāsthi-carmāṇi
liṅga-cchidrodbhavas tribhiḥ
Synonyms
māsena — within a month; tu — then; śiraḥ — a head; dvābhyām — in two months; bāhu — arms; aṅghri — feet; ādi — and so on; aṅga — limbs; vigrahaḥ — form; nakha — nails; loma — body hair; asthi — bones; carmāṇi — and skin; liṅga — organ of generation; chidra — apertures; udbhavaḥ — appearance; tribhiḥ — within three months.

Translation
In the course of a month, a head is formed, and at the end of two months the hands, feet and other limbs take shape. By the end of three months, the nails, fingers, toes, body hair, bones and skin appear, as do the organ of generation and the other apertures in the body, namely the eyes, nostrils, ears, mouth and anus.

Text 4
चतुर्भिर्धातव: सप्त पञ्चभि: क्षुत्तृडुद्भव: ।
षड्‌भिर्जरायुणा वीत: कुक्षौ भ्राम्यति दक्षिणे ॥ ४ ॥
caturbhir dhātavaḥ sapta
pañcabhiḥ kṣut-tṛḍ-udbhavaḥ
ṣaḍbhir jarāyuṇā vītaḥ
kukṣau bhrāmyati dakṣiṇe
Synonyms
caturbhiḥ — within four months; dhātavaḥ — ingredients; sapta — seven; pañcabhiḥ — within five months; kṣut-tṛṭ — of hunger and thirst; udbhavaḥ — appearance; ṣaḍbhiḥ — within six months; jarāyuṇā — by the amnion; vītaḥ — enclosed; kukṣau — in the abdomen; bhrāmyati — moves; dakṣiṇe — on the right side.

Translation
Within four months from the date of conception, the seven essential ingredients of the body, namely chyle, blood, flesh, fat, bone, marrow and semen, come into existence. At the end of five months, hunger and thirst make themselves felt, and at the end of six months, the fetus, enclosed by the amnion, begins to move on the right side of the abdomen.

Text 5
मातुर्जग्धान्नपानाद्यैरेधद्धातुरसम्मते ।
शेते विण्मूत्रयोर्गर्ते स जन्तुर्जन्तुसम्भवे ॥ ५ ॥
mātur jagdhānna-pānādyair
edhad-dhātur asammate
śete viṇ-mūtrayor garte
sa jantur jantu-sambhave
Synonyms
mātuḥ — of the mother; jagdha — taken; anna-pāna — by the food and drink; ādyaiḥ — and so on; edhat — increasing; dhātuḥ — the ingredients of his body; asammate — abominable; śete — remains; viṭ-mūtrayoḥ — of stools and urine; garte — in a hollow; saḥ — that; jantuḥ — fetus; jantu — of worms; sambhave — the breeding place.

Translation
Deriving its nutrition from the food and drink taken by the mother, the fetus grows and remains in that abominable residence of stools and urine, which is the breeding place of all kinds of worms.

Text 6
कृमिभि: क्षतसर्वाङ्ग: सौकुमार्यात्प्रतिक्षणम् ।
मूर्च्छामाप्नोत्युरुक्लेशस्तत्रत्यै: क्षुधितैर्मुहु: ॥ ६ ॥
kṛmibhiḥ kṣata-sarvāṅgaḥ
saukumāryāt pratikṣaṇam
mūrcchām āpnoty uru-kleśas
tatratyaiḥ kṣudhitair muhuḥ
Synonyms
kṛmibhiḥ — by worms; kṣata — bitten; sarva-aṅgaḥ — all over the body; saukumāryāt — because of tenderness; prati-kṣaṇam — moment after moment; mūrcchām — unconsciousness; āpnoti — he obtains; uru-kleśaḥ — whose suffering is great; tatratyaiḥ — being there (in the abdomen); kṣudhitaiḥ — hungry; muhuḥ — again and again.

Translation
Bitten again and again all over the body by the hungry worms in the abdomen itself, the child suffers terrible agony because of his tenderness. He thus becomes unconscious moment after moment because of the terrible condition.

Text 7
कटुतीक्ष्णोष्णलवणरूक्षाम्‍लादिभिरुल्बणै: ।
मातृभुक्तैरुपस्पृष्ट: सर्वाङ्गोत्थितवेदन: ॥ ७ ॥
kaṭu-tīkṣṇoṣṇa-lavaṇa-
rūkṣāmlādibhir ulbaṇaiḥ
mātṛ-bhuktair upaspṛṣṭaḥ
sarvāṅgotthita-vedanaḥ
Synonyms
kaṭu — bitter; tīkṣṇa — pungent; uṣṇa — hot; lavaṇa — salty; rūkṣa — dry; amla — sour; ādibhiḥ — and so on; ulbaṇaiḥ — excessive; mātṛ-bhuktaiḥ — by foods eaten by the mother; upaspṛṣṭaḥ — affected; sarva-aṅga — all over the body; utthita — arisen; vedanaḥ — pain.

Translation
Owing to the mother’s eating bitter, pungent foodstuffs, or food which is too salty or too sour, the body of the child incessantly suffers pains which are almost intolerable.

Text 8
उल्बेन संवृतस्तस्मिन्नन्त्रैश्च बहिरावृत: ।
आस्ते कृत्वा शिर: कुक्षौ भुग्नपृष्ठशिरोधर: ॥ ८ ॥
ulbena saṁvṛtas tasminn
antraiś ca bahir āvṛtaḥ
āste kṛtvā śiraḥ kukṣau
bhugna-pṛṣṭha-śirodharaḥ
Synonyms
ulbena — by the amnion; saṁvṛtaḥ — enclosed; tasmin — in that place; antraiḥ — by the intestines; ca — and; bahiḥ — outside; āvṛtaḥ — covered; āste — he lies; kṛtvā — having put; śiraḥ — the head; kukṣau — towards the belly; bhugna — bent; pṛṣṭha — back; śiraḥ-dharaḥ — neck.

Translation
Placed within the amnion and covered outside by the intestines, the child remains lying on one side of the abdomen, his head turned towards his belly and his back and neck arched like a bow.

Text 9
अकल्प: स्वाङ्गचेष्टायां शकुन्त इव पञ्जरे ।
तत्र लब्धस्मृतिर्दैवात्कर्म जन्मशतोद्भवम् ।
स्मरन्दीर्घमनुच्छ्‌वासं शर्म किं नाम विन्दते ॥ ९ ॥
akalpaḥ svāṅga-ceṣṭāyāṁ
śakunta iva pañjare
tatra labdha-smṛtir daivāt
karma janma-śatodbhavam
smaran dīrgham anucchvāsaṁ
śarma kiṁ nāma vindate
Synonyms
akalpaḥ — unable; sva-aṅga — his limbs; ceṣṭāyām — to move; śakuntaḥ — a bird; iva — like; pañjare — in a cage; tatra — there; labdha-smṛtiḥ — having gained his memory; daivāt — by fortune; karma — activities; janma-śata-udbhavam — occurring during the last hundred births; smaran — remembering; dīrgham — for a long time; anucchvāsam — sighing; śarma — peace of mind; kim — what; nāma — then; vindate — can he achieve.

Translation
The child thus remains just like a bird in a cage, without freedom of movement. At that time, if the child is fortunate, he can remember all the troubles of his past one hundred births, and he grieves wretchedly. What is the possibility of peace of mind in that condition?

Text 10
आरभ्य सप्तमान्मासाल्लब्धबोधोऽपि वेपित: ।
नैकत्रास्ते सूतिवातैर्विष्ठाभूरिव सोदर: ॥ १० ॥
ārabhya saptamān māsāl
labdha-bodho ’pi vepitaḥ
naikatrāste sūti-vātair
viṣṭhā-bhūr iva sodaraḥ
Synonyms
ārabhya — beginning; saptamāt māsāt — from the seventh month; labdha-bodhaḥ — endowed with consciousness; api — although; vepitaḥ — tossed; na — not; ekatra — in one place; āste — he remains; sūti-vātaiḥ — by the winds for childbirth; viṣṭhā-bhūḥ — the worm; iva — like; sa-udaraḥ — born of the same womb.

Translation
Thus endowed with the development of consciousness from the seventh month after his conception, the child is tossed downward by the airs that press the embryo during the weeks preceding delivery. Like the worms born of the same filthy abdominal cavity, he cannot remain in one place.

Text 11
नाथमान ऋषिर्भीत: सप्तवध्रि: कृताञ्जलि: ।
स्तुवीत तं विक्लवया वाचा येनोदरेऽर्पित: ॥ ११ ॥
nāthamāna ṛṣir bhītaḥ
sapta-vadhriḥ kṛtāñjaliḥ
stuvīta taṁ viklavayā
vācā yenodare ’rpitaḥ
Synonyms
nāthamānaḥ — appealing; ṛṣiḥ — the living entity; bhītaḥ — frightened; sapta-vadhriḥ — bound by the seven layers; kṛta-añjaliḥ — with folded hands; stuvīta — prays; tam — to the Lord; viklavayā — faltering; vācā — with words; yena — by whom; udare — in the womb; arpitaḥ — he was placed.

Translation
The living entity in this frightful condition of life, bound by seven layers of material ingredients, prays with folded hands, appealing to the Lord, who has put him in that condition.

Text 12
जन्तुरुवाच
तस्योपसन्नमवितुं जगदिच्छयात्त-
नानातनोर्भुवि चलच्चरणारविन्दम् ।
सोऽहं व्रजामि शरणं ह्यकुतोभयं मे
येनेद‍ृशी गतिरदर्श्यसतोऽनुरूपा ॥ १२ ॥
jantur uvāca
tasyopasannam avituṁ jagad icchayātta-
nānā-tanor bhuvi calac-caraṇāravindam
so ’haṁ vrajāmi śaraṇaṁ hy akuto-bhayaṁ me
yenedṛśī gatir adarśy asato ’nurūpā
Synonyms
jantuḥ uvāca — the human soul says; tasya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; upasannam — having approached for protection; avitum — to protect; jagat — the universe; icchayā — by His own will; ātta-nānā-tanoḥ — who accepts various forms; bhuvi — on the earth; calat — walking; caraṇa-aravindam — the lotus feet; saḥ aham — I myself; vrajāmi — go; śaraṇam — unto the shelter; hi — indeed; akutaḥ-bhayam — giving relief from all fear; me — for me; yena — by whom; īdṛśī — such; gatiḥ — condition of life; adarśi — was considered; asataḥ — impious; anurūpā — befitting.

Translation
The human soul says: I take shelter of the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who appears in His various eternal forms and walks on the surface of the world. I take shelter of Him only, because He can give me relief from all fear and from Him I have received this condition of life, which is just befitting my impious activities.

Text 13
यस्त्वत्र बद्ध इव कर्मभिरावृतात्मा
भूतेन्द्रियाशयमयीमवलम्ब्य मायाम् ।
आस्ते विशुद्धमविकारमखण्डबोधम्
आतप्यमानहृदयेऽवसितं नमामि ॥ १३ ॥
yas tv atra baddha iva karmabhir āvṛtātmā
bhūtendriyāśayamayīm avalambya māyām
āste viśuddham avikāram akhaṇḍa-bodham
ātapyamāna-hṛdaye ’vasitaṁ namāmi
Synonyms
yaḥ — who; tu — also; atra — here; baddhaḥ — bound; iva — as if; karmabhiḥ — by activities; āvṛta — covered; ātmā — the pure soul; bhūta — the gross elements; indriya — the senses; āśaya — the mind; mayīm — consisting of; avalambya — having fallen; māyām — into māyā; āste — remains; viśuddham — completely pure; avikāram — without change; akhaṇḍa-bodham — possessed of unlimited knowledge; ātapyamāna — repentant; hṛdaye — in the heart; avasitam — residing; namāmi — I offer my respectful obeisances.

Translation
I, the pure soul, appearing now bound by my activities, am lying in the womb of my mother by the arrangement of māyā. I offer my respectful obeisances unto Him who is also here with me but who is unaffected and changeless. He is unlimited, but He is perceived in the repentant heart. To Him I offer my respectful obeisances.

Text 14
य: पञ्चभूतरचिते रहित: शरीरे
च्छन्नोऽयथेन्द्रियगुणार्थचिदात्मकोऽहम् ।
तेनाविकुण्ठमहिमानमृषिं तमेनं
वन्दे परं प्रकृतिपूरुषयो: पुमांसम् ॥ १४ ॥
yaḥ pañca-bhūta-racite rahitaḥ śarīre
cchanno ’yathendriya-guṇārtha-cid-ātmako ’ham
tenāvikuṇṭha-mahimānam ṛṣiṁ tam enaṁ
vande paraṁ prakṛti-pūruṣayoḥ pumāṁsam
Synonyms
yaḥ — who; pañca-bhūta — five gross elements; racite — made of; rahitaḥ — separated; śarīre — in the material body; channaḥ — covered; ayathā — unfitly; indriya — senses; guṇa — qualities; artha — objects of senses; cit — ego; ātmakaḥ — consisting of; aham — I; tena — by a material body; avikuṇṭha-mahimānam — whose glories are unobscured; ṛṣim — all-knowing; tam — that; enam — unto Him; vande — I offer obeisances; param — transcendental; prakṛti — to material nature; pūruṣayoḥ — to the living entities; pumāṁsam — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
I am separated from the Supreme Lord because of my being in this material body, which is made of five elements, and therefore my qualities and senses are being misused, although I am essentially spiritual. Because the Supreme Personality of Godhead is transcendental to material nature and the living entities, because He is devoid of such a material body, and because He is always glorious in His spiritual qualities, I offer my obeisances unto Him.

Text 15
यन्माययोरुगुणकर्मनिबन्धनेऽस्मिन्
सांसारिके पथि चरंस्तदभिश्रमेण ।
नष्टस्मृति: पुनरयं प्रवृणीत लोकं
युक्त्या कया महदनुग्रहमन्तरेण ॥ १५ ॥
yan-māyayoru-guṇa-karma-nibandhane ’smin
sāṁsārike pathi caraṁs tad-abhiśrameṇa
naṣṭa-smṛtiḥ punar ayaṁ pravṛṇīta lokaṁ
yuktyā kayā mahad-anugraham antareṇa
Synonyms
yat — of the Lord; māyayā — by the māyā; uru-guṇa — arising from the great modes; karma — activities; nibandhane — with bonds; asmin — this; sāṁsārike — of repeated birth and death; pathi — on the path; caran — wandering; tat — of him; abhiśrameṇa — with great pains; naṣṭa — lost; smṛtiḥ — memory; punaḥ — again; ayam — this living entity; pravṛṇīta — may realize; lokam — his true nature; yuktyā kayā — by what means; mahat-anugraham — the mercy of the Lord; antareṇa — without.

Translation
The human soul further prays: The living entity is put under the influence of material nature and continues a hard struggle for existence on the path of repeated birth and death. This conditional life is due to his forgetfulness of his relationship with the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, without the Lord’s mercy, how can he again engage in the transcendental loving service of the Lord?

Text 16
ज्ञानं यदेतददधात्कतम: स देवस्
त्रैकालिकं
स्थिरचरेष्वनुवर्तितांश: ।
तं
जीवकर्मपदवीमनुवर्तमानास्
तापत्रयोपशमनाय वयं भजेम ॥ १६ ॥
jñānaṁ yad etad adadhāt katamaḥ sa devas
trai-kālikaṁ sthira-careṣv anuvartitāṁśaḥ
taṁ jīva-karma-padavīm anuvartamānās
tāpa-trayopaśamanāya vayaṁ bhajema
Synonyms
jñānam — knowledge; yat — which; etat — this; adadhāt — gave; katamaḥ — who other than; saḥ — that; devaḥ — the Personality of Godhead; trai-kālikam — of the three phases of time; sthira-careṣu — in the inanimate and animate objects; anuvartita — dwelling; aṁśaḥ — His partial representation; tam — unto Him; jīva — of the jīva souls; karma-padavīm — the path of fruitive activities; anuvartamānāḥ — who are pursuing; tāpa-traya — from the threefold miseries; upaśamanāya — for getting free; vayam — we; bhajema — must surrender.

Translation
No one other than the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as the localized Paramātmā, the partial representation of the Lord, is directing all inanimate and animate objects. He is present in the three phases of time — past, present and future. Therefore, the conditioned soul is engaged in different activities by His direction, and in order to get free from the threefold miseries of this conditional life, we have to surrender unto Him only.

Text 17
देह्यन्यदेहविवरे जठराग्निनासृग्-
विण्मूत्रकूपपतितो भृशतप्तदेह: ।
इच्छन्नितो विवसितुं गणयन्स्वमासान्
निर्वास्यते कृपणधीर्भगवन्कदा नु ॥ १७ ॥
dehy anya-deha-vivare jaṭharāgnināsṛg-
viṇ-mūtra-kūpa-patito bhṛśa-tapta-dehaḥ
icchann ito vivasituṁ gaṇayan sva-māsān
nirvāsyate kṛpaṇa-dhīr bhagavan kadā nu
Synonyms
dehī — the embodied soul; anya-deha — of another body; vivare — in the abdomen; jaṭhara — of the stomach; agninā — by the fire; asṛk — of blood; viṭ — stool; mūtra — and urine; kūpa — in a pool; patitaḥ — fallen; bhṛśa — strongly; tapta — scorched; dehaḥ — his body; icchan — desiring; itaḥ — from that place; vivasitum — to get out; gaṇayan — counting; svamāsān — his months; nirvāsyate — will be released; kṛpaṇa-dhīḥ — person of miserly intelligence; bhagavan — O Lord; kadā — when; nu — indeed.

Translation
Fallen into a pool of blood, stool and urine within the abdomen of his mother, his own body scorched by the mother’s gastric fire, the embodied soul, anxious to get out, counts his months and prays, “O my Lord, when shall I, a wretched soul, be released from this confinement?”

Text 18
येनेद‍ृशीं गतिमसौ दशमास्य ईश
संग्राहित: पुरुदयेन भवाद‍ृशेन ।
स्वेनैव तुष्यतु कृतेन स दीननाथ:
को नाम तत्प्रति विनाञ्जलिमस्य कुर्यात् ॥ १८ ॥
yenedṛśīṁ gatim asau daśa-māsya īśa
saṅgrāhitaḥ puru-dayena bhavādṛśena
svenaiva tuṣyatu kṛtena sa dīna-nāthaḥ
ko nāma tat-prati vināñjalim asya kuryāt
Synonyms
yena — by whom (the Lord); īdṛśīm — such; gatim — a condition; asau — that person (myself); daśa-māsyaḥ — ten months old; īśa — O Lord; saṅgrāhitaḥ — was made to accept; puru-dayena — very merciful; bhavādṛśena — incomparable; svena — own; eva — alone; tuṣyatu — may He be pleased; kṛtena — with His act; saḥ — that; dīna-nāthaḥ — refuge of the fallen souls; kaḥ — who; nāma — indeed; tat — that mercy; prati — in return; vinā — except with; añjalim — folded hands; asya — of the Lord; kuryāt — can repay.

Translation
My dear Lord, by Your causeless mercy I am awakened to consciousness, although I am only ten months old. For this causeless mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the friend of all fallen souls, there is no way to express my gratitude but to pray with folded hands.

Text 19
पश्यत्ययं धिषणया ननु सप्तवध्रि:
शारीरके दमशरीर्यपर: स्वदेहे ।
यत्सृष्टयासं तमहं पुरुषं पुराणं
पश्ये बहिर्हृदि च चैत्यमिव प्रतीतम् ॥ १९ ॥
paśyaty ayaṁ dhiṣaṇayā nanu sapta-vadhriḥ
śārīrake dama-śarīry aparaḥ sva-dehe
yat-sṛṣṭayāsaṁ tam ahaṁ puruṣaṁ purāṇaṁ
paśye bahir hṛdi ca caityam iva pratītam
Synonyms
paśyati — sees; ayam — this living entity; dhiṣaṇayā — with intelligence; nanu — only; sapta-vadhriḥ — bound by the seven layers of material coverings; śārīrake — agreeable and disagreeable sense perceptions; dama-śarīrī — having a body for self-control; aparaḥ — another; sva-dehe — in his body; yat — by the Supreme Lord; sṛṣṭayā — endowed; āsam — was; tam — Him; aham — I; puruṣam — person; purāṇam — oldest; paśye — see; bahiḥ — outside; hṛdi — in the heart; ca — and; caityam — the source of the ego; iva — indeed; pratītam — recognized.

Translation
The living entity in another type of body sees only by instinct; he knows only the agreeable and disagreeable sense perceptions of that particular body. But I have a body in which I can control my senses and can understand my destination; therefore, I offer my respectful obeisances to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by whom I have been blessed with this body and by whose grace I can see Him within and without.

Text 20
सोऽहं वसन्नपि विभो बहुदु:खवासं
गर्भान्न निर्जिगमिषे बहिरन्धकूपे ।
यत्रोपयातमुपसर्पति देवमाया
मिथ्या मतिर्यदनु संसृतिचक्रमेतत् ॥ २० ॥
so ’haṁ vasann api vibho bahu-duḥkha-vāsaṁ
garbhān na nirjigamiṣe bahir andha-kūpe
yatropayātam upasarpati deva-māyā
mithyā matir yad-anu saṁsṛti-cakram etat
Synonyms
saḥ aham — I myself; vasan — living; api — although; vibho — O Lord; bahu-duḥkha — with many miseries; vāsam — in a condition; garbhāt — from the abdomen; na — not; nirjigamiṣe — I wish to depart; bahiḥ — outside; andha-kūpe — in the blind well; yatra — where; upayātam — one who goes there; upasarpati — she captures; deva-māyā — the external energy of the Lord; mithyā — false; matiḥ — identification; yat — which māyā; anu — according to; saṁsṛti — of continual birth and death; cakram — cycle; etat — this.

Translation
Therefore, my Lord, although I am living in a terrible condition, I do not wish to depart from my mother’s abdomen to fall again into the blind well of materialistic life. Your external energy, called deva-māyā, at once captures the newly born child, and immediately false identification, which is the beginning of the cycle of continual birth and death, begins.

Text 21
तस्मादहं विगतविक्लव उद्धरिष्य
आत्मानमाशु तमस: सुहृदात्मनैव ।
भूयो यथा व्यसनमेतदनेकरन्ध्रं
मा मे भविष्यदुपसादितविष्णुपाद: ॥ २१ ॥
tasmād ahaṁ vigata-viklava uddhariṣya
ātmānam āśu tamasaḥ suhṛdātmanaiva
bhūyo yathā vyasanam etad aneka-randhraṁ
mā me bhaviṣyad upasādita-viṣṇu-pādaḥ
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; aham — I; vigata — ceased; viklavaḥ — agitation; uddhariṣye — shall deliver; ātmānam — myself; āśu — quickly; tamasaḥ — from the darkness; suhṛdā ātmanā — with friendly intelligence; eva — indeed; bhūyaḥ — again; yathā — so that; vyasanam — plight; etat — this; aneka-randhram — entering many wombs; mā — not; me — my; bhaviṣyat — may occur; upasādita — placed (in my mind); viṣṇu-pādaḥ — the lotus feet of Lord Viṣṇu.

Translation
Therefore, without being agitated any more, I shall deliver myself from the darkness of nescience with the help of my friend, clear consciousness. Simply by keeping the lotus feet of Lord Viṣṇu in my mind, I shall be saved from entering into the wombs of many mothers for repeated birth and death.

Text 22
कपिल उवाच
एवं कृतमतिर्गर्भे दशमास्य: स्तुवन्नृषि: ।
सद्य: क्षिपत्यवाचीनं प्रसूत्यै सूतिमारुत: ॥ २२ ॥
kapila uvāca
evaṁ kṛta-matir garbhe
daśa-māsyaḥ stuvann ṛṣiḥ
sadyaḥ kṣipaty avācīnaṁ
prasūtyai sūti-mārutaḥ
Synonyms
kapilaḥ uvāca — Lord Kapila said; evam — thus; kṛta-matiḥ — desiring; garbhe — in the womb; daśa-māsyaḥ — ten-month-old; stuvan — extolling; ṛṣiḥ — the living entity; sadyaḥ — at that very time; kṣipati — propels; avācīnam — turned downward; prasūtyai — for birth; sūti-mārutaḥ — the wind for childbirth.

Translation
Lord Kapila continued: The ten-month-old living entity has these desires even while in the womb. But while he thus extols the Lord, the wind that helps parturition propels him forth with his face turned downward so that he may be born.

Text 23
तेनावसृष्ट: सहसा कृत्वावाक्शिर आतुर: ।
विनिष्क्रामति कृच्छ्रेण निरुच्छ्‌वासो हतस्मृति: ॥ २३ ॥
tenāvasṛṣṭaḥ sahasā
kṛtvāvāk śira āturaḥ
viniṣkrāmati kṛcchreṇa
nirucchvāso hata-smṛtiḥ
Synonyms
tena — by that wind; avasṛṣṭaḥ — pushed downward; sahasā — suddenly; kṛtvā — turned; avāk — downward; śiraḥ — his head; āturaḥ — suffering; viniṣkrāmati — he comes out; kṛcchreṇa — with great trouble; nirucchvāsaḥ — breathless; hata — deprived of; smṛtiḥ — memory.

Translation
Pushed downward all of a sudden by the wind, the child comes out with great trouble, head downward, breathless and deprived of memory due to severe agony.

Text 24
पतितो भुव्यसृङ्‌मिश्र: विष्ठाभूरिव चेष्टते ।
रोरूयति गते ज्ञाने विपरीतां गतिं गत: ॥ २४ ॥
patito bhuvy asṛṅ-miśraḥ
viṣṭhā-bhūr iva ceṣṭate
rorūyati gate jñāne
viparītāṁ gatiṁ gataḥ
Synonyms
patitaḥ — fallen; bhuvi — on the earth; asṛk — with blood; miśraḥ — smeared; viṣṭhā-bhūḥ — a worm; iva — like; ceṣṭate — he moves his limbs; rorūyati — cries loudly; gate — being lost; jñāne — his wisdom; viparītām — the opposite; gatim — state; gataḥ — gone to.

Translation
The child thus falls on the ground, smeared with stool and blood, and plays just like a worm germinated from the stool. He loses his superior knowledge and cries under the spell of māyā.

Text 25
परच्छन्दं न विदुषा पुष्यमाणो जनेन स: ।
अनभिप्रेतमापन्न: प्रत्याख्यातुमनीश्वर: ॥ २५ ॥
para-cchandaṁ na viduṣā
puṣyamāṇo janena saḥ
anabhipretam āpannaḥ
pratyākhyātum anīśvaraḥ
Synonyms
para-chandam — the desire of another; na — not; viduṣā — understanding; puṣyamāṇaḥ — being maintained; janena — by persons; saḥ — he; anabhipretam — into undesirable circumstances; āpannaḥ — fallen; pratyākhyātum — to refuse; anīśvaraḥ — unable.

Translation
After coming out of the abdomen, the child is given to the care of persons who are unable to understand what he wants, and thus he is nursed by such persons. Unable to refuse whatever is given to him, he falls into undesirable circumstances.

Text 26
शायितोऽशुचिपर्यङ्के जन्तु: स्वेदज-दूषिते ।
नेश: कण्डूयनेऽङ्गानामासनोत्थानचेष्टने ॥ २६ ॥
śāyito ’śuci-paryaṅke
jantuḥ svedaja-dūṣite
neśaḥ kaṇḍūyane ’ṅgānām
āsanotthāna-ceṣṭane
Synonyms
śāyitaḥ — laid down; aśuci-paryaṅke — on a foul bed; jantuḥ — the child; sveda-ja — with creatures born from sweat; dūṣite — infested; na īśaḥ — incapable of; kaṇḍūyane — scratching; aṅgānām — his limbs; āsana — sitting; utthāna — standing; ceṣṭane — or moving.

Translation
Laid down on a foul bed infested with sweat and germs, the poor child is incapable of scratching his body to get relief from his itching sensation, to say nothing of sitting up, standing or even moving.

Text 27
तुदन्त्यामत्वचं दंशा मशका मत्कुणादय: ।
रुदन्तं विगतज्ञानं कृमय: कृमिकं यथा ॥ २७ ॥
tudanty āma-tvacaṁ daṁśā
maśakā matkuṇādayaḥ
rudantaṁ vigata-jñānaṁ
kṛmayaḥ kṛmikaṁ yathā
Synonyms
tudanti — they bite; āma-tvacam — the baby, whose skin is soft; daṁśāḥ — gnats; maśakāḥ — mosquitoes; matkuṇa — bugs; ādayaḥ — and other creatures; rudantam — crying; vigata — deprived of; jñānam — wisdom; kṛmayaḥ — worms; kṛmikam — a worm; yathā — just as.

Translation
In his helpless condition, gnats, mosquitoes, bugs and other germs bite the baby, whose skin is tender, just as smaller worms bite a big worm. The child, deprived of his wisdom, cries bitterly.

Text 28
इत्येवं शैशवं भुक्त्वा दु:खं पौगण्डमेव च ।
अलब्धाभीप्सितोऽज्ञानादिद्धमन्यु: शुचार्पित: ॥ २८ ॥
ity evaṁ śaiśavaṁ bhuktvā
duḥkhaṁ paugaṇḍam eva ca
alabdhābhīpsito ’jñānād
iddha-manyuḥ śucārpitaḥ
Synonyms
iti evam — in this way; śaiśavam — childhood; bhuktvā — having undergone; duḥkham — distress; paugaṇḍam — boyhood; eva — even; ca — and; alabdha — not achieved; abhīpsitaḥ — he whose desires; ajñānāt — due to ignorance; iddha — kindled; manyuḥ — his anger; śucā — by sorrow; arpitaḥ — overcome.

Translation
In this way, the child passes through his childhood, suffering different kinds of distress, and attains boyhood. In boyhood also he suffers pain over desires to get things he can never achieve. And thus, due to ignorance, he becomes angry and sorry.

Text 29
सह देहेन मानेन वर्धमानेन मन्युना ।
करोति विग्रहं कामी कामिष्वन्ताय चात्मन: ॥ २९ ॥
saha dehena mānena
vardhamānena manyunā
karoti vigrahaṁ kāmī
kāmiṣv antāya cātmanaḥ
Synonyms
saha — with; dehena — the body; mānena — with false prestige; vardhamānena — increasing; manyunā — on account of anger; karoti — he creates; vigraham — enmity; kāmī — the lusty person; kāmiṣu — towards other lusty people; antāya — for destruction; ca — and; ātmanaḥ — of his soul.

Translation
With the growth of the body, the living entity, in order to vanquish his soul, increases his false prestige and anger and thereby creates enmity towards similarly lusty people.

Text 30
भूतै: पञ्चभिरारब्धे देहे देह्यबुधोऽसकृत् ।
अहंममेत्यसद्ग्राह: करोति कुमतिर्मतिम् ॥ ३० ॥
bhūtaiḥ pañcabhir ārabdhe
dehe dehy abudho ’sakṛt
ahaṁ mamety asad-grāhaḥ
karoti kumatir matim
Synonyms
bhūtaiḥ — by material elements; pañcabhiḥ — five; ārabdhe — made; dehe — in the body; dehī — the living entity; abudhaḥ — ignorant; asakṛt — constantly; aham — I; mama — mine; iti — thus; asat — nonpermanent things; grāhaḥ — accepting; karoti — he does; ku-matiḥ — being foolish; matim — thought.

Translation
By such ignorance the living entity accepts the material body, which is made of five elements, as himself. With this misunderstanding, he accepts nonpermanent things as his own and increases his ignorance in the darkest region.

Text 31
तदर्थं कुरुते कर्म यद्बद्धो याति संसृतिम् ।
योऽनुयाति ददत्‍क्‍लेशमविद्याकर्मबन्धन: ॥ ३१ ॥
tad-arthaṁ kurute karma
yad-baddho yāti saṁsṛtim
yo ’nuyāti dadat kleśam
avidyā-karma-bandhanaḥ
Synonyms
tat-artham — for the sake of the body; kurute — he performs; karma — actions; yat-baddhaḥ — bound by which; yāti — he goes; saṁsṛtim — to repeated birth and death; yaḥ — which body; anuyāti — follows; dadat — giving; kleśam — misery; avidyā — by ignorance; karma — by fruitive activities; bandhanaḥ — the cause of bondage.

Translation
For the sake of the body, which is a source of constant trouble to him and which follows him because he is bound by ties of ignorance and fruitive activities, he performs various actions which cause him to be subjected to repeated birth and death.

Text 32
यद्यसद्‌भि: पथि पुन: शिश्नोदरकृतोद्यमै: ।
आस्थितो रमते जन्तुस्तमो विशति पूर्ववत् ॥ ३२ ॥
yady asadbhiḥ pathi punaḥ
śiśnodara-kṛtodyamaiḥ
āsthito ramate jantus
tamo viśati pūrvavat
Synonyms
yadi — if; asadbhiḥ — with the unrighteous; pathi — on the path; punaḥ — again; śiśna — for the genitals; udara — for the stomach; kṛta — done; udyamaiḥ — whose endeavors; āsthitaḥ — associating; ramate — enjoys; jantuḥ — the living entity; tamaḥ — darkness; viśati — enters; pūrva-vat — as before.

Translation
If, therefore, the living entity again associates with the path of unrighteousness, influenced by sensually minded people engaged in the pursuit of sexual enjoyment and the gratification of the palate, he again goes to hell as before.

Text 33
सत्यं शौचं दया मौनं बुद्धि: श्रीर्ह्रीर्यश: क्षमा ।
शमो दमो भगश्चेति यत्सङ्गाद्याति सङ्‍क्षयम् ॥ ३३ ॥
satyaṁ śaucaṁ dayā maunaṁ
buddhiḥ śrīr hrīr yaśaḥ kṣamā
śamo damo bhagaś ceti
yat-saṅgād yāti saṅkṣayam
Synonyms
satyam — truthfulness; śaucam — cleanliness; dayā — mercy; maunam — gravity; buddhiḥ — intelligence; śrīḥ — prosperity; hrīḥ — shyness; yaśaḥ — fame; kṣamā — forgiveness; śamaḥ — control of the mind; damaḥ — control of the senses; bhagaḥ — fortune; ca — and; iti — thus; yat-saṅgāt — from association with whom; yāti saṅkṣayam — are destroyed.

Translation
He becomes devoid of truthfulness, cleanliness, mercy, gravity, spiritual intelligence, shyness, austerity, fame, forgiveness, control of the mind, control of the senses, fortune and all such opportunities.

Text 34
तेष्वशान्तेषु मूढेषु खण्डितात्मस्वसाधुषु ।
सङ्गं न कुर्याच्छोच्येषु योषित्क्रीडामृगेषु च ॥ ३४ ॥
teṣv aśānteṣu mūḍheṣu
khaṇḍitātmasv asādhuṣu
saṅgaṁ na kuryāc chocyeṣu
yoṣit-krīḍā-mṛgeṣu ca
Synonyms
teṣu — with those; aśānteṣu — coarse; mūḍheṣu — fools; khaṇḍita-ātmasu — bereft of self-realization; asādhuṣu — wicked; saṅgam — association; na — not; kuryāt — one should make; śocyeṣu — pitiable; yoṣit — of women; krīḍā-mṛgeṣu — dancing dogs; ca — and.

Translation
One should not associate with a coarse fool who is bereft of the knowledge of self-realization and who is no more than a dancing dog in the hands of a woman.

Text 35
न तथास्य भवेन्मोहो बन्धश्चान्यप्रसङ्गत: ।
योषित्सङ्गाद्यथा पुंसो यथा तत्सङ्गिसङ्गत: ॥ ३५ ॥
na tathāsya bhaven moho
bandhaś cānya-prasaṅgataḥ
yoṣit-saṅgād yathā puṁso
yathā tat-saṅgi-saṅgataḥ
Synonyms
na — not; tathā — in that manner; asya — of this man; bhavet — may arise; mohaḥ — infatuation; bandhaḥ — bondage; ca — and; anya-prasaṅgataḥ — from attachment to any other object; yoṣit-saṅgāt — from attachment to women; yathā — as; puṁsaḥ — of a man; yathā — as; tat-saṅgi — of men who are fond of women; saṅgataḥ — from the fellowship.

Translation
The infatuation and bondage which accrue to a man from attachment to any other object is not as complete as that resulting from attachment to a woman or to the fellowship of men who are fond of women.

Text 36
प्रजापति: स्वां दुहितरं दृष्ट्वा तद्रूपधर्षित: ।
रोहिद्भूतां सोऽन्वधावद‍ृक्षरूपी हतत्रप: ॥ ३६ ॥
prajāpatiḥ svāṁ duhitaraṁ
dṛṣṭvā tad-rūpa-dharṣitaḥ
rohid-bhūtāṁ so ’nvadhāvad
ṛkṣa-rūpī hata-trapaḥ
Synonyms
prajā-patiḥ — Lord Brahmā; svām — his own; duhitaram — daughter; dṛṣṭvā — having seen; tat-rūpa — by her charms; dharṣitaḥ — bewildered; rohit-bhūtām — to her in the form of a deer; saḥ — he; anvadhāvat — ran; ṛkṣa-rūpī — in the form of a stag; hata — bereft of; trapaḥ — shame.

Translation
At the sight of his own daughter, Brahmā was bewildered by her charms and shamelessly ran up to her in the form of a stag when she took the form of a hind.

Text 37
तत्सृष्टसृष्टसृष्टेषु को न्वखण्डितधी: पुमान् ।
ऋषिं नारायणमृते योषिन्मय्येह मायया ॥ ३७ ॥
tat-sṛṣṭa-sṛṣṭa-sṛṣṭeṣu
ko nv akhaṇḍita-dhīḥ pumān
ṛṣiṁ nārāyaṇam ṛte
yoṣin-mayyeha māyayā
Synonyms
tat — by Brahmā; sṛṣṭa-sṛṣṭa-sṛṣṭeṣu — amongst all living entities begotten; kaḥ — who; nu — indeed; akhaṇḍita — not distracted; dhīḥ — his intelligence; pumān — male; ṛṣim — the sage; nārāyaṇam — Nārāyaṇa; ṛte — except; yoṣit-mayyā — in the form of a woman; iha — here; māyayā — by māyā.

Translation
Amongst all kinds of living entities begotten by Brahmā, namely men, demigods and animals, none but the sage Nārāyaṇa is immune to the attraction of māyā in the form of woman.

Text 38
बलं मे पश्य मायाया: स्त्रीमय्या जयिनो दिशाम् ।
या करोति पदाक्रान्तान्भ्रूविजृम्भेण केवलम् ॥ ३८ ॥
balaṁ me paśya māyāyāḥ
strī-mayyā jayino diśām
yā karoti padākrāntān
bhrūvi-jṛmbheṇa kevalam
Synonyms
balam — the strength; me — My; paśya — behold; māyāyāḥ — of māyā; strī-mayyāḥ — in the shape of a woman; jayinaḥ — conquerors; diśām — of all directions; yā — who; karoti — makes; pada-ākrāntān — following at her heels; bhrūvi — of her eyebrows; jṛmbheṇa — by the movement; kevalam — merely.

Translation
Just try to understand the mighty strength of My māyā in the shape of woman, who by the mere movement of her eyebrows can keep even the greatest conquerors of the world under her grip.

Text 39
सङ्गं न कुर्यात्प्रमदासु जातु
योगस्य पारं परमारुरुक्षु: ।
मत्सेवया प्रतिलब्धात्मलाभो
वदन्ति या निरयद्वारमस्य ॥ ३९ ॥
saṅgaṁ na kuryāt pramadāsu jātu
yogasya pāraṁ param ārurukṣuḥ
mat-sevayā pratilabdhātma-lābho
vadanti yā niraya-dvāram asya
Synonyms
saṅgam — association; na — not; kuryāt — one should make; pramadāsu — with women; jātu — ever; yogasya — of yoga; pāram — culmination; param — topmost; ārurukṣuḥ — one who aspires to reach; mat-sevayā — by rendering service unto Me; pratilabdha — obtained; ātma-lābhaḥ — self-realization; vadanti — they say; yāḥ — which women; niraya — to hell; dvāram — the gateway; asya — of the advancing devotee.

Translation
One who aspires to reach the culmination of yoga and has realized his self by rendering service unto Me should never associate with an attractive woman, for such a woman is declared in the scripture to be the gateway to hell for the advancing devotee.

Text 40
योपयाति शनैर्माया योषिद्देवविनिर्मिता ।
तामीक्षेतात्मनो मृत्युं तृणै: कूपमिवावृतम् ॥ ४० ॥
yopayāti śanair māyā
yoṣid deva-vinirmitā
tām īkṣetātmano mṛtyuṁ
tṛṇaiḥ kūpam ivāvṛtam
Synonyms
yā — she who; upayāti — approaches; śanaiḥ — slowly; māyā — representation of māyā; yoṣit — woman; deva — by the Lord; vinirmitā — created; tām — her; īkṣeta — one must regard; ātmanaḥ — of the soul; mṛtyum — death; tṛṇaiḥ — with grass; kūpam — a well; iva — like; āvṛtam — covered.

Translation
The woman, created by the Lord, is the representation of māyā, and one who associates with such māyā by accepting services must certainly know that this is the way of death, just like a blind well covered with grass.

Text 41
यां मन्यते पतिं मोहान्मन्मायामृषभायतीम् ।
स्त्रीत्वं स्त्रीसङ्गत: प्राप्तो वित्तापत्यगृहप्रदम् ॥ ४१ ॥
yāṁ manyate patiṁ mohān
man-māyām ṛṣabhāyatīm
strītvaṁ strī-saṅgataḥ prāpto
vittāpatya-gṛha-pradam
Synonyms
yām — which; manyate — she thinks; patim — her husband; mohāt — due to illusion; mat-māyām — My māyā; ṛṣabha — in the form of a man; āyatīm — coming; strītvam — the state of being a woman; strī-saṅgataḥ — from attachment to a woman; prāptaḥ — obtained; vitta — wealth; apatya — progeny; gṛha — house; pradam — bestowing.

Translation
A living entity who, as a result of attachment to a woman in his previous life, has been endowed with the form of a woman, foolishly looks upon māyā in the form of a man, her husband, as the bestower of wealth, progeny, house and other material assets.

Text 42
तामात्मनो विजानीयात्पत्यपत्यगृहात्मकम् ।
दैवोपसादितं मृत्युं मृगयोर्गायनं यथा ॥ ४२ ॥
tām ātmano vijānīyāt
paty-apatya-gṛhātmakam
daivopasāditaṁ mṛtyuṁ
mṛgayor gāyanaṁ yathā
Synonyms
tām — the Lord’s māyā; ātmanaḥ — of herself; vijānīyāt — she should know; pati — husband; apatya — children; gṛha — house; ātmakam — consisting of; daiva — by the authority of the Lord; upasāditam — brought about; mṛtyum — death; mṛgayoḥ — of the hunter; gāyanam — the singing; yathā — as.

Translation
A woman, therefore, should consider her husband, her house and her children to be the arrangement of the external energy of the Lord for her death, just as the sweet singing of the hunter is death for the deer.

Text 43
देहेन जीवभूतेन लोकाल्लोकमनुव्रजन् ।
भुञ्जान एव कर्माणि करोत्यविरतं पुमान् ॥ ४३ ॥
dehena jīva-bhūtena
lokāl lokam anuvrajan
bhuñjāna eva karmāṇi
karoty avirataṁ pumān
Synonyms
dehena — on account of the body; jīva-bhūtena — possessed by the living entity; lokāt — from one planet; lokam — to another planet; anuvrajan — wandering; bhuñjānaḥ — enjoying; eva — so; karmāṇi — fruitive activities; karoti — he does; aviratam — incessantly; pumān — the living entity.

Translation
Due to his particular type of body, the materialistic living entity wanders from one planet to another, following fruitive activities. In this way, he involves himself in fruitive activities and enjoys the result incessantly.

Text 44
जीवो ह्यस्यानुगो देहो भूतेन्द्रियमनोमय: ।
तन्निरोधोऽस्य मरणमाविर्भावस्तु सम्भव: ॥ ४४ ॥
jīvo hy asyānugo deho
bhūtendriya-mano-mayaḥ
tan-nirodho ’sya maraṇam
āvirbhāvas tu sambhavaḥ
Synonyms
jīvaḥ — the living entity; hi — indeed; asya — of him; anugaḥ — suitable; dehaḥ — body; bhūta — gross material elements; indriya — senses; manaḥ — mind; mayaḥ — made of; tat — of the body; nirodhaḥ — destruction; asya — of the living entity; maraṇam — death; āvirbhāvaḥ — manifestation; tu — but; sambhavaḥ — birth.

Translation
In this way the living entity gets a suitable body with a material mind and senses, according to his fruitive activities. When the reaction of his particular activity comes to an end, that end is called death, and when a particular type of reaction begins, that beginning is called birth.

Texts 45-46
द्रव्योपलब्धिस्थानस्य द्रव्येक्षायोग्यता यदा ।
तत्पञ्चत्वमहंमानादुत्पत्तिर्द्रव्यदर्शनम् ॥ ४५ ॥
यथाक्ष्णोर्द्रव्यावयवदर्शनायोग्यता यदा ।
तदैव चक्षुषो द्रष्टुर्द्रष्टृत्वायोग्यतानयो: ॥ ४६ ॥
dravyopalabdhi-sthānasya
dravyekṣāyogyatā yadā
tat pañcatvam ahaṁ-mānād
utpattir dravya-darśanam
yathākṣṇor dravyāvayava-
darśanāyogyatā yadā
tadaiva cakṣuṣo draṣṭur
draṣṭṛtvāyogyatānayoḥ
Synonyms
dravya — of objects; upalabdhi — of perception; sthānasya — of the place; dravya — of objects; īkṣā — of perception; ayogyatā — incapability; yadā — when; tat — that; pañcatvam — death; aham-mānāt — from the misconception of “I”; utpattiḥ — birth; dravya — the physical body; darśanam — viewing; yathā — just as; akṣṇoḥ — of the eyes; dravya — of objects; avayava — parts; darśana — of seeing; ayogyatā — incapability; yadā — when; tadā — then; eva — indeed; cakṣuṣaḥ — of the sense of sight; draṣṭuḥ — of the seer; draṣṭṛtva — of the faculty of seeing; ayogyatā — incapability; anayoḥ — of both of these.

Translation
When the eyes lose their power to see color or form due to morbid affliction of the optic nerve, the sense of sight becomes deadened. The living entity, who is the seer of both the eyes and the sight, loses his power of vision. In the same way, when the physical body, the place where perception of objects occurs, is rendered incapable of perceiving, that is known as death. When one begins to view the physical body as one’s very self, that is called birth.

Text 47
तस्मान्न कार्य: सन्त्रासो न कार्पण्यं न सम्भ्रम: ।
बुद्ध्वा जीवगतिं धीरो मुक्तसङ्गश्चरेदिह ॥ ४७ ॥
tasmān na kāryaḥ santrāso
na kārpaṇyaṁ na sambhramaḥ
buddhvā jīva-gatiṁ dhīro
mukta-saṅgaś cared iha
Synonyms
tasmāt — on account of death; na — not; kāryaḥ — should be done; santrāsaḥ — horror; na — not; kārpaṇyam — miserliness; na — not; sambhramaḥ — eagerness for material gain; buddhvā — realizing; jīva-gatim — the true nature of the living entity; dhīraḥ — steadfast; mukta-saṅgaḥ — free from attachment; caret — one should move about; iha — in this world.

Translation
Therefore, one should not view death with horror, nor have recourse to defining the body as soul, nor give way to exaggeration in enjoying the bodily necessities of life. Realizing the true nature of the living entity, one should move about in the world free from attachment and steadfast in purpose.

Text 48
सम्यग्दर्शनया बुद्ध्या योगवैराग्ययुक्तया ।
मायाविरचिते लोके चरेन्न्यस्य कलेवरम् ॥ ४८ ॥
samyag-darśanayā buddhyā
yoga-vairāgya-yuktayā
māyā-viracite loke
caren nyasya kalevaram
Synonyms
samyak-darśanayā — endowed with right vision; buddhyā — through reason; yoga — by devotional service; vairāgya — by detachment; yuktayā — strengthened; māyā-viracite — arranged by māyā; loke — to this world; caret — one should move about; nyasya — relegating; kalevaram — the body.

Translation
Endowed with right vision and strengthened by devotional service and a pessimistic attitude towards material identity, one should relegate his body to this illusory world through his reason. Thus one can be unconcerned with this material world.