Text 1
कपिल उवाच
अथ यो गृहमेधीयान्धर्मानेवावसन्गृहे ।
काममर्थं च धर्मान्स्वान्दोग्धि भूय: पिपर्ति तान् ॥ १ ॥
kapila uvāca
atha yo gṛha-medhīyān
dharmān evāvasan gṛhe
kāmam arthaṁ ca dharmān svān
dogdhi bhūyaḥ piparti tān
Synonyms
kapilaḥ uvāca — Lord Kapila said; atha — now; yaḥ — the person who; gṛha-medhīyān — of the householders; dharmān — duties; eva — certainly; āvasan — living; gṛhe — at home; kāmam — sense gratification; artham — economic development; ca — and; dharmān — religious rituals; svān — his; dogdhi — enjoys; bhūyaḥ — again and again; piparti — performs; tān — them.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead said: The person who lives in the center of household life derives material benefits by performing religious rituals, and thereby he fulfills his desire for economic development and sense gratification. Again and again he acts the same way.

Text 2
स चापि भगवद्धर्मात्काममूढ: पराङ्‍मुख: ।
यजते क्रतुभिर्देवान्पितृंश्च श्रद्धयान्वित: ॥ २ ॥
sa cāpi bhagavad-dharmāt
kāma-mūḍhaḥ parāṅ-mukhaḥ
yajate kratubhir devān
pitṝṁś ca śraddhayānvitaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he; ca api — moreover; bhagavat-dharmāt — from devotional service; kāma-mūḍhaḥ — infatuated by lust; parāk-mukhaḥ — having the face turned away; yajate — worships; kratubhiḥ — with sacrificial ceremonies; devān — the demigods; pitṝn — the forefathers; ca — and; śraddhayā — with faith; anvitaḥ — endowed.

Translation
Such persons are ever bereft of devotional service due to being too attached to sense gratification, and therefore, although they perform various kinds of sacrifices and take great vows to satisfy the demigods and forefathers, they are not interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, devotional service.

Text 3
तच्छ्रद्धयाक्रान्तमति: पितृदेवव्रत: पुमान् ।
गत्वा चान्द्रमसं लोकं सोमपा: पुनरेष्यति ॥ ३ ॥
tac-chraddhayākrānta-matiḥ
pitṛ-deva-vrataḥ pumān
gatvā cāndramasaṁ lokaṁ
soma-pāḥ punar eṣyati
Synonyms
tat — to the demigods and forefathers; śraddhayā — with reverence; ākrānta — overcome; matiḥ — his mind; pitṛ — to the forefathers; deva — to the demigods; vrataḥ — his vow; pumān — the person; gatvā — having gone; cāndramasam — to the moon; lokam — planet; soma-pāḥ — drinking soma juice; punaḥ — again; eṣyati — will return.

Translation
Such materialistic persons, attracted by sense gratification and devoted to the forefathers and demigods, can be elevated to the moon, where they drink an extract of the soma plant. They again return to this planet.

Text 4
यदा चाहीन्द्रशय्यायां शेतेऽनन्तासनो हरि: ।
तदा लोका लयं यान्ति त एते गृहमेधिनाम् ॥ ४ ॥
yadā cāhīndra-śayyāyāṁ
śete ’nantāsano hariḥ
tadā lokā layaṁ yānti
ta ete gṛha-medhinām
Synonyms
yadā — when; ca — and; ahi-indra — of the king of snakes; śayyāyām — on the bed; śete — lies; ananta-āsanaḥ — He whose seat is Ananta Śeṣa; hariḥ — Lord Hari; tadā — then; lokāḥ — the planets; layam — unto dissolution; yānti — go; te ete — those very; gṛha-medhinām — of the materialistic householders.

Translation
All the planets of the materialistic persons, including all the heavenly planets, such as the moon, are vanquished when the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, goes to His bed of serpents, which is known as Ananta Śeṣa.

Text 5
ये स्वधर्मान्न दुह्यन्ति धीरा: कामार्थहेतवे ।
नि:सङ्गा न्यस्तकर्माण: प्रशान्ता: शुद्धचेतस: ॥ ५ ॥
ye sva-dharmān na duhyanti
dhīrāḥ kāmārtha-hetave
niḥsaṅgā nyasta-karmāṇaḥ
praśāntāḥ śuddha-cetasaḥ
Synonyms
ye — those who; sva-dharmān — their own occupational duties; na — do not; duhyanti — take advantage of; dhīrāḥ — intelligent; kāma — sense gratification; artha — economic development; hetave — for the sake of; niḥsaṅgāḥ — free from material attachment; nyasta — given up; karmāṇaḥ — fruitive activities; praśāntāḥ — satisfied; śuddha-cetasaḥ — of purified consciousness.

Translation
Those who are intelligent and are of purified consciousness are completely satisfied in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Freed from the modes of material nature, they do not act for sense gratification; rather, since they are situated in their own occupational duties, they act as one is expected to act.

Text 6
निवृत्तिधर्मनिरता निर्ममा निरहङ्कृता: ।
स्वधर्माप्तेन सत्त्वेन परिशुद्धेन चेतसा ॥ ६ ॥
nivṛtti-dharma-niratā
nirmamā nirahaṅkṛtāḥ
sva-dharmāptena sattvena
pariśuddhena cetasā
Synonyms
nivṛtti-dharma — in religious activities for detachment; niratāḥ — constantly engaged; nirmamāḥ — without a sense of proprietorship; nirahaṅkṛtāḥ — without false egoism; sva-dharma — by one’s own occupational duties; āptena — executed; sattvena — by goodness; pariśuddhena — completely purified; cetasā — by consciousness.

Translation
By executing one’s occupational duties, acting with detachment and without a sense of proprietorship or false egoism, one is posted in one’s constitutional position by dint of complete purification of consciousness, and by thus executing so-called material duties he can easily enter into the kingdom of God.

Text 7
सूर्यद्वारेण ते यान्ति पुरुषं विश्वतोमुखम् ।
परावरेशं प्रकृतिमस्योत्पत्त्यन्तभावनम् ॥ ७ ॥
sūrya-dvāreṇa te yānti
puruṣaṁ viśvato-mukham
parāvareśaṁ prakṛtim
asyotpatty-anta-bhāvanam
Synonyms
sūrya-dvāreṇa — through the path of illumination; te — they; yānti — approach; puruṣam — the Personality of Godhead; viśvataḥ-mukham — whose face is turned everywhere; para-avara-īśam — the proprietor of the spiritual and material worlds; prakṛtim — the material cause; asya — of the world; utpatti — of manifestation; anta — of dissolution; bhāvanam — the cause.

Translation
Through the path of illumination, such liberated persons approach the complete Personality of Godhead, who is the proprietor of the material and spiritual worlds and is the supreme cause of their manifestation and dissolution.

Text 8
द्विपरार्धावसाने य: प्रलयो ब्रह्मणस्तु ते ।
तावदध्यासते लोकं परस्य परचिन्तका: ॥ ८ ॥
dvi-parārdhāvasāne yaḥ
pralayo brahmaṇas tu te
tāvad adhyāsate lokaṁ
parasya para-cintakāḥ
Synonyms
dvi-parārdha — two parārdhas; avasāne — at the end of; yaḥ — which; pralayaḥ — death; brahmaṇaḥ — of Lord Brahmā; tu — indeed; te — they; tāvat — so long; adhyāsate — dwell; lokam — on the planet; parasya — of the Supreme; para-cintakāḥ — thinking of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
Worshipers of the Hiraṇyagarbha expansion of the Personality of Godhead remain within this material world until the end of two parārdhas, when Lord Brahmā also dies.

Text 9
क्ष्माम्भोऽनलानिलवियन्मनइन्द्रियार्थ-
भूतादिभि: परिवृतं प्रतिसञ्जिहीर्षु: ।
अव्याकृतं विशति यर्हि गुणत्रयात्मा
कालं पराख्यमनुभूय पर: स्वयम्भू: ॥ ९ ॥
kṣmāmbho-’nalānila-viyan-mana-indriyārtha-
bhūtādibhiḥ parivṛtaṁ pratisañjihīrṣuḥ
avyākṛtaṁ viśati yarhi guṇa-trayātmā
kālaṁ parākhyam anubhūya paraḥ svayambhūḥ
Synonyms
kṣmā — earth; ambhaḥ — water; anala — fire; anila — air; viyat — ether; manaḥ — mind; indriya — the senses; artha — the objects of the senses; bhūta — ego; ādibhiḥ — and so on; parivṛtam — covered by; pratisañjihīrṣuḥ — desiring to dissolve; avyākṛtam — the changeless spiritual sky; viśati — he enters; yarhi — at which time; guṇa-traya-ātmā — consisting of the three modes; kālam — the time; para-ākhyam — two parārdhas; anubhūya — after experiencing; paraḥ — the chief; svayambhūḥ — Lord Brahmā.

Translation
After experiencing the inhabitable time of the three modes of material nature, known as two parārdhas, Lord Brahmā closes the material universe, which is covered by layers of earth, water, air, fire, ether, mind, ego, etc., and goes back to Godhead.

Text 10
एवं परेत्य भगवन्तमनुप्रविष्टा
ये योगिनो जितमरुन्मनसो विरागा: ।
तेनैव साकममृतं पुरुषं पुराणं
ब्रह्म प्रधानमुपयान्त्यगताभिमाना: ॥ १० ॥
evaṁ paretya bhagavantam anupraviṣṭā
ye yogino jita-marun-manaso virāgāḥ
tenaiva sākam amṛtaṁ puruṣaṁ purāṇaṁ
brahma pradhānam upayānty agatābhimānāḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; paretya — having gone a long distance; bhagavantam — Lord Brahmā; anupraviṣṭāḥ — entered; ye — those who; yoginaḥ — yogīs; jita — controlled; marut — the breathing; manasaḥ — the mind; virāgāḥ — detached; tena — with Lord Brahmā; eva — indeed; sākam — together; amṛtam — the embodiment of bliss; puruṣam — unto the Personality of Godhead; purāṇam — the oldest; brahma pradhānam — the Supreme Brahman; upayānti — they go; agata — not gone; abhimānāḥ — whose false ego.

Translation
The yogīs who become detached from the material world by practice of breathing exercises and control of the mind reach the planet of Brahmā, which is far, far away. After giving up their bodies, they enter into the body of Lord Brahmā, and therefore when Brahmā is liberated and goes to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the Supreme Brahman, such yogīs can also enter into the kingdom of God.

Text 11
अथ तं सर्वभूतानां हृत्पद्मेषु कृतालयम् ।
श्रुतानुभावं शरणं व्रज भावेन भामिनि ॥ ११ ॥
atha taṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
hṛt-padmeṣu kṛtālayam
śrutānubhāvaṁ śaraṇaṁ
vraja bhāvena bhāmini
Synonyms
atha — therefore; tam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarva-bhūtānām — of all living entities; hṛt-padmeṣu — in the lotus hearts; kṛta-ālayam — residing; śruta-anubhāvam — whose glories you have heard; śaraṇam — unto the shelter; vraja — go; bhāvena — by devotional service; bhāmini — My dear mother.

Translation
Therefore, My dear mother, by devotional service take direct shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is seated in everyone’s heart.

Texts 12-15
आद्य: स्थिरचराणां यो वेदगर्भ: सहर्षिभि: ।
योगेश्वरै: कुमाराद्यै: सिद्धैर्योगप्रवर्तकै: ॥ १२ ॥
भेदद‍ृष्टय‍ाभिमानेन नि:सङ्गेनापि कर्मणा ।
कर्तृत्वात्सगुणं ब्रह्म पुरुषं पुरुषर्षभम् ॥ १३ ॥
स संसृत्य पुन: काले कालेनेश्वरमूर्तिना ।
जाते गुणव्यतिकरे यथापूर्वं प्रजायते ॥ १४ ॥
ऐश्वर्यं पारमेष्ठ्यं च तेऽपि धर्मविनिर्मितम् ।
निषेव्य पुनरायान्ति गुणव्यतिकरे सति ॥ १५ ॥
ādyaḥ sthira-carāṇāṁ yo
veda-garbhaḥ saharṣibhiḥ
yogeśvaraiḥ kumārādyaiḥ
siddhair yoga-pravartakaiḥ
bheda-dṛṣṭyābhimānena
niḥsaṅgenāpi karmaṇā
kartṛtvāt saguṇaṁ brahma
puruṣaṁ puruṣarṣabham
sa saṁsṛtya punaḥ kāle
kāleneśvara-mūrtinā
jāte guṇa-vyatikare
yathā-pūrvaṁ prajāyate
aiśvaryaṁ pārameṣṭhyaṁ ca
te ’pi dharma-vinirmitam
niṣevya punar āyānti
guṇa-vyatikare sati
Synonyms
ādyaḥ — the creator, Lord Brahmā; sthira-carāṇām — of the immobile and mobile manifestations; yaḥ — he who; veda-garbhaḥ — the repository of the Vedas; saha — along with; ṛṣibhiḥ — the sages; yoga-īśvaraiḥ — with great mystic yogīs; kumāra-ādyaiḥ — the Kumāras and others; siddhaiḥ — with the perfected living beings; yoga-pravartakaiḥ — the authors of the yoga system; bheda-dṛṣṭyā — because of independent vision; abhimānena — by misconception; niḥsaṅgena — nonfruitive; api — although; karmaṇā — by their activities; kartṛtvāt — from the sense of being a doer; sa-guṇam — possessing spiritual qualities; brahma — Brahman; puruṣam — the Personality of Godhead; puruṣa-ṛṣabham — the first puruṣa incarnation; saḥ — he; saṁsṛtya — having attained; punaḥ — again; kāle — at the time; kālena — by time; īśvara-mūrtinā — the manifestation of the Lord; jāte guṇa-vyatikare — when the interaction of the modes arises; yathā — as; pūrvam — previously; prajāyate — is born; aiśvaryam — opulence; pārameṣṭhyam — royal; ca — and; te — the sages; api — also; dharma — by their pious activities; vinirmitam — produced; niṣevya — having enjoyed; punaḥ — again; āyānti — they return; guṇa-vyatikare sati — when the interaction of the modes takes place.

Translation
My dear mother, someone may worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead with a special self-interest, but even demigods such as Lord Brahmā, great sages such as Sanat-kumāra and great munis such as Marīci have to come back to the material world again at the time of creation. When the interaction of the three modes of material nature begins, Brahmā, who is the creator of this cosmic manifestation and who is full of Vedic knowledge, and the great sages, who are the authors of the spiritual path and the yoga system, come back under the influence of the time factor. They are liberated by their nonfruitive activities and attain the first incarnation of the puruṣa, but at the time of creation they come back in exactly the same forms and positions they previously had.

Text 16
ये त्विहासक्तमनस: कर्मसु श्रद्धयान्विता: ।
कुर्वन्त्यप्रतिषिद्धानि नित्यान्यपि च कृत्स्‍नश: ॥ १६ ॥
ye tv ihāsakta-manasaḥ
karmasu śraddhayānvitāḥ
kurvanty apratiṣiddhāni
nityāny api ca kṛtsnaśaḥ
Synonyms
ye — those who; tu — but; iha — in this world; āsakta — addicted; manasaḥ — whose minds; karmasu — to fruitive activities; śraddhayā — with faith; anvitāḥ — endowed; kurvanti — perform; apratiṣiddhāni — with attachment to the result; nityāni — prescribed duties; api — certainly; ca — and; kṛtsnaśaḥ — repeatedly.

Translation
Persons who are too addicted to this material world execute their prescribed duties very nicely and with great faith. They daily perform all such prescribed duties with attachment to the fruitive result.

Text 17
रजसा कुण्ठमनस: कामात्मानोऽजितेन्द्रिया: ।
पितृन् यजन्त्यनुदिनं गृहेष्वभिरताशया: ॥ १७ ॥
rajasā kuṇṭha-manasaḥ
kāmātmāno ’jitendriyāḥ
pitṝn yajanty anudinaṁ
gṛheṣv abhiratāśayāḥ
Synonyms
rajasā — by the mode of passion; kuṇṭha — full of anxieties; manasaḥ — their minds; kāma-ātmānaḥ — aspiring for sense gratification; ajita — uncontrolled; indriyāḥ — their senses; pitṝn — the forefathers; yajanti — they worship; anudinam — every day; gṛheṣu — in home life; abhirata — engaged; āśayāḥ — their minds.

Translation
Such persons, impelled by the mode of passion, are full of anxieties and always aspire for sense gratification due to uncontrolled senses. They worship the forefathers and are busy day and night improving the economic condition of their family, social or national life.

Text 18
त्रैवर्गिकास्ते पुरुषा विमुखा हरिमेधस: ।
कथायां कथनीयोरुविक्रमस्य मधुद्विष: ॥ १८ ॥
trai-vargikās te puruṣā
vimukhā hari-medhasaḥ
kathāyāṁ kathanīyoru-
vikramasya madhudviṣaḥ
Synonyms
trai-vargikāḥ — interested in the three elevating processes; te — those; puruṣāḥ — persons; vimukhāḥ — not interested; hari-medhasaḥ — of Lord Hari; kathāyām — in the pastimes; kathanīya — worth chanting of; uru-vikramasya — whose excellent prowess; madhu-dviṣaḥ — the killer of the Madhu demon.

Translation
Such persons are called trai-vargika because they are interested in the three elevating processes. They are averse to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can give relief to the conditioned soul. They are not interested in the Supreme Personality’s pastimes, which are worth hearing because of His transcendental prowess.

Text 19
नूनं दैवेन विहता ये चाच्युतकथासुधाम् ।
हित्वा श‍ृण्वन्त्यसद्गाथा: पुरीषमिव विड्भुज: ॥ १९ ॥
nūnaṁ daivena vihatā
ye cācyuta-kathā-sudhām
hitvā śṛṇvanty asad-gāthāḥ
purīṣam iva viḍ-bhujaḥ
Synonyms
nūnam — certainly; daivena — by the order of the Lord; vihatāḥ — condemned; ye — those who; ca — also; acyuta — of the infallible Lord; kathā — stories; sudhām — nectar; hitvā — having given up; śṛṇvanti — they hear; asat-gāthāḥ — stories about materialistic persons; purīṣam — stool; iva — like; viṭ-bhujaḥ — stool-eaters (hogs).

Translation
Such persons are condemned by the supreme order of the Lord. Because they are averse to the nectar of the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they are compared to stool-eating hogs. They give up hearing the transcendental activities of the Lord and indulge in hearing of the abominable activities of materialistic persons.

Text 20
दक्षिणेन पथार्यम्ण: पितृलोकं व्रजन्ति ते ।
प्रजामनु प्रजायन्ते श्मशानान्तक्रियाकृत: ॥ २० ॥
dakṣiṇena pathāryamṇaḥ
pitṛ-lokaṁ vrajanti te
prajām anu prajāyante
śmaśānānta-kriyā-kṛtaḥ
Synonyms
dakṣiṇena — southern; pathā — by the path; aryamṇaḥ — of the sun; pitṛ-lokam — to Pitṛloka; vrajanti — go; te — they; prajām — their families; anu — along with; prajāyante — they take birth; śmaśāna — the crematorium; anta — to the end; kriyā — fruitive activities; kṛtaḥ — performing.

Translation
Such materialistic persons are allowed to go to the planet called Pitṛloka by the southern course of the sun, but they again come back to this planet and take birth in their own families, beginning again the same fruitive activities from birth to the end of life.

Text 21
ततस्ते क्षीणसुकृता: पुनर्लोकमिमं सति ।
पतन्ति विवशा देवै: सद्यो विभ्रंशितोदया: ॥ २१ ॥
tatas te kṣīṇa-sukṛtāḥ
punar lokam imaṁ sati
patanti vivaśā devaiḥ
sadyo vibhraṁśitodayāḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; te — they; kṣīṇa — exhausted; su-kṛtāḥ — results of their pious activities; punaḥ — again; lokam imam — to this planet; sati — O virtuous mother; patanti — fall; vivaśāḥ — helpless; devaiḥ — by higher arrangement; sadyaḥ — suddenly; vibhraṁśita — caused to fall; udayāḥ — their prosperity.

Translation
When the results of their pious activities are exhausted, they fall down by higher arrangement and again come back to this planet, just as any person raised to a high position sometimes all of a sudden falls.

Text 22
तस्मात्त्वं सर्वभावेन भजस्व परमेष्ठिनम् ।
तद्गुणाश्रयया भक्त्या भजनीयपदाम्बुजम् ॥ २२ ॥
tasmāt tvaṁ sarva-bhāvena
bhajasva parameṣṭhinam
tad-guṇāśrayayā bhaktyā
bhajanīya-padāmbujam
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; tvam — you (Devahūti); sarva-bhāvena — with loving ecstasy; bhajasva — worship; parameṣṭhinam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat-guṇa — the qualities of the Lord; āśrayayā — connected with; bhaktyā — by devotional service; bhajanīya — worshipable; pada-ambujam — whose lotus feet.

Translation
My dear mother, I therefore advise that you take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for His lotus feet are worth worshiping. Accept this with all devotion and love, for thus you can be situated in transcendental devotional service.

Text 23
वासुदेवे भगवति भक्तियोग: प्रयोजित: ।
जनयत्याशु वैराग्यं ज्ञानं यद्ब्रह्मदर्शनम् ॥ २३ ॥
vāsudeve bhagavati
bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ
janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ
jñānaṁ yad brahma-darśanam
Synonyms
vāsudeve — unto Kṛṣṇa; bhagavati — the Personality of Godhead; bhakti-yogaḥ — devotional service; prayojitaḥ — discharged; janayati — produces; āśu — very soon; vairāgyam — detachment; jñānam — knowledge; yat — which; brahma-darśanam — self-realization.

Translation
Engagement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness and application of devotional service unto Kṛṣṇa make it possible to advance in knowledge and detachment, as well as in self-realization.

Text 24
यदास्य चित्तमर्थेषु समेष्विन्द्रियवृत्तिभि: ।
न विगृह्णाति वैषम्यं प्रियमप्रियमित्युत ॥ २४ ॥
yadāsya cittam artheṣu
sameṣv indriya-vṛttibhiḥ
na vigṛhṇāti vaiṣamyaṁ
priyam apriyam ity uta
Synonyms
yadā — when; asya — of the devotee; cittam — the mind; artheṣu — in the sense objects; sameṣu — same; indriya-vṛttibhiḥ — by the activities of the senses; na — not; vigṛhṇāti — does perceive; vaiṣamyam — difference; priyam — agreeable; apriyam — not agreeable; iti — thus; uta — certainly.

Translation
The exalted devotee’s mind becomes equipoised in sensory activities, and he is transcendental to that which is agreeable and not agreeable.

Text 25
स तदैवात्मनात्मानं नि:सङ्गं समदर्शनम् ।
हेयोपादेयरहितमारूढं पदमीक्षते ॥ २५ ॥
sa tadaivātmanātmānaṁ
niḥsaṅgaṁ sama-darśanam
heyopādeya-rahitam
ārūḍhaṁ padam īkṣate
Synonyms
saḥ — the pure devotee; tadā — then; eva — certainly; ātmanā — by his transcendental intelligence; ātmānam — himself; niḥsaṅgam — without material attachment; sama-darśanam — equipoised in vision; heya — to be rejected; upādeya — acceptable; rahitam — devoid of; ārūḍham — elevated; padam — to the transcendental position; īkṣate — he sees.

Translation
Because of his transcendental intelligence, the pure devotee is equipoised in his vision and sees himself to be uncontaminated by matter. He does not see anything as superior or inferior, and he feels himself elevated to the transcendental platform of being equal in qualities with the Supreme Person.

Text 26
ज्ञानमात्रं परं ब्रह्म परमात्मेश्वर: पुमान् ।
द‍ृश्यादिभि: पृथग्भावैर्भगवानेक ईयते ॥ २६ ॥
jñāna-mātraṁ paraṁ brahma
paramātmeśvaraḥ pumān
dṛśy-ādibhiḥ pṛthag bhāvair
bhagavān eka īyate
Synonyms
jñāna — knowledge; mātram — only; param — transcendental; brahma — Brahman; parama-ātmā — Paramātmā; īśvaraḥ — the controller; pumān — Supersoul; dṛśi-ādibhiḥ — by philosophical research and other processes; pṛthak bhāvaiḥ — according to different processes of understanding; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ekaḥ — alone; īyate — is perceived.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead alone is complete transcendental knowledge, but according to the different processes of understanding He appears differently, either as impersonal Brahman, as Paramātmā, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead or as the puruṣa-avatāra.

Text 27
एतावानेव योगेन समग्रेणेह योगिन: ।
युज्यतेऽभिमतो ह्यर्थो यदसङ्गस्तु कृत्स्‍नश: ॥ २७ ॥
etāvān eva yogena
samagreṇeha yoginaḥ
yujyate ’bhimato hy artho
yad asaṅgas tu kṛtsnaśaḥ
Synonyms
etāvān — of such a measure; eva — just; yogena — by yoga practice; samagreṇa — all; iha — in this world; yoginaḥ — of the yogī; yujyate — is achieved; abhimataḥ — desired; hi — certainly; arthaḥ — purpose; yat — which; asaṅgaḥ — detachment; tu — indeed; kṛtsnaśaḥ — completely.

Translation
The greatest common understanding for all yogīs is complete detachment from matter, which can be achieved by different kinds of yoga.

Text 28
ज्ञानमेकं पराचीनैरिन्द्रियैर्ब्रह्म निर्गुणम् ।
अवभात्यर्थरूपेण भ्रान्त्या शब्दादिधर्मिणा ॥ २८ ॥
jñānam ekaṁ parācīnair
indriyair brahma nirguṇam
avabhāty artha-rūpeṇa
bhrāntyā śabdādi-dharmiṇā
Synonyms
jñānam — knowledge; ekam — one; parācīnaiḥ — averse; indriyaiḥ — by the senses; brahma — the Supreme Absolute Truth; nirguṇam — beyond the material modes; avabhāti — appears; artha-rūpeṇa — in the form of various objects; bhrāntyā — mistakenly; śabda-ādi — sound and so on; dharmiṇā — endowed with.

Translation
Those who are averse to the Transcendence realize the Supreme Absolute Truth differently through speculative sense perception, and therefore, because of mistaken speculation, everything appears to them to be relative.

Text 29
यथा महानहंरूपस्त्रिवृत्पञ्चविध: स्वराट् ।
एकादशविधस्तस्य वपुरण्डं जगद्यत: ॥ २९ ॥
yathā mahān ahaṁ-rūpas
tri-vṛt pañca-vidhaḥ svarāṭ
ekādaśa-vidhas tasya
vapur aṇḍaṁ jagad yataḥ
Synonyms
yathā — as; mahān — the mahat-tattva; aham-rūpaḥ — the false ego; tri-vṛt — the three modes of material nature; pañca-vidhaḥ — the five material elements; sva-rāṭ — the individual consciousness; ekādaśa-vidhaḥ — the eleven senses; tasya — of the living entity; vapuḥ — the material body; aṇḍam — the brahmāṇḍa; jagat — the universe; yataḥ — from which or from whom.

Translation
From the total energy, the mahat-tattva, I have manifested the false ego, the three modes of material nature, the five material elements, the individual consciousness, the eleven senses and the material body. Similarly, the entire universe has come from the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 30
एतद्वै श्रद्धया भक्त्या योगाभ्यासेन नित्यश: ।
समाहितात्मा नि:सङ्गो विरक्त्या परिपश्यति ॥ ३० ॥
etad vai śraddhayā bhaktyā
yogābhyāsena nityaśaḥ
samāhitātmā niḥsaṅgo
viraktyā paripaśyati
Synonyms
etat — this; vai — certainly; śraddhayā — with faith; bhaktyā — by devotional service; yoga-abhyāsena — by practice of yoga; nityaśaḥ — always; samāhita-ātmā — he whose mind is fixed; niḥsaṅgaḥ — aloof from material association; viraktyā — by detachment; paripaśyati — understands.

Translation
This perfect knowledge can be achieved by a person who is already engaged in devotional service with faith, steadiness and full detachment, and who is always absorbed in thought of the Supreme. He is aloof from material association.

Text 31
इत्येतत्कथितं गुर्वि ज्ञानं तद्ब्रह्म-दर्शनम् ।
येनानुबुद्ध्यते तत्त्वं प्रकृते: पुरुषस्य च ॥ ३१ ॥
ity etat kathitaṁ gurvi
jñānaṁ tad brahma-darśanam
yenānubuddhyate tattvaṁ
prakṛteḥ puruṣasya ca
Synonyms
iti — thus; etat — this; kathitam — described; gurvi — O respectful mother; jñānam — knowledge; tat — that; brahma — the Absolute Truth; darśanam — revealing; yena — by which; anubuddhyate — is understood; tattvam — the truth; prakṛteḥ — of matter; puruṣasya — of spirit; ca — and.

Translation
My dear respectful mother, I have already described the path of understanding the Absolute Truth, by which one can come to understand the real truth of matter and spirit and their relationship.

Text 32
ज्ञानयोगश्च मन्निष्ठो नैर्गुण्यो भक्तिलक्षण: ।
द्वयोरप्येक एवार्थो भगवच्छब्दलक्षण: ॥ ३२ ॥
jñāna-yogaś ca man-niṣṭho
nairguṇyo bhakti-lakṣaṇaḥ
dvayor apy eka evārtho
bhagavac-chabda-lakṣaṇaḥ
Synonyms
jñāna-yogaḥ — philosophical research; ca — and; mat-niṣṭhaḥ — directed towards Me; nairguṇyaḥ — free from the material modes of nature; bhakti — devotional service; lakṣaṇaḥ — named; dvayoḥ — of both; api — moreover; ekaḥ — one; eva — certainly; arthaḥ — purpose; bhagavat — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śabda — by the word; lakṣaṇaḥ — signified.

Translation
Philosophical research culminates in understanding the Supreme Personality of Godhead. After achieving this understanding, when one becomes free from the material modes of nature, he attains the stage of devotional service. Either by devotional service directly or by philosophical research, one has to find the same destination, which is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 33
यथेन्द्रियै: पृथग्द्वारैरर्थो बहुगुणाश्रय: ।
एको नानेयते तद्वद्भगवान्शास्त्रवर्त्मभि: ॥ ३३ ॥
yathendriyaiḥ pṛthag-dvārair
artho bahu-guṇāśrayaḥ
eko nāneyate tadvad
bhagavān śāstra-vartmabhiḥ
Synonyms
yathā — as; indriyaiḥ — by the senses; pṛthak-dvāraiḥ — in different ways; arthaḥ — an object; bahu-guṇa — many qualities; āśrayaḥ — endowed with; ekaḥ — one; nānā — differently; īyate — is perceived; tadvat — similarly; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śāstra-vartmabhiḥ — according to different scriptural injunctions.

Translation
A single object is appreciated differently by different senses due to its having different qualities. Similarly, the Supreme Personality of Godhead is one, but according to different scriptural injunctions He appears to be different.

Texts 34-36
क्रियया क्रतुभिर्दानैस्तप:स्वाध्यायमर्शनै: ।
आत्मेन्द्रियजयेनापि संन्यासेन च कर्मणाम् ॥ ३४ ॥
योगेन विविधाङ्गेन भक्तियोगेन चैव हि ।
धर्मेणोभयचिह्नेन य: प्रवृत्तिनिवृत्तिमान् ॥ ३५ ॥
आत्मतत्त्वावबोधेन वैराग्येण द‍ृढेन च ।
ईयते भगवानेभि: सगुणो निर्गुण: स्वद‍ृक् ॥ ३६ ॥
kriyayā kratubhir dānais
tapaḥ-svādhyāya-marśanaiḥ
ātmendriya-jayenāpi
sannyāsena ca karmaṇām
yogena vividhāṅgena
bhakti-yogena caiva hi
dharmeṇobhaya-cihnena
yaḥ pravṛtti-nivṛttimān
ātma-tattvāvabodhena
vairāgyeṇa dṛḍhena ca
īyate bhagavān ebhiḥ
saguṇo nirguṇaḥ sva-dṛk
Synonyms
kriyayā — by fruitive activities; kratubhiḥ — by sacrificial performances; dānaiḥ — by charity; tapaḥ — austerities; svādhyāya — study of Vedic literature; marśanaiḥ — and by philosophical research; ātma-indriya-jayena — by controlling the mind and senses; api — also; sannyāsena — by renunciation; ca — and; karmaṇām — of fruitive activities; yogena — by yoga practice; vividha-aṅgena — of different divisions; bhakti-yogena — by devotional service; ca — and; eva — certainly; hi — indeed; dharmeṇa — by prescribed duties; ubhaya-cihnena — having both symptoms; yaḥ — which; pravṛtti — attachment; nivṛtti-mān — containing detachment; ātma-tattva — the science of self-realization; avabodhena — by understanding; vairāgyeṇa — by detachment; dṛḍhena — strong; ca — and; īyate — is perceived; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ebhiḥ — by these; sa-guṇaḥ — in the material world; nirguṇaḥ — beyond the material modes; sva-dṛk — one who sees his constitutional position.

Translation
By performing fruitive activities and sacrifices, by distributing charity, by performing austerities, by studying various literatures, by conducting philosophical research, by controlling the mind, by subduing the senses, by accepting the renounced order of life, by performing the prescribed duties of one’s social order, by performing the different divisions of yoga practice, by performing devotional service, by exhibiting the process of devotional service containing the symptoms of both attachment and detachment, by understanding the science of self-realization, and by developing a strong sense of detachment, one who is expert in understanding the different processes of self-realization realizes the Supreme Personality of Godhead as He is represented in the material world as well as in transcendence.

Text 37
प्रावोचं भक्तियोगस्य स्वरूपं ते चतुर्विधम् ।
कालस्य चाव्यक्तगतेर्योऽन्तर्धावति जन्तुषु ॥ ३७ ॥
prāvocaṁ bhakti-yogasya
svarūpaṁ te catur-vidham
kālasya cāvyakta-gater
yo ’ntardhāvati jantuṣu
Synonyms
prāvocam — explained; bhakti-yogasya — of devotional service; svarūpam — the identity; te — to you; catuḥ-vidham — in four divisions; kālasya — of time; ca — also; avyakta-gateḥ — the movement of which is imperceptible; yaḥ — which; antardhāvati — chases; jantuṣu — the living entities.

Translation
My dear mother, I have explained to you the process of devotional service and its identity in four different social divisions. I have explained to you as well how eternal time is chasing the living entities, although it is imperceptible to them.

Text 38
जीवस्य संसृतीर्बह्वीरविद्याकर्मनिर्मिता: ।
यास्वङ्ग प्रविशन्नात्मा न वेद गतिमात्मन: ॥ ३८ ॥
jīvasya saṁsṛtīr bahvīr
avidyā-karma-nirmitāḥ
yāsv aṅga praviśann ātmā
na veda gatim ātmanaḥ
Synonyms
jīvasya — of the living entity; saṁsṛtīḥ — courses of material existence; bahvīḥ — many; avidyā — in ignorance; karma — by work; nirmitāḥ — produced; yāsu — into which; aṅga — My dear mother; praviśan — entering; ātmā — the living entity; na — not; veda — understands; gatim — the movement; ātmanaḥ — of himself.

Translation
There are varieties of material existence for the living entity according to the work he performs in ignorance or forgetfulness of his real identity. My dear mother, if anyone enters into that forgetfulness, he is unable to understand where his movements will end.

Text 39
नैतत्खलायोपदिशेन्नाविनीताय कर्हिचित् ।
न स्तब्धाय न भिन्नाय नैव धर्मध्वजाय च ॥ ३९ ॥
naitat khalāyopadiśen
nāvinītāya karhicit
na stabdhāya na bhinnāya
naiva dharma-dhvajāya ca
Synonyms
na — not; etat — this instruction; khalāya — to the envious; upadiśet — one should teach; na — not; avinītāya — to the agnostic; karhicit — ever; na — not; stabdhāya — to the proud; na — not; bhinnāya — to the misbehaved; na — not; eva — certainly; dharma-dhvajāya — to the hypocrites; ca — also.

Translation
Lord Kapila continued: This instruction is not meant for the envious, for the agnostics or for persons who are unclean in their behavior. Nor is it for hypocrites or for persons who are proud of material possessions.

Text 40
न लोलुपायोपदिशेन्न गृहारूढचेतसे ।
नाभक्ताय च मे जातु न मद्भक्तद्विषामपि ॥ ४० ॥
na lolupāyopadiśen
na gṛhārūḍha-cetase
nābhaktāya ca me jātu
na mad-bhakta-dviṣām api
Synonyms
na — not; lolupāya — to the greedy; upadiśet — one should instruct; na — not; gṛha-ārūḍha-cetase — to one who is too attached to family life; na — not; abhaktāya — to the nondevotee; ca — and; me — of Me; jātu — ever; na — not; mat — My; bhakta — devotees; dviṣām — to those who are envious of; api — also.

Translation
It is not to be instructed to persons who are too greedy and too attached to family life, nor to persons who are nondevotees and who are envious of the devotees and of the Personality of Godhead.

Text 41
श्रद्दधानाय भक्ताय विनीतायानसूयवे ।
भूतेषु कृतमैत्राय शुश्रूषाभिरताय च ॥ ४१ ॥
śraddadhānāya bhaktāya
vinītāyānasūyave
bhūteṣu kṛta-maitrāya
śuśrūṣābhiratāya ca
Synonyms
śraddadhānāya — faithful; bhaktāya — to the devotee; vinītāya — respectful; anasūyave — nonenvious; bhūteṣu — to all living entities; kṛta-maitrāya — friendly; śuśrūṣā — faithful service; abhiratāya — eager to render; ca — and.

Translation
Instruction should be given to the faithful devotee who is respectful to the spiritual master, nonenvious, friendly to all kinds of living entities and eager to render service with faith and sincerity.

Text 42
बहिर्जातविरागाय शान्तचित्ताय दीयताम् ।
निर्मत्सराय शुचये यस्याहं प्रेयसां प्रिय: ॥ ४२ ॥
bahir-jāta-virāgāya
śānta-cittāya dīyatām
nirmatsarāya śucaye
yasyāhaṁ preyasāṁ priyaḥ
Synonyms
bahiḥ — for what is outside; jāta-virāgāya — to him who has developed detachment; śānta-cittāya — whose mind is peaceful; dīyatām — let this be instructed; nirmatsarāya — nonenvious; śucaye — perfectly cleansed; yasya — of whom; aham — I; preyasām — of all that is very dear; priyaḥ — the most dear.

Translation
This instruction should be imparted by the spiritual master to persons who have taken the Supreme Personality of Godhead to be more dear than anything, who are not envious of anyone, who are perfectly cleansed and who have developed detachment for that which is outside the purview of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Text 43
य इदं श‍ृणुयादम्ब श्रद्धया पुरुष: सकृत् ।
यो वाभिधत्ते मच्चित्त: स ह्येति पदवीं च मे ॥ ४३ ॥
ya idaṁ śṛṇuyād amba
śraddhayā puruṣaḥ sakṛt
yo vābhidhatte mac-cittaḥ
sa hy eti padavīṁ ca me
Synonyms
yaḥ — he who; idam — this; śṛṇuyāt — may hear; amba — O mother; śraddhayā — with faith; puruṣaḥ — a person; sakṛt — once; yaḥ — he who; vā — or; abhidhatte — repeats; mat-cittaḥ — his mind fixed on Me; saḥ — he; hi — certainly; eti — attains; padavīm — abode; ca — and; me — My.

Translation
Anyone who once meditates upon Me with faith and affection, who hears and chants about Me, surely goes back home, back to Godhead.