Text 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
एवं निशम्य कपिलस्य वचो जनित्री
सा कर्दमस्य दयिता किल देवहूति: ।
विस्रस्तमोहपटला तमभिप्रणम्य
तुष्टाव तत्त्वविषयाङ्कितसिद्धिभूमिम् ॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvāca
evaṁ niśamya kapilasya vaco janitrī
sā kardamasya dayitā kila devahūtiḥ
visrasta-moha-paṭalā tam abhipraṇamya
tuṣṭāva tattva-viṣayāṅkita-siddhi-bhūmim
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; evam — thus; niśamya — having heard; kapilasya — of Lord Kapila; vacaḥ — the words; janitrī — the mother; sā — she; kardamasya — of Kardama Muni; dayitā — the dear wife; kila — namely; devahūtiḥ — Devahūti; visrasta — freed from; moha-paṭalā — the covering of illusion; tam — unto Him; abhipraṇamya — having offered obeisances; tuṣṭāva — recited prayers; tattva — basic principles; viṣaya — in the matter of; aṅkita — the author; siddhi — of liberation; bhūmim — the background.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya said: Thus Devahūti, the mother of Lord Kapila and wife of Kardama Muni, became freed from all ignorance concerning devotional service and transcendental knowledge. She offered her obeisances unto the Lord, the author of the basic principles of the Sāṅkhya system of philosophy, which is the background of liberation, and she satisfied Him with the following verses of prayer.

Text 2
देवहूतिरुवाच
अथाप्यजोऽन्त:सलिले शयानं
भूतेन्द्रियार्थात्ममयं वपुस्ते ।
गुणप्रवाहं सदशेषबीजं
दध्यौ स्वयं यज्जठराब्जजात: ॥ २ ॥
devahūtir uvāca
athāpy ajo ’ntaḥ-salile śayānaṁ
bhūtendriyārthātma-mayaṁ vapus te
guṇa-pravāhaṁ sad-aśeṣa-bījaṁ
dadhyau svayaṁ yaj-jaṭharābja-jātaḥ
Synonyms
devahūtiḥ uvāca — Devahūti said; atha api — moreover; ajaḥ — Lord Brahmā; antaḥ-salile — in the water; śayānam — lying; bhūta — the material elements; indriya — the senses; artha — the sense objects; ātma — the mind; mayam — pervaded by; vapuḥ — body; te — Your; guṇa-pravāham — the source of the stream of the three modes of material nature; sat — manifest; aśeṣa — of all; bījam — the seed; dadhyau — meditated upon; svayam — himself; yat — of whom; jaṭhara — from the abdomen; abja — from the lotus flower; jātaḥ — born.

Translation
Devahūti said: Brahmā is said to be unborn because he takes birth from the lotus flower which grows from Your abdomen while You lie in the ocean at the bottom of the universe. But even Brahmā simply meditated upon You, whose body is the source of unlimited universes.

Text 3
स एव विश्वस्य भवान्विधत्ते
गुणप्रवाहेण विभक्तवीर्य: ।
सर्गाद्यनीहोऽवितथाभिसन्धिर्
आत्मेश्वरोऽतर्क्यसहस्रशक्ति: ॥ ३ ॥
sa eva viśvasya bhavān vidhatte
guṇa-pravāheṇa vibhakta-vīryaḥ
sargādy anīho ’vitathābhisandhir
ātmeśvaro ’tarkya-sahasra-śaktiḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — that very person; eva — certainly; viśvasya — of the universe; bhavān — You; vidhatte — carry on; guṇa-pravāheṇa — by the interaction of the modes; vibhakta — divided; vīryaḥ — Your energies; sarga-ādi — the creation and so on; anīhaḥ — the nondoer; avitatha — not futile; abhisandhiḥ — Your determination; ātma-īśvaraḥ — the Lord of all living entities; atarkya — inconceivable; sahasra — thousands; śaktiḥ — possessing energies.

Translation
My dear Lord, although personally You have nothing to do, You have distributed Your energies in the interactions of the material modes of nature, and for that reason the creation, maintenance and dissolution of the cosmic manifestation take place. My dear Lord, You are self-determined and are the Supreme Personality of Godhead for all living entities. For them You created this material manifestation, and although You are one, Your diverse energies can act multifariously. This is inconceivable to us.

Text 4
स त्वं भृतो मे जठरेण नाथ
कथं नु यस्योदर एतदासीत् ।
विश्वं युगान्ते वटपत्र एक:
शेते स्म माया-शिशुरङ्‌घ्रिपान: ॥ ४ ॥
sa tvaṁ bhṛto me jaṭhareṇa nātha
kathaṁ nu yasyodara etad āsīt
viśvaṁ yugānte vaṭa-patra ekaḥ
śete sma māyā-śiśur aṅghri-pānaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — that very person; tvam — You; bhṛtaḥ — took birth; me jaṭhareṇa — by my abdomen; nātha — O my Lord; katham — how; nu — then; yasya — of whom; udare — in the belly; etat — this; āsīt — did rest; viśvam — universe; yuga-ante — at the end of the millennium; vaṭa-patre — on the leaf of a banyan tree; ekaḥ — alone; śete sma — You lay down; māyā — possessing inconceivable powers; śiśuḥ — a baby; aṅghri — Your toe; pānaḥ — licking.

Translation
As the Supreme Personality of Godhead, You have taken birth from my abdomen. O my Lord, how is that possible for the supreme one, who has in His belly all the cosmic manifestation? The answer is that it is possible, for at the end of the millennium You lie down on a leaf of a banyan tree, and just like a small baby, You lick the toe of Your lotus foot.

Text 5
त्वं देहतन्त्र: प्रशमाय पाप्मनां
निदेशभाजां च विभो विभूतये ।
यथावतारास्तव सूकरादयस्
तथायमप्यात्मपथोपलब्धये ॥ ५ ॥
tvaṁ deha-tantraḥ praśamāya pāpmanāṁ
nideśa-bhājāṁ ca vibho vibhūtaye
yathāvatārās tava sūkarādayas
tathāyam apy ātma-pathopalabdhaye
Synonyms
tvam — You; deha — this body; tantraḥ — have assumed; praśamāya — for the diminution; pāpmanām — of sinful activities; nideśa-bhājām — of instructions in devotion; ca — and; vibho — O my Lord; vibhūtaye — for the expansion; yathā — as; avatārāḥ — incarnations; tava — Your; sūkara-ādayaḥ — the boar and other forms; tathā — so; ayam — this incarnation of Kapila; api — surely; ātma-patha — the path of self-realization; upalabdhaye — in order to reveal.

Translation
My dear Lord, You have assumed this body in order to diminish the sinful activities of the fallen and to enrich their knowledge in devotion and liberation. Since these sinful people are dependent on Your direction, by Your own will You assume incarnations as a boar and as other forms. Similarly, You have appeared in order to distribute transcendental knowledge to Your dependents.

Text 6
यन्नामधेयश्रवणानुकीर्तनाद्
यत्प्रह्वणाद्यत्स्मरणादपि क्‍वचित् ।
श्वादोऽपि सद्य: सवनाय कल्पते
कुत: पुनस्ते भगवन्नु दर्शनात् ॥ ६ ॥
yan-nāmadheya-śravaṇānukīrtanād
yat-prahvaṇād yat-smaraṇād api kvacit
śvādo ’pi sadyaḥ savanāya kalpate
kutaḥ punas te bhagavan nu darśanāt
Synonyms
yat — of whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); nāmadheya — the name; śravaṇa — hearing; anukīrtanāt — by chanting; yat — to whom; prahvaṇāt — by offering obeisances; yat — whom; smaraṇāt — by remembering; api — even; kvacit — at any time; śva-adaḥ — a dog-eater; api — even; sadyaḥ — immediately; savanāya — for performing Vedic sacrifices; kalpate — becomes eligible; kutaḥ — what to speak of; punaḥ — again; te — You; bhagavan — O Supreme Personality of Godhead; nu — then; darśanāt — by seeing face to face.

Translation
To say nothing of the spiritual advancement of persons who see the Supreme Person face to face, even a person born in a family of dog-eaters immediately becomes eligible to perform Vedic sacrifices if he once utters the holy name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead or chants about Him, hears about His pastimes, offers Him obeisances or even remembers Him.

Text 7
अहो बत श्वपचोऽतो गरीयान्
यज्जिह्वाग्रे वर्तते नाम तुभ्यम् ।
तेपुस्तपस्ते जुहुवु: सस्‍नुरार्या
ब्रह्मानूचुर्नाम गृणन्ति ये ते ॥ ७ ॥
aho bata śva-paco ’to garīyān
yaj-jihvāgre vartate nāma tubhyam
tepus tapas te juhuvuḥ sasnur āryā
brahmānūcur nāma gṛṇanti ye te
Synonyms
aho bata — oh, how glorious; śva-pacaḥ — a dog-eater; ataḥ — hence; garīyān — worshipable; yat — of whom; jihvā-agre — on the tip of the tongue; vartate — is; nāma — the holy name; tubhyam — unto You; tepuḥ tapaḥ — practiced austerities; te — they; juhuvuḥ — executed fire sacrifices; sasnuḥ — took bath in the sacred rivers; āryāḥ — Āryans; brahma anūcuḥ — studied the Vedas; nāma — the holy name; gṛṇanti — accept; ye — they who; te — Your.

Translation
Oh, how glorious are they whose tongues are chanting Your holy name! Even if born in the families of dog-eaters, such persons are worshipable. Persons who chant the holy name of Your Lordship must have executed all kinds of austerities and fire sacrifices and achieved all the good manners of the Āryans. To be chanting the holy name of Your Lordship, they must have bathed at holy places of pilgrimage, studied the Vedas and fulfilled everything required.

Text 8
तं त्वामहं ब्रह्म परं पुमांसं
प्रत्यक्स्रोतस्यात्मनि संविभाव्यम् ।
स्वतेजसा ध्वस्तगुणप्रवाहं
वन्दे विष्णुं कपिलं वेदगर्भम् ॥ ८ ॥
taṁ tvām ahaṁ brahma paraṁ pumāṁsaṁ
pratyak-srotasy ātmani saṁvibhāvyam
sva-tejasā dhvasta-guṇa-pravāhaṁ
vande viṣṇuṁ kapilaṁ veda-garbham
Synonyms
tam — unto Him; tvām — You; aham — I; brahma — Brahman; param — supreme; pumāṁsam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pratyak-srotasi — turned inwards; ātmani — in the mind; saṁvibhāvyam — meditated upon, perceived; sva-tejasā — by Your own potency; dhvasta — vanished; guṇa-pravāham — the influence of the modes of material nature; vande — I offer obeisances; viṣṇum — unto Lord Viṣṇu; kapilam — named Kapila; veda-garbham — the repository of the Vedas.

Translation
I believe, my Lord, that You are Lord Viṣṇu Himself under the name of Kapila, and You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Supreme Brahman! The saints and sages, being freed from all the disturbances of the senses and mind, meditate upon You, for by Your mercy only can one become free from the clutches of the three modes of material nature. At the time of dissolution, all the Vedas are sustained in You only.

Text 9
मैत्रेय उवाच
ईडितो भगवानेवं कपिलाख्य: पर: पुमान् ।
वाचाविक्लवयेत्याह मातरं मातृवत्सल: ॥ ९ ॥
maitreya uvāca
īḍito bhagavān evaṁ
kapilākhyaḥ paraḥ pumān
vācāviklavayety āha
mātaraṁ mātṛ-vatsalaḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; īḍitaḥ — praised; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; evam — thus; kapila-ākhyaḥ — named Kapila; paraḥ — supreme; pumān — person; vācā — with words; aviklavayā — grave; iti — thus; āha — replied; mātaram — to His mother; mātṛ-vatsalaḥ — very affectionate to His mother.

Translation
Thus the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kapila, satisfied by the words of His mother, towards whom He was very affectionate, replied with gravity.

Text 10
कपिल उवाच
मार्गेणानेन मातस्ते सुसेव्येनोदितेन मे ।
आस्थितेन परां काष्ठामचिरादवरोत्स्यसि ॥ १० ॥
kapila uvāca
mārgeṇānena mātas te
susevyenoditena me
āsthitena parāṁ kāṣṭhām
acirād avarotsyasi
Synonyms
kapilaḥ uvāca — Lord Kapila said; mārgeṇa — by the path; anena — this; mātaḥ — My dear mother; te — for you; su-sevyena — very easy to execute; uditena — instructed; me — by Me; āsthitena — being performed; parām — supreme; kāṣṭhām — goal; acirāt — very soon; avarotsyasi — you will attain.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead said: My dear mother, the path of self-realization which I have already instructed to you is very easy. You can execute this system without difficulty, and by following it you shall very soon be liberated, even within your present body.

Text 11
श्रद्धत्स्वैतन्मतं मह्यं जुष्टं यद्ब्रह्मवादिभि: ।
येन मामभयं याया मृत्युमृच्छन्त्यतद्विद: ॥ ११ ॥
śraddhatsvaitan mataṁ mahyaṁ
juṣṭaṁ yad brahma-vādibhiḥ
yena mām abhayaṁ yāyā
mṛtyum ṛcchanty atad-vidaḥ
Synonyms
śraddhatsva — you may rest assured; etat — about this; matam — instruction; mahyam — My; juṣṭam — followed; yat — which; brahma-vādibhiḥ — by transcendentalists; yena — by which; mām — unto Me; abhayam — without fear; yāyāḥ — you shall reach; mṛtyum — death; ṛcchanti — attain; a-tat-vidaḥ — persons who are not conversant with this.

Translation
My dear mother, those who are actually transcendentalists certainly follow My instructions as I have given them to you. You may rest assured that if you traverse this path of self-realization perfectly, surely you shall be freed from fearful material contamination and shall ultimately reach Me. Mother, persons who are not conversant with this method of devotional service certainly cannot get out of the cycle of birth and death.

Text 12
मैत्रेय उवाच
इति प्रदर्श्य भगवान्सतीं तामात्मनो गतिम् ।
स्वमात्रा ब्रह्मवादिन्या कपिलोऽनुमतो ययौ ॥ १२ ॥
maitreya uvāca
iti pradarśya bhagavān
satīṁ tām ātmano gatim
sva-mātrā brahma-vādinyā
kapilo ’numato yayau
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; iti — thus; pradarśya — after instructing; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; satīm — venerable; tām — that; ātmanaḥ — of self-realization; gatim — path; sva-mātrā — from His mother; brahma-vādinyā — self-realized; kapilaḥ — Lord Kapila; anumataḥ — took permission; yayau — left.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead Kapila, after instructing His beloved mother, took permission from her and left His home, His mission having been fulfilled.

Text 13
सा चापि तनयोक्तेन योगादेशेन योगयुक् ।
तस्मिन्नाश्रम आपीडे सरस्वत्या: समाहिता ॥ १३ ॥
sā cāpi tanayoktena
yogādeśena yoga-yuk
tasminn āśrama āpīḍe
sarasvatyāḥ samāhitā
Synonyms
sā — she; ca — and; api — also; tanaya — by her son; uktena — spoken; yoga-ādeśena — by the instruction on yoga; yoga-yuk — engaged in bhakti-yoga; tasmin — in that; āśrame — hermitage; āpīḍe — the flower crown; sarasvatyāḥ — of the Sarasvatī; samāhitā — fixed in samādhi.

Translation
As instructed by her son, Devahūti also began to practice bhakti-yoga in that very āśrama. She practiced samādhi in the house of Kardama Muni, which was so beautifully decorated with flowers that it was considered the flower crown of the river Sarasvatī.

Text 14
अभीक्ष्णावगाहकपिशान्जटिलान्कुटिलालकान् ।
आत्मानं चोग्रतपसा बिभ्रती चीरिणं कृशम् ॥ १४ ॥
abhīkṣṇāvagāha-kapiśān
jaṭilān kuṭilālakān
ātmānaṁ cogra-tapasā
bibhratī cīriṇaṁ kṛśam
Synonyms
abhīkṣṇa — again and again; avagāha — by bathing; kapiśān — gray; jaṭilān — matted; kuṭila — curled; alakān — hair; ātmānam — her body; ca — and; ugra-tapasā — by severe austerities; bibhratī — became; cīriṇam — clothed in rags; kṛśam — thin.

Translation
She began to bathe three times daily, and thus her curling black hair gradually became gray. Due to austerity, her body gradually became thin, and she wore old garments.

Text 15
प्रजापते: कर्दमस्य तपोयोगविजृम्भितम् ।
स्वगार्हस्थ्यमनौपम्यं प्रार्थ्यं वैमानिकैरपि ॥ १५ ॥
prajāpateḥ kardamasya
tapo-yoga-vijṛmbhitam
sva-gārhasthyam anaupamyaṁ
prārthyaṁ vaimānikair api
Synonyms
prajā-pateḥ — of the progenitor of mankind; kardamasya — Kardama Muni; tapaḥ — by austerity; yoga — by yoga; vijṛmbhitam — developed; sva-gārhasthyam — his home and household paraphernalia; anaupamyam — unequaled; prārthyam — enviable; vaimānikaiḥ — by the denizens of heaven; api — even.

Translation
The home and household paraphernalia of Kardama, who was one of the Prajāpatis, was developed in such a way, by dint of his mystic powers of austerity and yoga, that his opulence was sometimes envied by those who travel in outer space in airplanes.

Text 16
पय:फेननिभा: शय्या दान्ता रुक्‍मपरिच्छदा: ।
आसनानि च हैमानि सुस्पर्शास्तरणानि च ॥ १६ ॥
payaḥ-phena-nibhāḥ śayyā
dāntā rukma-paricchadāḥ
āsanāni ca haimāni
susparśāstaraṇāni ca
Synonyms
payaḥ — of milk; phena — the foam; nibhāḥ — resembling; śayyāḥ — beds; dāntāḥ — made of ivory; rukma — golden; paricchadāḥ — with covers; āsanāni — chairs and benches; ca — and; haimāni — made of gold; su-sparśa — soft to the touch; āstaraṇāni — cushions; ca — and.

Translation
The opulence of the household of Kardama Muni is described herein. The bedsheets and mattresses were all as white as the foam of milk, the chairs and benches were made of ivory and were covered by cloths of lace with golden filigree, and the couches were made of gold and had very soft pillows.

Text 17
स्वच्छस्फटिककुड्येषु महामारकतेषु च ।
रत्नप्रदीपा आभान्ति ललना रत्नसंयुता: ॥ १७ ॥
svaccha-sphaṭika-kuḍyeṣu
mahā-mārakateṣu ca
ratna-pradīpā ābhānti
lalanā ratna-saṁyutāḥ
Synonyms
svaccha — pure; sphaṭika — marble; kuḍyeṣu — on the walls; mahā-mārakateṣu — decorated with valuable emeralds; ca — and; ratna-pradīpāḥ — jewel lamps; ābhānti — shine; lalanāḥ — women; ratna — with jewelry; saṁyutāḥ — decorated.

Translation
The walls of the house were made of first-class marble, decorated with valuable jewels. There was no need of light, for the household was illuminated by the rays of these jewels. The female members of the household were all amply decorated with jewelry.

Text 18
गृहोद्यानं कुसुमितै रम्यं बह्वमरद्रुमै: ।
कूजद्विहङ्गमिथुनं गायन्मत्तमधुव्रतम् ॥ १८ ॥
gṛhodyānaṁ kusumitai
ramyaṁ bahv-amara-drumaiḥ
kūjad-vihaṅga-mithunaṁ
gāyan-matta-madhuvratam
Synonyms
gṛha-udyānam — the household garden; kusumitaiḥ — with flowers and fruits; ramyam — beautiful; bahu-amara-drumaiḥ — with many celestial trees; kūjat — singing; vihaṅga — of birds; mithunam — with pairs; gāyat — humming; matta — intoxicated; madhu-vratam — with bees.

Translation
The compound of the main household was surrounded by beautiful gardens with sweet, fragrant flowers and many trees which produced fresh fruit and were tall and beautiful. The attraction of such gardens was that singing birds would sit on the trees, and their chanting voices, as well as the humming sound of the bees, made the whole atmosphere as pleasing as possible.

Text 19
यत्र प्रविष्टमात्मानं विबुधानुचरा जगु: ।
वाप्यामुत्पलगन्धिन्यां
कर्दमेनोपलालितम् ॥ १९ ॥
yatra praviṣṭam ātmānaṁ
vibudhānucarā jaguḥ
vāpyām utpala-gandhinyāṁ
kardamenopalālitam
Synonyms
yatra — where; praviṣṭam — entered; ātmānam — unto her; vibudha-anucarāḥ — the associates of the denizens of heaven; jaguḥ — sang; vāpyām — in the pond; utpala — of lotuses; gandhinyām — with the fragrance; kardamena — by Kardama; upalālitam — treated with great care.

Translation
When Devahūti would enter that lovely garden to take her bath in the pond filled with lotus flowers, the associates of the denizens of heaven, the Gandharvas, would sing about Kardama’s glorious household life. Her great husband, Kardama, gave her all protection at all times.

Text 20
हित्वा तदीप्सिततममप्याखण्डलयोषिताम् ।
किञ्चिच्चकार वदनं पुत्रविश्लेषणातुरा ॥ २० ॥
hitvā tad īpsitatamam
apy ākhaṇḍala-yoṣitām
kiñcic cakāra vadanaṁ
putra-viśleṣaṇāturā
Synonyms
hitvā — having given up; tat — that household; īpsita-tamam — most desirable; api — even; ākhaṇḍala-yoṣitām — by the wives of Lord Indra; kiñcit cakāra vadanam — she wore a sorry look on her face; putra-viśleṣaṇa — by separation from her son; āturā — afflicted.

Translation
Although her position was unique from all points of view, saintly Devahūti, in spite of all her possessions, which were envied even by the ladies of the heavenly planets, gave up all such comforts. She was only sorry that her great son was separated from her.

Text 21
वनं प्रव्रजिते पत्यावपत्यविरहातुरा ।
ज्ञाततत्त्वाप्यभून्नष्टे वत्से गौरिव वत्सला ॥ २१ ॥
vanaṁ pravrajite patyāv
apatya-virahāturā
jñāta-tattvāpy abhūn naṣṭe
vatse gaur iva vatsalā
Synonyms
vanam — to the forest; pravrajite patyau — when her husband left home; apatya-viraha — by separation from her son; āturā — very sorry; jñāta-tattvā — knowing the truth; api — although; abhūt — she became; naṣṭe vatse — when her calf is lost; gauḥ — a cow; iva — like; vatsalā — affectionate.

Translation
Devahūti’s husband had already left home and accepted the renounced order of life, and then her only son, Kapila, left home. Although she knew all the truths of life and death, and although her heart was cleansed of all dirt, she was very aggrieved at the loss of her son, just as a cow is affected when her calf dies.

Text 22
तमेव ध्यायती देवमपत्यं कपिलं हरिम् ।
बभूवाचिरतो वत्स नि:स्पृहा ताद‍ृशे गृहे ॥ २२ ॥
tam eva dhyāyatī devam
apatyaṁ kapilaṁ harim
babhūvācirato vatsa
niḥspṛhā tādṛśe gṛhe
Synonyms
tam — upon Him; eva — certainly; dhyāyatī — meditating; devam — divine; apatyam — son; kapilam — Lord Kapila; harim — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; babhūva — became; acirataḥ — very soon; vatsa — O dear Vidura; niḥspṛhā — unattached; tādṛśe gṛhe — to such a home.

Translation
O Vidura, thus always meditating upon her son, the Supreme Personality of Godhead Kapiladeva, she very soon became unattached to her nicely decorated home.

Text 23
ध्यायती भगवद्रूपं यदाह ध्यानगोचरम् ।
सुत: प्रसन्नवदनं समस्तव्यस्तचिन्तया ॥ २३ ॥
dhyāyatī bhagavad-rūpaṁ
yad āha dhyāna-gocaram
sutaḥ prasanna-vadanaṁ
samasta-vyasta-cintayā
Synonyms
dhyāyatī — meditating; bhagavat-rūpam — upon the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yat — which; āha — He instructed; dhyāna-gocaram — the object of meditation; sutaḥ — her son; prasanna-vadanam — with a smiling face; samasta — on the whole; vyasta — on the parts; cintayā — with her mind.

Translation
Thereafter, having heard with great eagerness and in all detail from her son, Kapiladeva, the eternally smiling Personality of Godhead, Devahūti began to meditate constantly upon the Viṣṇu form of the Supreme Lord.

Texts 24-25
भक्तिप्रवाहयोगेन वैराग्येण बलीयसा ।
युक्तानुष्ठानजातेन ज्ञानेन ब्रह्महेतुना ॥ २४ ॥
विशुद्धेन तदात्मानमात्मना विश्वतोमुखम् ।
स्वानुभूत्या तिरोभूतमायागुणविशेषणम् ॥ २५ ॥
bhakti-pravāha-yogena
vairāgyeṇa balīyasā
yuktānuṣṭhāna-jātena
jñānena brahma-hetunā
viśuddhena tadātmānam
ātmanā viśvato-mukham
svānubhūtyā tirobhūta-
māyā-guṇa-viśeṣaṇam
Synonyms
bhakti-pravāha-yogena — by continuous engagement in devotional service; vairāgyeṇa — by renunciation; balīyasā — very strong; yukta-anuṣṭhāna — by proper performance of duties; jātena — produced; jñānena — by knowledge; brahma-hetunā — due to realization of the Absolute Truth; viśuddhena — by purification; tadā — then; ātmānam — Supreme Personality of Godhead; ātmanā — with the mind; viśvataḥ-mukham — whose face is turned everywhere; sva-anubhūtyā — by self-realization; tiraḥ-bhūta — disappeared; māyā-guṇa — of the modes of material nature; viśeṣaṇam — distinctions.

Translation
She did so with serious engagement in devotional service. Because she was strong in renunciation, she accepted only the necessities of the body. She became situated in knowledge due to realization of the Absolute Truth, her heart became purified, she became fully absorbed in meditation upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and all misgivings due to the modes of material nature disappeared.

Text 26
ब्रह्मण्यवस्थितमतिर्भगवत्यात्मसंश्रये ।
निवृत्तजीवापत्तित्वात्क्षीणक्लेशाप्तनिर्वृति: ॥ २६ ॥
brahmaṇy avasthita-matir
bhagavaty ātma-saṁśraye
nivṛtta-jīvāpattitvāt
kṣīṇa-kleśāpta-nirvṛtiḥ
Synonyms
brahmaṇi — in Brahman; avasthita — situated; matiḥ — her mind; bhagavati — in the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ātma-saṁśraye — residing in all living entities; nivṛtta — freed; jīva — of the jīva soul; āpattitvāt — from the unfortunate condition; kṣīṇa — disappeared; kleśa — material pangs; āpta — attained; nirvṛtiḥ — transcendental bliss.

Translation
Her mind became completely engaged in the Supreme Lord, and she automatically realized the knowledge of the impersonal Brahman. As a Brahman-realized soul, she was freed from the designations of the materialistic concept of life. Thus all material pangs disappeared, and she attained transcendental bliss.

Text 27
नित्यारूढसमाधित्वात्परावृत्तगुणभ्रमा ।
न सस्मार तदात्मानं स्वप्ने द‍ृष्टमिवोत्थित: ॥ २७ ॥
nityārūḍha-samādhitvāt
parāvṛtta-guṇa-bhramā
na sasmāra tadātmānaṁ
svapne dṛṣṭam ivotthitaḥ
Synonyms
nitya — eternal; ārūḍha — situated in; samādhitvāt — from trance; parāvṛtta — freed from; guṇa — of the modes of material nature; bhramā — illusion; na sasmāra — she did not remember; tadā — then; ātmānam — her material body; svapne — in a dream; dṛṣṭam — seen; iva — just as; utthitaḥ — one who has arisen.

Translation
Situated in eternal trance and freed from illusion impelled by the modes of material nature, she forgot her material body, just as one forgets his different bodies in a dream.

Text 28
तद्देह: परत: पोषोऽप्यकृशश्चाध्यसम्भवात् ।
बभौ मलैरवच्छन्न: सधूम इव पावक: ॥ २८ ॥
tad-dehaḥ parataḥ poṣo
’py akṛśaś cādhy-asambhavāt
babhau malair avacchannaḥ
sadhūma iva pāvakaḥ
Synonyms
tat-dehaḥ — her body; parataḥ — by others (the damsels created by Kardama); poṣaḥ — maintained; api — although; akṛśaḥ — not thin; ca — and; ādhi — anxiety; asambhavāt — from not occurring; babhau — shone; malaiḥ — by dust; avacchannaḥ — covered; sa-dhūmaḥ — surrounded with smoke; iva — like; pāvakaḥ — a fire.

Translation
Her body was being taken care of by the spiritual damsels created by her husband, Kardama, and since she had no mental anxiety at that time, her body did not become thin. She appeared just like a fire surrounded by smoke.

Text 29
स्वाङ्गं तपोयोगमयं मुक्तकेशं गताम्बरम् ।
दैवगुप्तं न बुबुधे वासुदेवप्रविष्टधी: ॥ २९ ॥
svāṅgaṁ tapo-yogamayaṁ
mukta-keśaṁ gatāmbaram
daiva-guptaṁ na bubudhe
vāsudeva-praviṣṭa-dhīḥ
Synonyms
sva-aṅgam — her body; tapaḥ — austerity; yoga — yoga practice; mayam — fully engaged in; mukta — loosened; keśam — her hair; gata — disarrayed; ambaram — her garments; daiva — by the Lord; guptam — protected; na — not; bubudhe — she was aware of; vāsudeva — in the Supreme Personality of Godhead; praviṣṭa — absorbed; dhīḥ — her thoughts.

Translation
Because she was always absorbed in the thought of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, she was not aware that sometimes her hair was loosened or her garments were disarrayed.

Text 30
एवं सा कपिलोक्तेन मार्गेणाचिरत: परम् ।
आत्मानं ब्रह्मनिर्वाणं भगवन्तमवाप ह ॥ ३० ॥
evaṁ sā kapiloktena
mārgeṇācirataḥ param
ātmānaṁ brahma-nirvāṇaṁ
bhagavantam avāpa ha
Synonyms
evam — thus; sā — she (Devahūti); kapila — by Kapila; uktena — instructed; mārgeṇa — by the path; acirataḥ — soon; param — supreme; ātmānam — Supersoul; brahma — Brahman; nirvāṇam — cessation of materialistic existence; bhagavantam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; avāpa — she achieved; ha — certainly.

Translation
My dear Vidura, by following the principles instructed by Kapila, Devahūti soon became liberated from material bondage and achieved the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as Supersoul, without difficulty.

Text 31
तद्वीरासीत्पुण्यतमं क्षेत्रं त्रैलोक्यविश्रुतम् ।
नाम्ना सिद्धपदं यत्र सा संसिद्धिमुपेयुषी ॥ ३१ ॥
tad vīrāsīt puṇyatamaṁ
kṣetraṁ trailokya-viśrutam
nāmnā siddha-padaṁ yatra
sā saṁsiddhim upeyuṣī
Synonyms
tat — that; vīra — O brave Vidura; āsīt — was; puṇya-tamam — most sacred; kṣetram — place; trai-lokya — in the three worlds; viśrutam — known; nāmnā — by the name; siddha-padam — Siddhapada; yatra — where; sā — she (Devahūti); saṁsiddhim — perfection; upeyuṣī — achieved.

Translation
The place where Devahūti achieved her perfection, my dear Vidura, is understood to be a most sacred spot. It is known all over the three worlds as Siddhapada.

Text 32
तस्यास्तद्योगविधुतमार्त्यं मर्त्यमभूत्सरित् ।
स्रोतसां प्रवरा सौम्य सिद्धिदा सिद्धसेविता ॥ ३२ ॥
tasyās tad yoga-vidhuta-
mārtyaṁ martyam abhūt sarit
srotasāṁ pravarā saumya
siddhidā siddha-sevitā
Synonyms
tasyāḥ — of Devahūti; tat — that; yoga — by yoga practice; vidhuta — relinquished; mārtyam — material elements; martyam — her mortal body; abhūt — became; sarit — a river; srotasām — of all rivers; pravarā — the foremost; saumya — O gentle Vidura; siddhi-dā — conferring perfection; siddha — by persons desiring perfection; sevitā — resorted to.

Translation
Dear Vidura, the material elements of her body have melted into water and are now a flowing river, which is the most sacred of all rivers. Anyone who bathes in that river also attains perfection, and therefore all persons who desire perfection go bathe there.

Text 33
कपिलोऽपि महायोगी भगवान्पितुराश्रमात् ।
मातरं समनुज्ञाप्य प्रागुदीचीं दिशं ययौ ॥ ३३ ॥
kapilo ’pi mahā-yogī
bhagavān pitur āśramāt
mātaraṁ samanujñāpya
prāg-udīcīṁ diśaṁ yayau
Synonyms
kapilaḥ — Lord Kapila; api — surely; mahā-yogī — the great sage; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pituḥ — of His father; āśramāt — from the hermitage; mātaram — from His mother; samanujñāpya — having asked permission; prāk-udīcīm — northeast; diśam — direction; yayau — He went.

Translation
My dear Vidura, the great sage Kapila, the Personality of Godhead, left His father’s hermitage with the permission of His mother and went towards the northeast.

Text 34
सिद्धचारणगन्धर्वैर्मुनिभिश्चाप्सरोगणै: ।
स्तूयमान: समुद्रेण दत्तार्हणनिकेतन: ॥ ३४ ॥
siddha-cāraṇa-gandharvair
munibhiś cāpsaro-gaṇaiḥ
stūyamānaḥ samudreṇa
dattārhaṇa-niketanaḥ
Synonyms
siddha — by the Siddhas; cāraṇa — by the Cāraṇas; gandharvaiḥ — by the Gandharvas; munibhiḥ — by the munis; ca — and; apsaraḥ-gaṇaiḥ — by the Apsarās (damsels of the heavenly planets); stūyamānaḥ — being extolled; samudreṇa — by the ocean; datta — given; arhaṇa — oblations; niketanaḥ — place of residence.

Translation
While He was passing in the northern direction, all the celestial denizens known as Cāraṇas and Gandharvas, as well as the munis and the damsels of the heavenly planets, prayed and offered Him all respects. The ocean offered Him oblations and a place of residence.

Text 35
आस्ते योगं समास्थाय साङ्ख्याचार्यैरभिष्टुत: ।
त्रयाणामपि लोकानामुपशान्त्यै समाहित: ॥ ३५ ॥
āste yogaṁ samāsthāya
sāṅkhyācāryair abhiṣṭutaḥ
trayāṇām api lokānām
upaśāntyai samāhitaḥ
Synonyms
āste — He remains; yogam — yoga; samāsthāya — having practiced; sāṅkhya — of the Sāṅkhya philosophy; ācāryaiḥ — by the great teachers; abhiṣṭutaḥ — worshiped; trayāṇām — three; api — certainly; lokānām — of the worlds; upaśāntyai — for the deliverance; samāhitaḥ — fixed in trance.

Translation
Even now Kapila Muni is staying there in trance for the deliverance of the conditioned souls in the three worlds, and all the ācāryas, or great teachers, of the system of Sāṅkhya philosophy are worshiping Him.

Text 36
एतन्निगदितं तात यत्पृष्टोऽहं तवानघ ।
कपिलस्य च संवादो देवहूत्याश्च पावन: ॥ ३६ ॥
etan nigaditaṁ tāta
yat pṛṣṭo ’haṁ tavānagha
kapilasya ca saṁvādo
devahūtyāś ca pāvanaḥ
Synonyms
etat — this; nigaditam — spoken; tāta — O dear Vidura; yat — which; pṛṣṭaḥ — was asked; aham — I; tava — by you; anagha — O sinless Vidura; kapilasya — of Kapila; ca — and; saṁvādaḥ — conversation; devahūtyāḥ — of Devahūti; ca — and; pāvanaḥ — pure.

Translation
My dear son, since you have inquired from me, I have answered. O sinless one, the descriptions of Kapiladeva and His mother and their activities are the purest of all pure discourses.

Text 37
य इदमनुश‍ृणोति योऽभिधत्ते
कपिलमुनेर्मतमात्मयोगगुह्यम् ।
भगवति कृतधी: सुपर्णकेताव्
उपलभते भगवत्पदारविन्दम् ॥ ३७ ॥
एष साक्षाद्धरेरंशो जातो लोकरिरक्षया ।
इयं च तत्परा हि श्रीरनुजज्ञेऽनपायिनी ॥ ६ ॥
ya idam anuśṛṇoti yo ’bhidhatte
kapila-muner matam ātma-yoga-guhyam
bhagavati kṛta-dhīḥ suparṇa-ketāv
upalabhate bhagavat-padāravindam
Synonyms
yaḥ — whoever; idam — this; anuśṛṇoti — hears; yaḥ — whoever; abhidhatte — expounds; kapila-muneḥ — of the sage Kapila; matam — instructions; ātma-yoga — based on meditation on the Lord; guhyam — confidential; bhagavati — on the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kṛta-dhīḥ — having fixed his mind; suparṇa-ketau — who has a banner of Garuḍa; upalabhate — achieves; bhagavat — of the Supreme Lord; pada-aravindam — the lotus feet.

Translation
The description of the dealings of Kapiladeva and His mother is very confidential, and anyone who hears or reads this narration becomes a devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is carried by Garuḍa, and he thereafter enters into the abode of the Supreme Lord to engage in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.