Text 1
ऋषिरुवाच
इति तासां स्वशक्तीनां सतीनामसमेत्य स: ।
प्रसुप्तलोकतन्त्राणां निशाम्य गतिमीश्वर: ॥ १ ॥
ṛṣir uvāca
iti tāsāṁ sva-śaktīnāṁ
satīnām asametya saḥ
prasupta-loka-tantrāṇāṁ
niśāmya gatim īśvaraḥ
Synonyms
ṛṣiḥ uvāca — the Ṛṣi Maitreya said; iti — thus; tāsām — their; sva-śaktīnām — own potency; satīnām — so situated; asametya — without combination; saḥ — He (the Lord); prasupta — suspended; loka-tantrāṇām — in the universal creations; niśāmya — hearing; gatim — progress; īśvaraḥ — the Lord.

Translation
The Ṛṣi Maitreya said: The Lord thus heard about the suspension of the progressive creative functions of the universe due to the noncombination of His potencies, such as the mahat-tattva.

Text 2
कालसंज्ञां तदा देवीं बिभ्रच्छक्तिमुरुक्रम: ।
त्रयोविंशतितत्त्वानां गणं युगपदाविशत् ॥ २ ॥
kāla-sañjñāṁ tadā devīṁ
bibhrac-chaktim urukramaḥ
trayoviṁśati tattvānāṁ
gaṇaṁ yugapad āviśat
Synonyms
kāla-sañjñām — known as Kālī; tadā — at that time; devīm — the goddess; bibhrat — destructive; śaktim — potency; urukramaḥ — the supreme powerful; trayaḥ-viṁśati — twenty-three; tattvānām — of the elements; gaṇam — all of them; yugapat — simultaneously; āviśat — entered.

Translation
The Supreme Powerful Lord then simultaneously entered into the twenty-three elements with the goddess Kālī, His external energy, who alone amalgamates all the different elements.

Text 3
सोऽनुप्रविष्टो भगवांश्चेष्टारूपेण तं गणम् ।
भिन्नं संयोजयमास सुप्तं कर्म प्रबोधयन् ॥ ३ ॥
so ’nupraviṣṭo bhagavāṁś
ceṣṭārūpeṇa taṁ gaṇam
bhinnaṁ saṁyojayām āsa
suptaṁ karma prabodhayan
Synonyms
saḥ — that; anupraviṣṭaḥ — thus entering later on; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; ceṣṭā-rūpeṇa — by His representation of attempt, Kālī; tam — them; gaṇam — all the living entities, including the demigods; bhinnam — separately; saṁyojayām āsa — engaged to work; suptam — sleeping; karma — work; prabodhayan — enlightening.

Translation
Thus when the Personality of Godhead entered into the elements by His energy, all the living entities were enlivened into different activities, just as one is engaged in his work after awakening from sleep.

Text 4
प्रबुद्धकर्मा दैवेन त्रयोविंशतिको गण: ।
प्रेरितोऽजनयत्स्वाभिर्मात्राभिरधिपूरुषम् ॥ ४ ॥
prabuddha-karmā daivena
trayoviṁśatiko gaṇaḥ
prerito ’janayat svābhir
mātrābhir adhipūruṣam
Synonyms
prabuddha — awakened; karmā — activities; daivena — by the will of the Supreme; trayaḥ-viṁśatikaḥ — by the twenty-three principal ingredients; gaṇaḥ — the combination; preritaḥ — induced by; ajanayat — manifested; svābhiḥ — by His personal; mātrābhiḥ — plenary expansion; adhipūruṣam — the gigantic universal form (viśva-rūpa).

Translation
When the twenty-three principal elements were set in action by the will of the Supreme, the gigantic universal form, or the viśvarūpa body of the Lord, came into existence.

Text 5
परेण विशता स्वस्मिन्मात्रया विश्वसृग्गण: ।
चुक्षोभान्योन्यमासाद्य यस्मिन्लोकाश्चराचरा: ॥ ५ ॥
pareṇa viśatā svasmin
mātrayā viśva-sṛg-gaṇaḥ
cukṣobhānyonyam āsādya
yasmin lokāś carācarāḥ
Synonyms
pareṇa — by the Lord; viśatā — thus entering; svasmin — by His own self; mātrayā — by a plenary portion; viśva-sṛk — the elements of universal creation; gaṇaḥ — all; cukṣobha — transformed; anyonyam — one another; āsādya — having obtained; yasmin — in which; lokāḥ — the planets; cara-acarāḥ — movable and immovable.

Translation
As the Lord, in His plenary portion, entered into the elements of the universal creation, they transformed into the gigantic form in which all the planetary systems and all movable and immovable creations rest.

Text 6
हिरण्मय: स पुरुष: सहस्रपरिवत्सरान् ।
आण्डकोश उवासाप्सु सर्वसत्त्वोपबृंहित: ॥ ६ ॥
hiraṇmayaḥ sa puruṣaḥ
sahasra-parivatsarān
āṇḍa-kośa uvāsāpsu
sarva-sattvopabṛṁhitaḥ
Synonyms
hiraṇmayaḥ — the Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, who also assumes the virāṭ-rūpa; saḥ — He; puruṣaḥ — incarnation of Godhead; sahasra — one thousand; parivatsarān — celestial years; āṇḍa-kośe — within the global universe; uvāsa — resided; apsu — on the water; sarva-sattva — all living entities lying with Him; upabṛṁhitaḥ — so spread.

Translation
The gigantic virāṭ-puruṣa, known as Hiraṇmaya, lived for one thousand celestial years on the water of the universe, and all the living entities lay with Him.

Text 7
स वै विश्वसृजां गर्भो देवकर्मात्मशक्तिमान् ।
विबभाजात्मनात्मानमेकधा दशधा त्रिधा ॥ ७ ॥
sa vai viśva-sṛjāṁ garbho
deva-karmātma-śaktimān
vibabhājātmanātmānam
ekadhā daśadhā tridhā
Synonyms
saḥ — that; vai — certainly; viśva-sṛjām — of the gigantic virāṭ form; garbhaḥ — total energy; deva — living energy; karma — activity of life; ātma — self; śaktimān — full with potencies; vibabhāja — divided; ātmanā — by Himself; ātmānam — Himself; ekadhā — in oneness; daśadhā — in ten; tridhā — and in three.

Translation
The total energy of the mahat-tattva, in the form of the gigantic virāṭ-rūpa, divided Himself by Himself into the consciousness of the living entities, the life of activity, and self-identification, which are subdivided into one, ten and three respectively.

Text 8
एष ह्यशेषसत्त्वानामात्मांश: परमात्मन: ।
आद्योऽवतारो यत्रासौ भूतग्रामो विभाव्यते ॥ ८ ॥
eṣa hy aśeṣa-sattvānām
ātmāṁśaḥ paramātmanaḥ
ādyo ’vatāro yatrāsau
bhūta-grāmo vibhāvyate
Synonyms
eṣaḥ — this; hi — certainly; aśeṣa — unlimited; sattvānām — living entities; ātmā — Self; aṁśaḥ — part; parama-ātmanaḥ — of the Supersoul; ādyaḥ — the first; avatāraḥ — incarnation; yatra — whereupon; asau — all those; bhūta-grāmaḥ — the aggregate creations; vibhāvyate — flourish.

Translation
The gigantic universal form of the Supreme Lord is the first incarnation and plenary portion of the Supersoul. He is the Self of an unlimited number of living entities, and in Him rests the aggregate creation, which thus flourishes.

Text 9
साध्यात्म: साधिदैवश्च साधिभूत इति त्रिधा ।
विराट् प्राणो दशविध एकधा हृदयेन च ॥ ९ ॥
sādhyātmaḥ sādhidaivaś ca
sādhibhūta iti tridhā
virāṭ prāṇo daśa-vidha
ekadhā hṛdayena ca
Synonyms
sa-ādhyātmaḥ — the body and mind with all the senses; sa-ādhidaivaḥ — and the controlling demigods of the senses; ca — and; sa-ādhibhūtaḥ — the present objectives; iti — thus; tridhā — three; virāṭ — gigantic; prāṇaḥ — moving force; daśa-vidhaḥ — ten kinds; ekadhā — one only; hṛdayena — living energy; ca — also.

Translation
The gigantic universal form is represented by three, ten and one in the sense that He is the body and the mind and the senses, He is the dynamic force for all movements by ten kinds of life energy, and He is the one heart where life energy is generated.

Text 10
स्मरन् विश्वसृजामीशो विज्ञापितमधोक्षज: ।
विराजमतपत्स्वेन तेजसैषां विवृत्तये ॥ १० ॥
smaran viśva-sṛjām īśo
vijñāpitam adhokṣajaḥ
virājam atapat svena
tejasaiṣāṁ vivṛttaye
Synonyms
smaran — remembering; viśva-sṛjām — of the demigods entrusted with the task of cosmic construction; īśaḥ — the Supreme Lord; vijñāpitam — as He was prayed for; adhokṣajaḥ — the Transcendence; virājam — the gigantic universal form; atapat — considered thus; svena — by His own; tejasā — energy; eṣām — for them; vivṛttaye — for understanding.

Translation
The Supreme Lord is the Supersoul of all the demigods entrusted with the task of constructing the cosmic manifestation. Being thus prayed to [by the demigods], He thought to Himself and thus manifested the gigantic form for their understanding.

Text 11
अथ तस्याभितप्तस्य कतिधायतनानि ह ।
निरभिद्यन्त देवानां तानि मे गदत: श‍ृणु ॥ ११ ॥
atha tasyābhitaptasya
katidhāyatanāni ha
nirabhidyanta devānāṁ
tāni me gadataḥ śṛṇu
Synonyms
atha — therefore; tasya — His; abhitaptasya — in terms of His contemplation; katidhā — how many; āyatanāni — embodiments; ha — there were; nirabhidyanta — by separated parts; devānām — of the demigods; tāni — all those; me gadataḥ — described by me; śṛṇu — just hear.

Translation
Maitreya said: You may now hear from me how the Supreme Lord separated Himself into the diverse forms of the demigods after the manifestation of the gigantic universal form.

Text 12
तस्याग्निरास्यं निर्भिन्नं लोकपालोऽविशत्पदम् ।
वाचा स्वांशेन वक्तव्यं ययासौ प्रतिपद्यते ॥ १२ ॥
tasyāgnir āsyaṁ nirbhinnaṁ
loka-pālo ’viśat padam
vācā svāṁśena vaktavyaṁ
yayāsau pratipadyate
Synonyms
tasya — His; agniḥ — fire; āsyam — mouth; nirbhinnam — thus separated; loka-pālaḥ — the directors of material affairs; aviśat — entered; padam — respective positions; vācā — by words; sva-aṁśena — by one’s own part; vaktavyam — speeches; yayā — by which; asau — they; pratipadyate — express.

Translation
Agni, or heat, separated from His mouth, and all the directors of material affairs entered into it in their respective positions. By that energy the living entity expresses himself in words.

Text 13
निर्भिन्नं तालु वरुणो लोकपालोऽविशद्धरे: ।
जिह्वयांशेन च रसं ययासौ प्रतिपद्यते ॥ १३ ॥
nirbhinnaṁ tālu varuṇo
loka-pālo ’viśad dhareḥ
jihvayāṁśena ca rasaṁ
yayāsau pratipadyate
Synonyms
nirbhinnam — separated; tālu — palate; varuṇaḥ — the deity controlling water; loka-pālaḥ — director of the planets; aviśat — entered; hareḥ — of the Lord; jihvayā aṁśena — with the part of the tongue; ca — also; rasam — tastes; yayā — by which; asau — the living entity; pratipadyate — expresses.

Translation
When the palate of the gigantic form was separately manifested, Varuṇa, the director of water in the planetary systems, entered therein, and thus the living entity has the facility to taste everything with his tongue.

Text 14
निर्भिन्ने अश्विनौ नासे विष्णोराविशतां पदम् ।
घ्राणेनांशेन गन्धस्य प्रतिपत्तिर्यतो भवेत् ॥ १४ ॥
nirbhinne aśvinau nāse
viṣṇor āviśatāṁ padam
ghrāṇenāṁśena gandhasya
pratipattir yato bhavet
Synonyms
nirbhinne — thus being separated; aśvinau — the dual Aśvinīs; nāse — of the two nostrils; viṣṇoḥ — of the Lord; āviśatām — entering; padam — post; ghrāṇena aṁśena — by partially smelling; gandhasya — aroma; pratipattiḥ — experience; yataḥ — whereupon; bhavet — becomes.

Translation
When the Lord’s two nostrils separately manifested themselves, the dual Aśvinī-kumāras entered them in their proper positions, and because of this the living entities can smell the aromas of everything.

Text 15
निर्भिन्ने अक्षिणी त्वष्टा लोकपालोऽविशद्विभो: ।
चक्षुषांशेन रूपाणां प्रतिपत्तिर्यतो भवेत् ॥ १५ ॥
nirbhinne akṣiṇī tvaṣṭā
loka-pālo ’viśad vibhoḥ
cakṣuṣāṁśena rūpāṇāṁ
pratipattir yato bhavet
Synonyms
nirbhinne — thus being separated; akṣiṇī — the eyes; tvaṣṭā — the sun; loka-pālaḥ — director of light; aviśat — entered; vibhoḥ — of the great; cakṣuṣā aṁśena — by the part of the eyesight; rūpāṇām — of the forms; pratipattiḥ — experience; yataḥ — by which; bhavet — becomes.

Translation
Thereafter, the two eyes of the gigantic form of the Lord were separately manifested. The sun, the director of light, entered them with the partial representation of eyesight, and thus the living entities can have vision of forms.

Text 16
निर्भिन्नान्यस्य चर्माणि लोकपालोऽनिलोऽविशत् ।
प्राणेनांशेन संस्पर्शं येनासौ प्रतिपद्यते ॥ १६ ॥
nirbhinnāny asya carmāṇi
loka-pālo ’nilo ’viśat
prāṇenāṁśena saṁsparśaṁ
yenāsau pratipadyate
Synonyms
nirbhinnāni — being separated; asya — of the gigantic form; carmāṇi — skin; loka-pālaḥ — the director; anilaḥ — air; aviśat — entered; prāṇena aṁśena — the part of the breathing; saṁsparśam — touch; yena — by which; asau — the living entity; pratipadyate — can experience.

Translation
When there was a manifestation of skin separated from the gigantic form, Anila, the deity directing the wind, entered with partial touch, and thus the living entities can realize tactile knowledge.

Text 17
कर्णावस्य विनिर्भिन्नौ धिष्ण्यं स्वं विविशुर्दिश: ।
श्रोत्रेणांशेन शब्दस्य सिद्धिं येन प्रपद्यते ॥ १७ ॥
karṇāv asya vinirbhinnau
dhiṣṇyaṁ svaṁ viviśur diśaḥ
śrotreṇāṁśena śabdasya
siddhiṁ yena prapadyate
Synonyms
karṇau — the ears; asya — of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnau — being thus separated; dhiṣṇyam — the controlling deity; svam — own; viviśuḥ — entered; diśaḥ — of the directions; śrotreṇa aṁśena — with the hearing principles; śabdasya — of the sound; siddhim — perfection; yena — by which; prapadyate — is experienced.

Translation
When the ears of the gigantic form became manifested, all the controlling deities of the directions entered into them with the hearing principles, by which all the living entities hear and take advantage of sound.

Text 18
त्वचमस्य विनिर्भिन्नां विविशुर्धिष्ण्यमोषधी: ।
अंशेन रोमभि: कण्डूं यैरसौ प्रतिपद्यते ॥ १८ ॥
tvacam asya vinirbhinnāṁ
viviśur dhiṣṇyam oṣadhīḥ
aṁśena romabhiḥ kaṇḍūṁ
yair asau pratipadyate
Synonyms
tvacam — skin; asya — of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnām — being separately manifested; viviśuḥ — entered; dhiṣṇyam — the controlling deity; oṣadhīḥ — sensations; aṁśena — with parts; romabhiḥ — through the hairs on the body; kaṇḍūm — itching; yaiḥ — by which; asau — the living entity; pratipadyate — experiences.

Translation
When there was a separate manifestation of skin, the controlling deities of sensations and their different parts entered into it, and thus the living entities feel itching and happiness due to touch.

Text 19
मेढ्रं तस्य विनिर्भिन्नं स्वधिष्ण्यं क उपाविशत् ।
रेतसांशेन येनासावानन्दं प्रतिपद्यते ॥ १९ ॥
meḍhraṁ tasya vinirbhinnaṁ
sva-dhiṣṇyaṁ ka upāviśat
retasāṁśena yenāsāv
ānandaṁ pratipadyate
Synonyms
meḍhram — genitals; tasya — of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnam — being separated; sva-dhiṣṇyam — own position; kaḥ — Brahmā, the original living creature; upāviśat — entered; retasā aṁśena — with the part of the semen; yena — by which; asau — the living entity; ānandam — sex pleasure; pratipadyate — experiences.

Translation
When the genitals of the gigantic form separately became manifest, then Prajāpati, the original living creature, entered into them with his partial semen, and thus the living entities can enjoy sex pleasure.

Text 20
गुदं पुंसो विनिर्भिन्नं मित्रो लोकेश आविशत् ।
पायुनांशेन येनासौ विसर्गं प्रतिपद्यते ॥ २० ॥
gudaṁ puṁso vinirbhinnaṁ
mitro lokeśa āviśat
pāyunāṁśena yenāsau
visargaṁ pratipadyate
Synonyms
gudam — evacuating outlet; puṁsaḥ — of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnam — being separately manifested; mitraḥ — the sun-god; loka-īśaḥ — the director named Mitra; āviśat — entered; pāyunā aṁśena — with the partial evacuation process; yena — by which; asau — the living entity; visargam — evacuation; pratipadyate — performs.

Translation
The evacuating channel separately became manifest, and the director named Mitra entered into it with partial organs of evacuation. Thus the living entities are able to pass stool and urine.

Text 21
हस्तावस्य विनिर्भिन्नाविन्द्र: स्वर्पतिराविशत् ।
वार्तयांशेन पुरुषो यया वृत्तिं प्रपद्यते ॥ २१ ॥
hastāv asya vinirbhinnāv
indraḥ svar-patir āviśat
vārtayāṁśena puruṣo
yayā vṛttiṁ prapadyate
Synonyms
hastau — hands; asya — of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnau — being separately manifested; indraḥ — the King of heaven; svaḥ-patiḥ — the ruler of heavenly planets; āviśat — entered into it; vārtayā aṁśena — with partial mercantile principles; puruṣaḥ — the living entity; yayā — by which; vṛttim — business of livelihood; prapadyate — transacts.

Translation
Thereafter, when the hands of the gigantic form separately became manifested, Indra, the ruler of the heavenly planets, entered into them, and thus the living entity is able to transact business for his livelihood.

Text 22
पादावस्य विनिर्भिन्नौ लोकेशो विष्णुराविशत् ।
गत्या स्वांशेन पुरुषो यया प्राप्यं प्रपद्यते ॥ २२ ॥
pādāv asya vinirbhinnau
lokeśo viṣṇur āviśat
gatyā svāṁśena puruṣo
yayā prāpyaṁ prapadyate
Synonyms
pādau — the legs; asya — of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnau — being manifested separately; loka-īśaḥ viṣṇuḥ — the demigod Viṣṇu (not the Personality of Godhead); āviśat — entered; gatyā — by the power of movement; sva-aṁśena — with his own parts; puruṣaḥ — living entity; yayā — by which; prāpyam — destination; prapadyate — reaches.

Translation
Thereafter the legs of the gigantic form separately became manifest, and the demigod named Viṣṇu [not the Personality of Godhead] entered with partial movement. This helps the living entity move to his destination.

Text 23
बुद्धिं चास्य विनिर्भिन्नां वागीशो धिष्ण्यमाविशत् ।
बोधेनांशेन बोद्धव्यम् प्रतिपत्तिर्यतो भवेत् ॥ २३ ॥
buddhiṁ cāsya vinirbhinnāṁ
vāg-īśo dhiṣṇyam āviśat
bodhenāṁśena boddhavyam
pratipattir yato bhavet
Synonyms
buddhim — intelligence; ca — also; asya — of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnām — being separately manifested; vāk-īśaḥ — Brahmā, lord of the Vedas; dhiṣṇyam — the controlling power; āviśat — entered in; bodhena aṁśena — with his part of intelligence; boddhavyam — the matter of understanding; pratipattiḥ — understood; yataḥ — by which; bhavet — so becomes.

Translation
When the intelligence of the gigantic form separately became manifest, Brahmā, the lord of the Vedas, entered into it with the partial power of understanding, and thus an object of understanding is experienced by the living entities.

Text 24
हृदयं चास्य निर्भिन्नं चन्द्रमा धिष्ण्यमाविशत् ।
मनसांशेन येनासौ विक्रियां प्रतिपद्यते ॥ २४ ॥
hṛdayaṁ cāsya nirbhinnaṁ
candramā dhiṣṇyam āviśat
manasāṁśena yenāsau
vikriyāṁ pratipadyate
Synonyms
hṛdayam — heart; ca — also; asya — of the gigantic form; nirbhinnam — being manifested separately; candramā — the moon demigod; dhiṣṇyam — with controlling power; āviśat — entered into; manasā aṁśena — partly with mental activity; yena — by which; asau — the living entity; vikriyām — resolution; pratipadyate — transacts.

Translation
After that, the heart of the gigantic form separately manifested itself, and into it entered the moon demigod with partial mental activity. Thus the living entity can conduct his mental speculations.

Text 25
आत्मानं चास्य निर्भिन्नमभिमानोऽविशत्पदम् ।
कर्मणांशेन येनासौ कर्तव्यं प्रतिपद्यते ॥ २५ ॥
ātmānaṁ cāsya nirbhinnam
abhimāno ’viśat padam
karmaṇāṁśena yenāsau
kartavyaṁ pratipadyate
Synonyms
ātmānam — false ego; ca — also; asya — of the gigantic form; nirbhinnam — being separately manifested; abhimānaḥ — false identification; aviśat — entered; padam — in position; karmaṇā — activities; aṁśena — by the part; yena — by which; asau — the living entity; kartavyam — objective activities; pratipadyate — takes in.

Translation
Thereafter the materialistic ego of the gigantic form separately manifested itself, and into it entered Rudra, the controller of false ego, with his own partial activities, by which the living entity transacts his objective actions.

Text 26
सत्त्वं चास्य विनिर्भिन्नं महान्धिष्ण्यमुपाविशत् ।
चित्तेनांशेन येनासौ विज्ञानं प्रतिपद्यते ॥ २६ ॥
sattvaṁ cāsya vinirbhinnaṁ
mahān dhiṣṇyam upāviśat
cittenāṁśena yenāsau
vijñānaṁ pratipadyate
Synonyms
sattvam — consciousness; ca — also; asya — of the gigantic form; vinirbhinnam — being separately manifested; mahān — the total energy, mahat-tattva; dhiṣṇyam — with control; upāviśat — entered into; cittena aṁśena — along with His part of consciousness; yena — by which; asau — the living entity; vijñānam — specific knowledge; pratipadyate — cultivates.

Translation
Thereafter, when His consciousness separately manifested itself, the total energy, mahat-tattva, entered with His conscious part. Thus the living entity is able to conceive specific knowledge.

Text 27
शीर्ष्णोऽस्य द्यौर्धरा पद्‍भ्यां खं नाभेरुदपद्यत ।
गुणानां वृत्तयो येषु प्रतीयन्ते सुरादय: ॥ २७ ॥
śīrṣṇo ’sya dyaur dharā padbhyāṁ
khaṁ nābher udapadyata
guṇānāṁ vṛttayo yeṣu
pratīyante surādayaḥ
Synonyms
śīrṣṇaḥ — head; asya — of the gigantic form; dyauḥ — the heavenly planets; dharā — earthly planets; padbhyām — on His legs; kham — the sky; nābheḥ — from the abdomen; udapadyata — became manifested; guṇānām — of the three modes of nature; vṛttayaḥ — reactions; yeṣu — in which; pratīyante — manifest; sura-ādayaḥ — the demigods and others.

Translation
Thereafter, from the head of the gigantic form, the heavenly planets were manifested, and from His legs the earthly planets and from His abdomen the sky separately manifested themselves. Within them the demigods and others also were manifested in terms of the modes of material nature.

Text 28
आत्यन्तिकेन सत्त्वेन दिवं देवा: प्रपेदिरे ।
धरां रज:स्वभावेन पणयो ये च ताननु ॥ २८ ॥
ātyantikena sattvena
divaṁ devāḥ prapedire
dharāṁ rajaḥ-svabhāvena
paṇayo ye ca tān anu
Synonyms
ātyantikena — excessive; sattvena — by the mode of goodness; divam — in the higher planets; devāḥ — the demigods; prapedire — have been situated; dharām — on the earth; rajaḥ — the mode of passion; svabhāvena — by nature; paṇayaḥ — the human being; ye — all those; ca — also; tān — their; anu — subordinate.

Translation
The demigods, qualified by the superexcellent quality of the mode of goodness, are situated in the heavenly planets, whereas the human beings, because of their nature in the mode of passion, live on the earth in company with their subordinates.

Text 29
तार्तीयेन स्वभावेन भगवन्नाभिमाश्रिता: ।
उभयोरन्तरं व्योम ये रुद्रपार्षदां गणा: ॥ २९ ॥
tārtīyena svabhāvena
bhagavan-nābhim āśritāḥ
ubhayor antaraṁ vyoma
ye rudra-pārṣadāṁ gaṇāḥ
Synonyms
tārtīyena — by excessive development of the third mode of material nature, the mode of ignorance; svabhāvena — by such nature; bhagavat-nābhim — the abdominal navel of the gigantic form of the Personality of Godhead; āśritāḥ — those who are so situated; ubhayoḥ — between the two; antaram — in between; vyoma — the sky; ye — all of whom; rudra-pārṣadām — associates of Rudra; gaṇāḥ — population.

Translation
Living entities who are associates of Rudra develop in the third mode of material nature, or ignorance. They are situated in the sky between the earthly planets and the heavenly planets.

Text 30
मुखतोऽवर्तत ब्रह्म पुरुषस्य कुरूद्वह ।
यस्तून्मुखत्वाद्वर्णानां मुख्योऽभूद्ब्राह्मणो गुरु: ॥ ३० ॥
mukhato ’vartata brahma
puruṣasya kurūdvaha
yas tūnmukhatvād varṇānāṁ
mukhyo ’bhūd brāhmaṇo guruḥ
Synonyms
mukhataḥ — from the mouth; avartata — generated; brahma — the Vedic wisdom; puruṣasya — of the virāṭ-puruṣa, the gigantic form; kuru-udvaha — O chief of the Kuru dynasty; yaḥ — who are; tu — due to; unmukhatvāt — inclined to; varṇānām — of the orders of society; mukhyaḥ — the chief; abhūt — so became; brāhmaṇaḥ — called the brāhmaṇas; guruḥ — the recognized teacher or spiritual master.

Translation
O chief of the Kuru dynasty, the Vedic wisdom became manifested from the mouth of the virāṭ, the gigantic form. Those who are inclined to this Vedic knowledge are called brāhmaṇas, and they are the natural teachers and spiritual masters of all the orders of society.

Text 31
बाहुभ्योऽवर्तत क्षत्रं क्षत्रियस्तदनुव्रत: ।
यो जातस्त्रायते वर्णान् पौरुष: कण्टकक्षतात् ॥ ३१ ॥
bāhubhyo ’vartata kṣatraṁ
kṣatriyas tad anuvrataḥ
yo jātas trāyate varṇān
pauruṣaḥ kaṇṭaka-kṣatāt
Synonyms
bāhubhyaḥ — from the arms; avartata — generated; kṣatram — the power of protection; kṣatriyaḥ — in relation to the power of protection; tat — that; anuvrataḥ — followers; yaḥ — one who; jātaḥ — so becomes; trāyate — delivers; varṇān — the other occupations; pauruṣaḥ — representative of the Personality of Godhead; kaṇṭaka — of disturbing elements like thieves and debauchees; kṣatāt — from the mischief.

Translation
Thereafter the power of protection was generated from the arms of the gigantic virāṭ form, and in relation to such power the kṣatriyas also came into existence by following the kṣatriya principle of protecting society from the disturbance of thieves and miscreants.

Text 32
विशोऽवर्तन्त तस्योर्वोर्लोकवृत्तिकरीर्विभो: ।
वैश्यस्तदुद्भवो वार्तां नृणां य: समवर्तयत् ॥ ३२ ॥
viśo ’vartanta tasyorvor
loka-vṛttikarīr vibhoḥ
vaiśyas tad-udbhavo vārtāṁ
nṛṇāṁ yaḥ samavartayat
Synonyms
viśaḥ — means of living by production and distribution; avartanta — generated; tasya — His (the gigantic form’s); ūrvoḥ — from the thighs; loka-vṛttikarīḥ — means of livelihood; vibhoḥ — of the Lord; vaiśyaḥ — the mercantile community; tat — their; udbhavaḥ — orientation; vārtām — means of living; nṛṇām — of all men; yaḥ — one who; samavartayat — executed.

Translation
The means of livelihood of all persons, namely production of grains and their distribution to the prajās, was generated from the thighs of the Lord’s gigantic form. The mercantile men who take charge of such execution are called vaiśyas.

Text 33
पद्‍भ्यां भगवतो जज्ञे शुश्रूषा धर्मसिद्धये ।
तस्यां जात: पुरा शूद्रो यद्‌वृत्त्या तुष्यते हरि: ॥ ३३ ॥
padbhyāṁ bhagavato jajñe
śuśrūṣā dharma-siddhaye
tasyāṁ jātaḥ purā śūdro
yad-vṛttyā tuṣyate hariḥ
Synonyms
padbhyām — from the legs; bhagavataḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; jajñe — became manifested; śuśrūṣā — service; dharma — occupational duty; siddhaye — for the matter of; tasyām — in that; jātaḥ — being generated; purā — formerly; śūdraḥ — the servitors; yat-vṛttyā — the occupation by which; tuṣyate — becomes satisfied; hariḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
Thereafter, service was manifested from the legs of the Personality of Godhead for the sake of perfecting the religious function. Situated on the legs are the śūdras, who satisfy the Lord by service.

Text 34
एते वर्णा: स्वधर्मेण यजन्ति स्वगुरुं हरिम् ।
श्रद्धयात्मविशुद्ध्यर्थं यज्जाता: सह वृत्तिभि: ॥ ३४ ॥
ete varṇāḥ sva-dharmeṇa
yajanti sva-guruṁ harim
śraddhayātma-viśuddhy-arthaṁ
yaj-jātāḥ saha vṛttibhiḥ
Synonyms
ete — all these; varṇāḥ — orders of society; sva-dharmeṇa — by one’s own occupational duties; yajanti — worship; sva-gurum — with the spiritual master; harim — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śraddhayā — with faith and devotion; ātma — self; viśuddhi-artham — for purifying; yat — from whom; jātāḥ — born; saha — along with; vṛttibhiḥ — occupational duty.

Translation
All these different social divisions are born, with their occupational duties and living conditions, from the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus for unconditional life and self-realization one has to worship the Supreme Lord under the direction of the spiritual master.

Text 35
एतत्क्षत्तर्भगवतो दैवकर्मात्मरूपिण: ।
क: श्रद्दध्यादुपाकर्तुं योगमायाबलोदयम् ॥ ३५ ॥
etat kṣattar bhagavato
daiva-karmātma-rūpiṇaḥ
kaḥ śraddadhyād upākartuṁ
yoga-māyā-balodayam
Synonyms
etat — this; kṣattaḥ — O Vidura; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; daiva-karma-ātma-rūpiṇaḥ — of the gigantic form of transcendental work, time and nature; kaḥ — who else; śraddadhyāt — can aspire; upākartum — measure in totality; yoga-māyā — internal potency; bala-udayam — manifested by the strength of.

Translation
O Vidura, who can estimate or measure the transcendental time, work and potency of the gigantic form manifested by the internal potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead?

Text 36
तथापि कीर्तयाम्यङ्ग यथामति यथाश्रुतम् ।
कीर्तिं हरे: स्वां सत्कर्तुं गिरमन्याभिधासतीम् ॥ ३६ ॥
tathāpi kīrtayāmy aṅga
yathā-mati yathā-śrutam
kīrtiṁ hareḥ svāṁ sat-kartuṁ
giram anyābhidhāsatīm
Synonyms
tathā — therefore; api — although it is so; kīrtayāmi — I do describe; aṅga — O Vidura; yathā — as much as; mati — intelligence; yathā — as much as; śrutam — heard; kīrtim — glories; hareḥ — of the Lord; svām — own; sat-kartum — just purify; giram — speeches; anyābhidhā — otherwise; asatīm — unchaste.

Translation
In spite of my inability, whatever I have been able to hear [from the spiritual master] and whatever I could assimilate I am now describing in glorification of the Lord by pure speech, for otherwise my power of speaking would remain unchaste.

Text 37
एकान्तलाभं वचसो नु पुंसां
सुश्लोकमौलेर्गुणवादमाहु: ।
श्रुतेश्च विद्वद्‍‌भिरुपाकृतायां
कथासुधायामुपसम्प्रयोगम् ॥ ३७ ॥
ekānta-lābhaṁ vacaso nu puṁsāṁ
suśloka-mauler guṇa-vādam āhuḥ
śruteś ca vidvadbhir upākṛtāyāṁ
kathā-sudhāyām upasamprayogam
Synonyms
eka-anta — the one which has no comparison; lābham — gain; vacasaḥ — by discussions; nu puṁsām — after the Supreme Person; suśloka — pious; mauleḥ — activities; guṇa-vādam — glorification; āhuḥ — it is so said; śruteḥ — of the ear; ca — also; vidvadbhiḥ — by the learned; upākṛtāyām — being so edited; kathā-sudhāyām — in the nectar of such a transcendental message; upasamprayogam — serves the real purpose, being nearer to.

Translation
The highest perfectional gain of humanity is to engage in discussions of the activities and glories of the Pious Actor. Such activities are so nicely arranged in writing by the greatly learned sages that the actual purpose of the ear is served just by being near them.

Text 38
आत्मनोऽवसितो वत्स महिमा कविनादिना ।
संवत्सरसहस्रान्ते धिया योगविपक्‍कया ॥ ३८ ॥
ātmano ’vasito vatsa
mahimā kavinādinā
saṁvatsara-sahasrānte
dhiyā yoga-vipakkayā
Synonyms
ātmanaḥ — of the Supreme Soul; avasitaḥ — known; vatsa — O my dear son; mahimā — glories; kavinā — by the poet Brahmā; ādinā — original; saṁvatsara — celestial years; sahasra-ante — at the end of one thousand; dhiyā — by intelligence; yoga-vipakkayā — by matured meditation.

Translation
O my son, the original poet, Brahmā, after mature meditation for one thousand celestial years, could know only that the glories of the Supreme Soul are inconceivable.

Text 39
अतो भगवतो माया मायिनामपि मोहिनी ।
यत्स्वयं चात्मवर्त्मात्मा न वेद किमुतापरे ॥ ३९ ॥
ato bhagavato māyā
māyinām api mohinī
yat svayaṁ cātma-vartmātmā
na veda kim utāpare
Synonyms
ataḥ — therefore; bhagavataḥ — godly; māyā — potencies; māyinām — of the jugglers; api — even; mohinī — enchanting; yat — that which; svayam — personally; ca — also; ātma-vartma — self-sufficient; ātmā — self; na — does not; veda — know; kim — what; uta — to speak of; apare — others.

Translation
The wonderful potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is bewildering even to the jugglers. That potency is unknown even to the self-sufficient Lord, so it is certainly unknown to others.

Text 40
यतोऽप्राप्य न्यवर्तन्त वाचश्च मनसा सह ।
अहं चान्य इमे देवास्तस्मै भगवते नम: ॥ ४० ॥
yato ’prāpya nyavartanta
vācaś ca manasā saha
ahaṁ cānya ime devās
tasmai bhagavate namaḥ
Synonyms
yataḥ — from whom; aprāpya — being unable to measure; nyavartanta — cease to try; vācaḥ — words; ca — also; manasā — with the mind; saha — with; aham ca — also the ego; anye — other; ime — all these; devāḥ — demigods; tasmai — unto Him; bhagavate — unto the Personality of Godhead; namaḥ — offer obeisances.

Translation
Words, mind and ego, with their respective controlling demigods, have failed to achieve success in knowing the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, we simply have to offer our respectful obeisances unto Him as a matter of sanity.