Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं ब्रुवाणं मैत्रेयं द्वैपायनसुतो बुध: ।
प्रीणयन्निव भारत्या विदुर: प्रत्यभाषत ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ bruvāṇaṁ maitreyaṁ
dvaipāyana-suto budhaḥ
prīṇayann iva bhāratyā
viduraḥ pratyabhāṣata
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — thus; bruvāṇam — speaking; maitreyam — unto the sage Maitreya; dvaipāyana-sutaḥ — the son of Dvaipāyana; budhaḥ — learned; prīṇayan — in a pleasing manner; iva — as it was; bhāratyā — in the manner of a request; viduraḥ — Vidura; pratyabhāṣata — expressed.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, while Maitreya, the great sage, was thus speaking, Vidura, the learned son of Dvaipāyana Vyāsa, expressed a request in a pleasing manner by asking this question.

Text 2
विदुर उवाच
ब्रह्मन् कथं भगवतश्चिन्मात्रस्याविकारिण: ।
लीलया चापि युज्येरन्निर्गुणस्य गुणा: क्रिया: ॥ २ ॥
vidura uvāca
brahman kathaṁ bhagavataś
cin-mātrasyāvikāriṇaḥ
līlayā cāpi yujyeran
nirguṇasya guṇāḥ kriyāḥ
Synonyms
viduraḥ uvāca — Vidura said; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; katham — how; bhagavataḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; cit-mātrasya — of the complete spiritual whole; avikāriṇaḥ — of the unchangeable; līlayā — by His pastime; ca — either; api — even though it is so; yujyeran — take place; nirguṇasya — who is without the modes of nature; guṇāḥ — modes of nature; kriyāḥ — activities.

Translation
Śrī Vidura said: O great brāhmaṇa, since the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the complete spiritual whole and is unchangeable, how is He connected with the material modes of nature and their activities? If this is His pastime, how do the activities of the unchangeable take place and exhibit qualities without the modes of nature?

Text 3
क्रीडायामुद्यमोऽर्भस्य कामश्चिक्रीडिषान्यत: ।
स्वतस्तृप्तस्य च कथं निवृत्तस्य सदान्यत: ॥ ३ ॥
krīḍāyām udyamo ’rbhasya
kāmaś cikrīḍiṣānyataḥ
svatas-tṛptasya ca kathaṁ
nivṛttasya sadānyataḥ
Synonyms
krīḍāyām — in the matter of playing; udyamaḥ — enthusiasm; arbhasya — of the boys; kāmaḥ — desire; cikrīḍiṣā — willingness to play; anyataḥ — with other boys; svataḥ-tṛptasya — for one who is self-satisfied; ca — also; katham — what for; nivṛttasya — one who is detached; sadā — at all times; anyataḥ — otherwise.

Translation
Boys are enthusiastic to play with other boys or with various diversions because they are encouraged by desire. But there is no possibility of such desire for the Lord because He is self-satisfied and detached from everything at all times.

Text 4
अस्राक्षीद्भगवान् विश्वं गुणमय्यात्ममायया ।
तया संस्थापयत्येतद्भूय: प्रत्यपिधास्यति ॥ ४ ॥
asrākṣīd bhagavān viśvaṁ
guṇa-mayyātma-māyayā
tayā saṁsthāpayaty etad
bhūyaḥ pratyapidhāsyati
Synonyms
asrākṣīt — caused to create; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; viśvam — the universe; guṇa-mayyā — endowed with three modes of material nature; ātma — self; māyayā — by the potency; tayā — by her; saṁsthāpayati — maintains; etat — all these; bhūyaḥ — then again; praty-apidhāsyati — conversely dissolves also.

Translation
By His self-sheltered potency of the three modes of material nature, the Lord has caused the creation of this universe. By her He maintains the creation and conversely dissolves it, again and again.

Text 5
देशत: कालतो योऽसाववस्थात: स्वतोऽन्यत: ।
अविलुप्तावबोधात्मा स युज्येताजया कथम् ॥ ५ ॥
deśataḥ kālato yo ’sāv
avasthātaḥ svato ’nyataḥ
aviluptāvabodhātmā
sa yujyetājayā katham
Synonyms
deśataḥ — circumstantial; kālataḥ — by the influence of time; yaḥ — one who; asau — the living entity; avasthātaḥ — by situation; svataḥ — by dream; anyataḥ — by others; avilupta — extinct; avabodha — consciousness; ātmā — pure self; saḥ — he; yujyeta — engaged; ajayā — with nescience; katham — how is it so.

Translation
The pure soul is pure consciousness and is never out of consciousness, either due to circumstances, time, situations, dreams or other causes. How then does he become engaged in nescience?

Text 6
भगवानेक एवैष सर्वक्षेत्रेष्ववस्थित: ।
अमुष्य दुर्भगत्वं वा क्लेशो वा कर्मभि: कुत: ॥ ६ ॥
bhagavān eka evaiṣa
sarva-kṣetreṣv avasthitaḥ
amuṣya durbhagatvaṁ vā
kleśo vā karmabhiḥ kutaḥ
Synonyms
bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ekaḥ — alone; eva eṣaḥ — all these; sarva — all; kṣetreṣu — in the living entities; avasthitaḥ — situated; amuṣya — of the living entities; durbhagatvam — misfortune; vā — either; kleśaḥ — miseries; vā — or; karmabhiḥ — by activities; kutaḥ — what for.

Translation
The Lord, as the Supersoul, is situated in every living being’s heart. Why then do the living entities’ activities result in misfortune and misery?

Text 7
एतस्मिन्मे मनो विद्वन् खिद्यतेऽज्ञानसङ्कटे ।
तन्न: पराणुद विभो कश्मलं मानसं महत् ॥ ७ ॥
etasmin me mano vidvan
khidyate ’jñāna-saṅkaṭe
tan naḥ parāṇuda vibho
kaśmalaṁ mānasaṁ mahat
Synonyms
etasmin — in this; me — my; manaḥ — mind; vidvan — O learned one; khidyate — is troubling; ajñāna — nescience; saṅkaṭe — in distress; tat — therefore; naḥ — my; parāṇuda — clear up; vibho — O great one; kaśmalam — illusion; mānasam — relating to the mind; mahat — great.

Translation
O great and learned one, my mind is greatly illusioned by the distress of this nescience, and I therefore request you to clear it up.

Text 8
श्रीशुक उवाच
स इत्थं चोदित: क्षत्‍त्रा तत्त्वजिज्ञासुना मुनि: ।
प्रत्याह भगवच्चित्त: स्मयन्निव गतस्मय: ॥ ८ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
sa itthaṁ coditaḥ kṣattrā
tattva-jijñāsunā muniḥ
pratyāha bhagavac-cittaḥ
smayann iva gata-smayaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; saḥ — he (Maitreya Muni); ittham — in this way; coditaḥ — being agitated; kṣattrā — by Vidura; tattva-jijñāsunā — by one who was anxious to inquire to know the truth; muniḥ — the great sage; pratyāha — replied; bhagavat-cittaḥ — God conscious; smayan — wondering; iva — as if; gata-smayaḥ — without hesitation.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, Maitreya, being thus agitated by the inquisitive Vidura, at first seemed astonished, but then he replied to him without hesitation, since he was fully God conscious.

Text 9
मैत्रेय उवाच
सेयं भगवतो माया यन्नयेन विरुध्यते ।
ईश्वरस्य विमुक्तस्य कार्पण्यमुत बन्धनम् ॥ ९ ॥
maitreya uvāca
seyaṁ bhagavato māyā
yan nayena virudhyate
īśvarasya vimuktasya
kārpaṇyam uta bandhanam
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; sā iyam — such a statement; bhagavataḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; māyā — illusion; yat — that which; nayena — by logic; virudhyate — becomes contradictory; īśvarasya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vimuktasya — of the ever liberated; kārpaṇyam — insufficiency; uta — as also, what to speak of; bandhanam — bondage.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya said: Certain conditioned souls put forward the theory that the Supreme Brahman, or the Personality of Godhead, is overcome by illusion, or māyā, and at the same time they maintain that He is unconditioned. This is against all logic.

Text 10
यदर्थेन विनामुष्य पुंस आत्मविपर्यय: ।
प्रतीयत उपद्रष्टु: स्वशिरश्छेदनादिक: ॥ १० ॥
yad arthena vināmuṣya
puṁsa ātma-viparyayaḥ
pratīyata upadraṣṭuḥ
sva-śiraś chedanādikaḥ
Synonyms
yat — thus; arthena — a purpose or meaning; vinā — without; amuṣya — of such a one; puṁsaḥ — of the living entity; ātma-viparyayaḥ — upset about self-identification; pratīyate — so appear; upadraṣṭuḥ — of the superficial onlooker; sva-śiraḥ — own head; chedana-ādikaḥ — cutting off.

Translation
The living entity is in distress regarding his self-identity. He has no factual background, like a man who dreams that he sees his head cut off.

Text 11
यथा जले चन्द्रमस: कम्पादिस्तत्कृतो गुण: ।
द‍ृश्यतेऽसन्नपि द्रष्टुरात्मनोऽनात्मनो गुण: ॥ ११ ॥
yathā jale candramasaḥ
kampādis tat-kṛto guṇaḥ
dṛśyate ’sann api draṣṭur
ātmano ’nātmano guṇaḥ
Synonyms
yathā — as; jale — in the water; candramasaḥ — of the moon; kampa-ādiḥ — quivering, etc.; tat-kṛtaḥ — done by the water; guṇaḥ — quality; dṛśyate — it is so seen; asan api — without existence; draṣṭuḥ — of the seer; ātmanaḥ — of the self; anātmanaḥ — of other than the self; guṇaḥ — quality.

Translation
As the moon reflected on water appears to the seer to tremble due to being associated with the quality of the water, so the self associated with matter appears to be qualified as matter.

Text 12
स वै निवृत्तिधर्मेण वासुदेवानुकम्पया ।
भगवद्भक्तियोगेन तिरोधत्ते शनैरिह ॥ १२ ॥
sa vai nivṛtti-dharmeṇa
vāsudevānukampayā
bhagavad-bhakti-yogena
tirodhatte śanair iha
Synonyms
saḥ — that; vai — also; nivṛtti — detachment; dharmeṇa — by engagement; vāsudeva — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anukampayā — by the mercy of; bhagavat — in relation with the Personality of Godhead; bhakti-yogena — by linking up; tirodhatte — diminishes; śanaiḥ — gradually; iha — in this existence.

Translation
But that misconception of self-identity can be diminished gradually by the mercy of the Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, through the process of devotional service to the Lord in the mode of detachment.

Text 13
यदेन्द्रियोपरामोऽथ द्रष्ट्रात्मनि परे हरौ ।
विलीयन्ते तदा क्लेशा: संसुप्तस्येव कृत्‍स्‍नश: ॥ १३ ॥
yadendriyoparāmo ’tha
draṣṭrātmani pare harau
vilīyante tadā kleśāḥ
saṁsuptasyeva kṛtsnaśaḥ
Synonyms
yadā — when; indriya — senses; uparāmaḥ — satiated; atha — thus; draṣṭṛ-ātmani — unto the seer, the Supersoul; pare — in the Transcendence; harau — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vilīyante — become merged in; tadā — at that time; kleśāḥ — miseries; saṁsuptasya — one who has enjoyed sound sleep; iva — like; kṛtsnaśaḥ — completely.

Translation
When the senses are satisfied in the seer-Supersoul, the Personality of Godhead, and merge in Him, all miseries are completely vanquished, as after a sound sleep.

Text 14
अशेषसंक्लेशशमं विधत्ते गुणानुवादश्रवणं मुरारे: ।
किं वा पुनस्तच्चरणारविन्दपरागसेवारतिरात्मलब्धा ॥ १४ ॥
aśeṣa-saṅkleśa-śamaṁ vidhatte
guṇānuvāda-śravaṇaṁ murāreḥ
kiṁ vā punas tac-caraṇāravinda-
parāga-sevā-ratir ātma-labdhā
Synonyms
aśeṣa — unlimited; saṅkleśa — miserable conditions; śamam — cessation; vidhatte — can perform; guṇa-anuvāda — of the transcendental name, form, qualities, pastimes, entourage and paraphernalia, etc.; śravaṇam — hearing and chanting; murāreḥ — of Murāri (Śrī Kṛṣṇa), the Personality of Godhead; kim vā — what to speak of; punaḥ — again; tat — His; caraṇa-aravinda — lotus feet; parāga-sevā — to the service of the flavorful dust; ratiḥ — attraction; ātma-labdhā — those who have gained such self-achievement.

Translation
Simply by chanting and hearing of the transcendental name, form, etc., of the Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one can achieve the cessation of unlimited miserable conditions. Therefore what to speak of those who have attained attraction for serving the flavor of the dust of the Lord’s lotus feet?

Text 15
विदुर उवाच
संछिन्न: संशयो मह्यं तव सूक्तासिना विभो ।
उभयत्रापि भगवन्मनो मे सम्प्रधावति ॥ १५ ॥
vidura uvāca
sañchinnaḥ saṁśayo mahyaṁ
tava sūktāsinā vibho
ubhayatrāpi bhagavan
mano me sampradhāvati
Synonyms
viduraḥ uvāca — Vidura said; sañchinnaḥ — cut off; saṁśayaḥ — doubts; mahyam — unto me; tava — your; sūkta-asinā — by the weapon of convincing words; vibho — O my lord; ubhayatra api — both in God and in the living entity; bhagavan — O powerful one; manaḥ — mind; me — my; sampradhāvati — perfectly entering.

Translation
Vidura said: O powerful sage, my lord, all my doubts about the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the living entities have now been removed by your convincing words. My mind is now perfectly entering into them.

Text 16
साध्वेतद् व्याहृतं विद्वन्नात्ममायायनं हरे: ।
आभात्यपार्थं निर्मूलं विश्वमूलं न यद्बहि: ॥ १६ ॥
sādhv etad vyāhṛtaṁ vidvan
nātma-māyāyanaṁ hareḥ
ābhāty apārthaṁ nirmūlaṁ
viśva-mūlaṁ na yad bahiḥ
Synonyms
sādhu — as good as it should be; etat — all these explanations; vyāhṛtam — thus spoken; vidvan — O learned one; na — not; ātma — the self; māyā — energy; ayanam — movement; hareḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; ābhāti — appears; apārtham — without meaning; nirmūlam — without basis; viśva-mūlam — the origin is the Supreme; na — not; yat — which; bahiḥ — outside.

Translation
O learned sage, your explanations are very good, as they should be. Disturbances to the conditioned soul have no other basis than the movement of the external energy of the Lord.

Text 17
यश्च मूढतमो लोके यश्च बुद्धे: परं गत: ।
तावुभौ सुखमेधेते क्लिश्यत्यन्तरितो जन: ॥ १७ ॥
yaś ca mūḍhatamo loke
yaś ca buddheḥ paraṁ gataḥ
tāv ubhau sukham edhete
kliśyaty antarito janaḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — one who is; ca — also; mūḍha-tamaḥ — the lowest of the fools; loke — in the world; yaḥ ca — and one who is; buddheḥ — of intelligence; param — transcendental; gataḥ — gone; tau — of them; ubhau — both; sukham — happiness; edhete — enjoy; kliśyati — suffer; antaritaḥ — situated between; janaḥ — persons.

Translation
Both the lowest of fools and he who is transcendental to all intelligence enjoy happiness, whereas persons between them suffer the material pangs.

Text 18
अर्थाभावं विनिश्चित्य प्रतीतस्यापि नात्मन: ।
तां चापि युष्मच्चरणसेवयाहं पराणुदे ॥ १८ ॥
arthābhāvaṁ viniścitya
pratītasyāpi nātmanaḥ
tāṁ cāpi yuṣmac-caraṇa-
sevayāhaṁ parāṇude
Synonyms
artha-abhāvam — without substance; viniścitya — being ascertained; pratītasya — of the apparent values; api — also; na — never; ātmanaḥ — of the self; tām — that; ca — also; api — thus; yuṣmat — your; caraṇa — feet; sevayā — by service; aham — myself; parāṇude — shall be able to give up.

Translation
But, my dear sir, I am obliged to you because now I can understand that this material manifestation is without substance, although it appears real. I am confident that by serving your feet it will be possible for me to give up the false idea.

Text 19
यत्सेवया भगवत: कूटस्थस्य मधुद्विष: ।
रतिरासो भवेत्तीव्र: पादयोर्व्यसनार्दन: ॥ १९ ॥
yat-sevayā bhagavataḥ
kūṭa-sthasya madhu-dviṣaḥ
rati-rāso bhavet tīvraḥ
pādayor vyasanārdanaḥ
Synonyms
yat — to whom; sevayā — by service; bhagavataḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; kūṭa-sthasya — of the unchangeable; madhu-dviṣaḥ — the enemy of the Madhu asura; rati-rāsaḥ — attachment in different relationships; bhavet — develops; tīvraḥ — highly ecstatic; pādayoḥ — of the feet; vyasana — distresses; ardanaḥ — vanquishing.

Translation
By serving the feet of the spiritual master, one is enabled to develop transcendental ecstasy in the service of the Personality of Godhead, who is the unchangeable enemy of the Madhu demon and whose service vanquishes one’s material distresses.

Text 20
दुरापा ह्यल्पतपस: सेवा वैकुण्ठवर्त्मसु ।
यत्रोपगीयते नित्यं देवदेवो जनार्दन: ॥ २० ॥
durāpā hy alpa-tapasaḥ
sevā vaikuṇṭha-vartmasu
yatropagīyate nityaṁ
deva-devo janārdanaḥ
Synonyms
durāpā — rarely obtainable; hi — certainly; alpa-tapasaḥ — of one whose austerity is meager; sevā — service; vaikuṇṭha — the transcendental kingdom of God; vartmasu — on the path of; yatra — wherein; upagīyate — is glorified; nityam — always; deva — of the demigods; devaḥ — the Lord; jana-ardanaḥ — the controller of the living entities.

Translation
Persons whose austerity is meager can hardly obtain the service of the pure devotees who are progressing on the path back to the kingdom of Godhead, the Vaikuṇṭhas. Pure devotees engage one hundred percent in glorifying the Supreme Lord, who is the Lord of the demigods and the controller of all living entities.

Text 21
सृष्ट्वाग्रे महदादीनि सविकाराण्यनुक्रमात् ।
तेभ्यो विराजमुद्‍धृत्य तमनु प्राविशद्विभु: ॥ २१ ॥
sṛṣṭvāgre mahad-ādīni
sa-vikārāṇy anukramāt
tebhyo virājam uddhṛtya
tam anu prāviśad vibhuḥ
Synonyms
sṛṣṭvā — after creating; agre — in the beginning; mahat-ādīni — the total material energy; sa-vikārāṇi — along with the sense organs; anukramāt — by a gradual process of differentiation; tebhyaḥ — out of that; virājam — the gigantic universal form; uddhṛtya — manifesting; tam — unto that; anu — later; prāviśat — entered; vibhuḥ — the Supreme.

Translation
After creating the total material energy, the mahat-tattva, and thereby manifesting the gigantic universal form with senses and sense organs, the Supreme Lord entered within it.

Text 22
यमाहुराद्यं पुरुषं सहस्राङ्‌घ्र्‌यूरुबाहुकम् ।
यत्र विश्व इमे लोका: सविकाशं त आसते ॥ २२ ॥
yam āhur ādyaṁ puruṣaṁ
sahasrāṅghry-ūru-bāhukam
yatra viśva ime lokāḥ
sa-vikāśaṁ ta āsate
Synonyms
yam — who; āhuḥ — is called; ādyam — original; puruṣam — incarnation for cosmic manifestation; sahasra — thousand; aṅghri — legs; ūru — thighs; bāhukam — hands; yatra — wherein; viśvaḥ — the universe; ime — all these; lokāḥ — planets; sa-vikāśam — with respective developments; te — all of them; āsate — living.

Translation
The puruṣa incarnation lying on the Causal Ocean is called the original puruṣa in the material creations, and in His virāṭ form, in whom all the planets and their inhabitants live, He has many thousands of legs and hands.

Text 23
यस्मिन् दशविध: प्राण: सेन्द्रियार्थेन्द्रियस्त्रिवृत् ।
त्वयेरितो यतो वर्णास्तद्विभूतीर्वदस्व न: ॥ २३ ॥
yasmin daśa-vidhaḥ prāṇaḥ
sendriyārthendriyas tri-vṛt
tvayerito yato varṇās
tad-vibhūtīr vadasva naḥ
Synonyms
yasmin — in which; daśa-vidhaḥ — ten kinds of; prāṇaḥ — air of life; sa — with; indriya — senses; artha — interest; indriyaḥ — of the senses; tri-vṛt — three kinds of life vigor; tvayā — by you; īritaḥ — explained; yataḥ — wherefrom; varṇāḥ — four specific divisions; tat-vibhūtīḥ — prowess; vadasva — please describe; naḥ — unto me.

Translation
O great brāhmaṇa, you have told me that the gigantic virāṭ form and His senses, sense objects and ten kinds of life air exist with three kinds of life vigor. Now, if you will, kindly explain to me the different powers of the specific divisions.

Text 24
यत्र पुत्रैश्च पौत्रैश्च नप्तृभि: सह गोत्रजै: ।
प्रजा विचित्राकृतय आसन् याभिरिदं ततम् ॥ २४ ॥
yatra putraiś ca pautraiś ca
naptṛbhiḥ saha gotrajaiḥ
prajā vicitrākṛtaya
āsan yābhir idaṁ tatam
Synonyms
yatra — wherein; putraiḥ — along with sons; ca — and; pautraiḥ — along with grandsons; ca — also; naptṛbhiḥ — with grandsons from daughters; saha — along with; gotra-jaiḥ — of the same family; prajāḥ — generations; vicitra — of different kinds; ākṛtayaḥ — so done; āsan — exist; yābhiḥ — by whom; idam — all these planets; tatam — spread.

Translation
O my lord, I think that the process manifest in the forms of sons, grandsons and family members has spread all over the universe in different varieties and species.

Text 25
प्रजापतीनां स पतिश्चक्लृपे कान् प्रजापतीन् ।
सर्गांश्चैवानुसर्गांश्च मनून्मन्वन्तराधिपान् ॥ २५ ॥
prajāpatīnāṁ sa patiś
cakḷpe kān prajāpatīn
sargāṁś caivānusargāṁś ca
manūn manvantarādhipān
Synonyms
prajā-patīnām — of the demigods like Brahmā and others; saḥ — he; patiḥ — leader; cakḷpe — decided; kān — whomsoever; prajāpatīn — fathers of the living entities; sargān — generations; ca — also; eva — certainly; anusargān — later generations; ca — and; manūn — the Manus; manvantara-adhipān — and the changes of such.

Translation
O learned brāhmaṇa, please describe how the leader of all the demigods, namely the Prajāpati, Brahmā, decided to establish the various Manus, the heads of the ages. Please describe the Manus also, and please describe the descendants of those Manus.

Text 26
उपर्यधश्च ये लोका भूमेर्मित्रात्मजासते ।
तेषां संस्थां प्रमाणं च भूर्लोकस्य च वर्णय ॥ २६ ॥
upary adhaś ca ye lokā
bhūmer mitrātmajāsate
teṣāṁ saṁsthāṁ pramāṇaṁ ca
bhūr-lokasya ca varṇaya
Synonyms
upari — on the head; adhaḥ — underneath; ca — also; ye — which; lokāḥ — planets; bhūmeḥ — of the earth; mitra-ātmaja — O son of Mitrā (Maitreya Muni); āsate — do exist; teṣām — their; saṁsthām — situation; pramāṇam ca — also their measurement; bhūḥ-lokasya — of the earthly planets; ca — also; varṇaya — please describe.

Translation
O son of Mitrā, kindly describe how the planets are situated above the earth as well as underneath it, and also please mention their measurement as well as that of the earthly planets.

Text 27
तिर्यङ्‌मानुषदेवानां सरीसृपपतत्‍त्रिणाम् ।
वद न: सर्गसंव्यूहं गार्भस्वेदद्विजोद्‍‌भिदाम् ॥ २७ ॥
tiryaṅ-mānuṣa-devānāṁ
sarīsṛpa-patattriṇām
vada naḥ sarga-saṁvyūhaṁ
gārbha-sveda-dvijodbhidām
Synonyms
tiryak — subhuman; mānuṣa — human beings; devānām — of the superhuman beings, or demigods; sarīsṛpa — reptiles; patattriṇām — of the birds; vada — kindly describe; naḥ — unto me; sarga — generation; saṁvyūham — specific divisions; gārbha — embryonic; sveda — perspiration; dvija — twice-born; udbhidām — of the plants, etc.

Translation
Also please describe the living beings under different classifications: subhumans, humans, those born of the embryo, those born of perspiration, those who are twice-born [birds], and the plants and vegetables. Kindly describe their generations and subdivisions also.

Text 28
गुणावतारैर्विश्वस्य सर्गस्थित्यप्ययाश्रयम् ।
सृजत: श्रीनिवासस्य व्याचक्ष्वोदारविक्रमम् ॥ २८ ॥
guṇāvatārair viśvasya
sarga-sthity-apyayāśrayam
sṛjataḥ śrīnivāsasya
vyācakṣvodāra-vikramam
Synonyms
guṇa — modes of material nature; avatāraiḥ — of the incarnations; viśvasya — of the universe; sarga — creation; sthiti — maintenance; apyaya — destruction; āśrayam — and ultimate rest; sṛjataḥ — of the one who creates; śrīnivāsasya — of the Personality of Godhead; vyācakṣva — kindly describe; udāra — magnanimous; vikramam — specific activities.

Translation
Please also describe the incarnations of the material modes of nature — Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara — and please describe the incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His magnanimous activities.

Text 29
वर्णाश्रमविभागांश्च रूपशीलस्वभावत: ।
ऋषीणां जन्मकर्माणि वेदस्य च विकर्षणम् ॥ २९ ॥
varṇāśrama-vibhāgāṁś ca
rūpa-śīla-svabhāvataḥ
ṛṣīṇāṁ janma-karmāṇi
vedasya ca vikarṣaṇam
Synonyms
varṇa-āśrama — the four divisions of social statuses and orders of spiritual culture; vibhāgān — respective divisions; ca — also; rūpa — personal features; śīla-svabhāvataḥ — personal character; ṛṣīṇām — of the sages; janma — birth; karmāṇi — activities; vedasya — of the Vedas; ca — and; vikarṣaṇam — categorical divisions.

Translation
O great sage, kindly describe the divisions and orders of human society in terms of symptoms, behavior and the characteristics of mental equilibrium and sense control. Also please describe the births of the great sages and the categorical divisions of the Vedas.

Text 30
यज्ञस्य च वितानानि योगस्य च पथ: प्रभो ।
नैष्कर्म्यस्य च सांख्यस्य तन्त्रं वा भगवत्स्मृतम् ॥ ३० ॥
yajñasya ca vitānāni
yogasya ca pathaḥ prabho
naiṣkarmyasya ca sāṅkhyasya
tantraṁ vā bhagavat-smṛtam
Synonyms
yajñasya — of sacrifices; ca — also; vitānāni — expansions; yogasya — of the mystic powers; ca — also; pathaḥ — ways; prabho — O my lord; naiṣkarmyasya — of knowledge; ca — and; sāṅkhyasya — of analytical studies; tantram — the path of devotional service; vā — as well as; bhagavat — in relation with the Personality of Godhead; smṛtam — regulative principles.

Translation
Please also describe the expansions of different sacrifices and the paths of mystic powers, analytical study of knowledge, and devotional service, all with their respective regulations.

Text 31
पाषण्डपथवैषम्यं प्रतिलोमनिवेशनम् ।
जीवस्य गतयो याश्च यावतीर्गुणकर्मजा: ॥ ३१ ॥
pāṣaṇḍa-patha-vaiṣamyaṁ
pratiloma-niveśanam
jīvasya gatayo yāś ca
yāvatīr guṇa-karmajāḥ
Synonyms
pāṣaṇḍa-patha — the path of the faithless; vaiṣamyam — imperfection by contradiction; pratiloma — crossbreeding; niveśanam — situation; jīvasya — of the living entities; gatayaḥ — movements; yāḥ — as they are; ca — also; yāvatīḥ — as many as; guṇa — modes of material nature; karma-jāḥ — generated by different work.

Translation
Please also describe the imperfections and contradictions of the faithless atheists, the situation of crossbreeding, and the movements of the living entities in various species of life according to their particular modes of nature and work.

Text 32
धर्मार्थकाममोक्षाणां निमित्तान्यविरोधत: ।
वार्ताया दण्डनीतेश्च श्रुतस्य च विधिं पृथक् ॥ ३२ ॥
dharmārtha-kāma-mokṣāṇāṁ
nimittāny avirodhataḥ
vārtāyā daṇḍa-nīteś ca
śrutasya ca vidhiṁ pṛthak
Synonyms
dharma — religiosity; artha — economic development; kāma — sense gratification; mokṣāṇām — salvation; nimittāni — causes; avirodhataḥ — without being contradictory; vārtāyāḥ — on the principles of the means of livelihood; daṇḍa-nīteḥ — of law and order; ca — also; śrutasya — of the codes of scriptures; ca — also; vidhim — regulations; pṛthak — different.

Translation
You may also describe the noncontradictory causes of religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and salvation and also the different means of livelihood and different processes of law and order as mentioned in the revealed scriptures.

Text 33
श्राद्धस्य च विधिं ब्रह्मन् पितृणां सर्गमेव च ।
ग्रहनक्षत्रताराणां कालावयवसंस्थितिम् ॥ ३३ ॥
śrāddhasya ca vidhiṁ brahman
pitṝṇāṁ sargam eva ca
graha-nakṣatra-tārāṇāṁ
kālāvayava-saṁsthitim
Synonyms
śrāddhasya — of the periodical offerings of respects; ca — also; vidhim — regulations; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; pitṝṇām — of the forefathers; sargam — creation; eva — as; ca — also; graha — planetary system; nakṣatra — the stars; tārāṇām — luminaries; kāla — time; avayava — duration; saṁsthitim — situations.

Translation
Please also explain the regulations for offering respects to the forefathers, the creation of the Pitṛloka, the time schedule in the planets, stars and luminaries, and their respective situations.

Text 34
दानस्य तपसो वापि यच्चेष्टापूर्तयो: फलम् ।
प्रवासस्थस्य यो धर्मो यश्च पुंस उतापदि ॥ ३४ ॥
dānasya tapaso vāpi
yac ceṣṭā-pūrtayoḥ phalam
pravāsa-sthasya yo dharmo
yaś ca puṁsa utāpadi
Synonyms
dānasya — of charity; tapasaḥ — of penance; vāpi — lake; yat — that which; ca — and; iṣṭā — endeavor; pūrtayoḥ — of reservoirs of water; phalam — fruitive result; pravāsa-sthasya — one who is away from home; yaḥ — that which; dharmaḥ — duty; yaḥ ca — and which; puṁsaḥ — of man; uta — described; āpadi — in danger.

Translation
Please also describe the fruitive results of charity and penance and of digging reservoirs of water. Please describe the situation of persons who are away from home and also the duty of a man in an awkward position.

Text 35
येन वा भगवांस्तुष्येद्धर्मयोनिर्जनार्दन: ।
सम्प्रसीदति वा येषामेतदाख्याहि मेऽनघ ॥ ३५ ॥
yena vā bhagavāṁs tuṣyed
dharma-yonir janārdanaḥ
samprasīdati vā yeṣām
etad ākhyāhi me ’nagha
Synonyms
yena — by which; vā — either; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; tuṣyet — is satisfied; dharma-yoniḥ — the father of all religion; janārdanaḥ — the controller of all living being; samprasīdati — completely satisfied; vā — either, or; yeṣām — of those; etat — all these; ākhyāhi — kindly describe; me — unto me; anagha — O sinless one.

Translation
O sinless one, because the Personality of Godhead, the controller of all living entities, is the father of all religion and all those who are candidates for religious activities, kindly describe how He can be completely satisfied.

Text 36
अनुव्रतानां शिष्याणां पुत्राणां च द्विजोत्तम ।
अनापृष्टमपि ब्रूयुर्गुरवो दीनवत्सला: ॥ ३६ ॥
anuvratānāṁ śiṣyāṇāṁ
putrāṇāṁ ca dvijottama
anāpṛṣṭam api brūyur
guravo dīna-vatsalāḥ
Synonyms
anuvratānām — the followers; śiṣyāṇām — of the disciples; putrāṇām — of the sons; ca — also; dvija-uttama — O best amongst the brāhmaṇas; anāpṛṣṭam — that which is not asked for; api — in spite of; brūyuḥ — please describe; guravaḥ — the spiritual masters; dīna-vatsalāḥ — who are kind to the needy.

Translation
O best among the brāhmaṇas, those who are spiritual masters are very kind to the needy. They are always kind to their followers, disciples and sons, and without being asked by them, the spiritual master describes all that is knowledge.

Text 37
तत्त्वानां भगवंस्तेषां कतिधा प्रतिसंक्रम: ।
तत्रेमं क उपासीरन् क उ स्विदनुशेरते ॥ ३७ ॥
tattvānāṁ bhagavaṁs teṣāṁ
katidhā pratisaṅkramaḥ
tatremaṁ ka upāsīran
ka u svid anuśerate
Synonyms
tattvānām — of the elements of nature; bhagavan — O great sage; teṣām — of them; katidhā — how many; pratisaṅkramaḥ — dissolutions; tatra — thereupon; imam — unto the Supreme Lord; ke — who are they; upāsīran — being saved; ke — who are they; u — who; svit — may; anuśerate — serve the Lord while He sleeps.

Translation
Please describe how many dissolutions there are for the elements of material nature and who survives after the dissolutions to serve the Lord while He is asleep.

Text 38
पुरुषस्य च संस्थानं स्वरूपं वा परस्य च ।
ज्ञानं च नैगमं यत्तद्गुरुशिष्यप्रयोजनम् ॥ ३८ ॥
puruṣasya ca saṁsthānaṁ
svarūpaṁ vā parasya ca
jñānaṁ ca naigamaṁ yat tad
guru-śiṣya-prayojanam
Synonyms
puruṣasya — of the living entity; ca — also; saṁsthānam — existence; svarūpam — identity; vā — either, or; parasya — of the Supreme; ca — also; jñānam — knowledge; ca — also; naigamam — in the matter of the Upaniṣads; yat — that; tat — the same; guru — spiritual master; śiṣya — disciple; prayojanam — necessity.

Translation
What are the truths regarding the living entities and the Supreme Personality of Godhead? What are their identities? What are the specific values in the knowledge in the Vedas, and what are the necessities for the spiritual master and his disciples?

Text 39
निमित्तानि च तस्येह प्रोक्तान्यनघसूरिभि: ।
स्वतो ज्ञानं कुत: पुंसां भक्तिर्वैराग्यमेव वा ॥ ३९ ॥
nimittāni ca tasyeha
proktāny anagha-sūribhiḥ
svato jñānaṁ kutaḥ puṁsāṁ
bhaktir vairāgyam eva vā
Synonyms
nimittāni — the source of knowledge; ca — also; tasya — of such knowledge; iha — in this world; proktāni — mentioned; anagha — spotless; sūribhiḥ — by devotees; svataḥ — self-sufficient; jñānam — knowledge; kutaḥ — how; puṁsām — of the living entity; bhaktiḥ — devotional service; vairāgyam — detachment; eva — certainly; vā — also.

Translation
Spotless devotees of the Lord have mentioned the source of such knowledge. How could one have knowledge of devotional service and detachment without the help of such devotees?

Text 40
एतान्मे पृच्छत: प्रश्नान् हरे: कर्मविवित्सया ।
ब्रूहि मेऽज्ञस्य मित्रत्वादजया नष्टचक्षुष: ॥ ४० ॥
etān me pṛcchataḥ praśnān
hareḥ karma-vivitsayā
brūhi me ’jñasya mitratvād
ajayā naṣṭa-cakṣuṣaḥ
Synonyms
etān — all these; me — my; pṛcchataḥ — of one who inquires; praśnān — questions; hareḥ — of the Supreme Lord; karma — pastimes; vivitsayā — desiring to know; brūhi — kindly describe; me — unto me; ajñasya — of one who is ignorant; mitratvāt — because of friendship; ajayā — by the external energy; naṣṭa-cakṣuṣaḥ — those who have lost their vision.

Translation
My dear sage, I have put all these questions before you with a view to knowing the pastimes of Hari, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. You are the friend of all, so kindly describe them for all those who have lost their vision.

Text 41
सर्वे वेदाश्च यज्ञाश्च तपो दानानि चानघ ।
जीवाभयप्रदानस्य न कुर्वीरन् कलामपि ॥ ४१ ॥
sarve vedāś ca yajñāś ca
tapo dānāni cānagha
jīvābhaya-pradānasya
na kurvīran kalām api
Synonyms
sarve — all kinds of; vedāḥ — divisions of the Vedas; ca — also; yajñāḥ — sacrifices; ca — also; tapaḥ — penances; dānāni — charities; ca — and; anagha — O spotless one; jīva — the living entity; abhaya — immunity from material pangs; pradānasya — of one who gives such assurance; na — not; kurvīran — can he equalized; kalām — even partially; api — certainly.

Translation
O spotless one, your answers to all these questions will grant immunity from all material miseries. Such charity is greater than all Vedic charities, sacrifices, penances, etc.

Text 42
श्रीशुक उवाच
स इत्थमापृष्टपुराणकल्प: कुरुप्रधानेन मुनिप्रधान: ।
प्रवृद्धहर्षो भगवत्कथायां सञ्चोदितस्तं प्रहसन्निवाह ॥ ४२ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
sa ittham āpṛṣṭa-purāṇa-kalpaḥ
kuru-pradhānena muni-pradhānaḥ
pravṛddha-harṣo bhagavat-kathāyāṁ
sañcoditas taṁ prahasann ivāha
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; saḥ — he; ittham — thus; āpṛṣṭa — being questioned; purāṇa-kalpaḥ — one who knows how to explain the supplements of the Vedas (the Purāṇas); kuru-pradhānena — by the chief of the Kurus; muni-pradhānaḥ — the chief amongst the sages; pravṛddha — sufficiently enriched; harṣaḥ — satisfaction; bhagavat — the Personality of Godhead; kathāyām — in the topics of; sañcoditaḥ — being so infused; tam — unto Vidura; prahasan — with smiles; iva — like that; āha — replied.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus the chief of the sages, who was always enthusiastic about describing topics regarding the Personality of Godhead, began to narrate the descriptive explanation of the Purāṇas, being so infused by Vidura. He was very much enlivened by speaking on the transcendental activities of the Lord.