Text 1
ब्रह्मोवाच
ज्ञातोऽसि मेऽद्य सुचिरान्ननु देहभाजां
न ज्ञायते भगवतो गतिरित्यवद्यम् ।
नान्यत्त्वदस्ति भगवन्नपि तन्न शुद्धं
मायागुणव्यतिकराद्यदुरुर्विभासि ॥ १ ॥
brahmovāca
jñāto ’si me ’dya sucirān nanu deha-bhājāṁ
na jñāyate bhagavato gatir ity avadyam
nānyat tvad asti bhagavann api tan na śuddhaṁ
māyā-guṇa-vyatikarād yad urur vibhāsi
Synonyms
brahmā uvāca — Lord Brahmā said; jñātaḥ — known; asi — You are; me — by me; adya — today; sucirāt — after a long time; nanu — but; deha-bhājām — of one who has a material body; na — not; jñāyate — is known; bhagavataḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; gatiḥ — course; iti — so it is; avadyam — great offense; na anyat — none beyond; tvat — You; asti — there is; bhagavan — O my Lord; api — even though there is; tat — anything that may be; na — never; śuddham — absolute; māyā — material energy; guṇa-vyatikarāt — because of the mixture of the modes of; yat — to which; uruḥ — transcendental; vibhāsi — You are.

Translation
Lord Brahmā said: O my Lord, today, after many, many years of penance, I have come to know about You. Oh, how unfortunate the embodied living entities are that they are unable to know Your personality! My Lord, You are the only knowable object because there is nothing supreme beyond You. If there is anything supposedly superior to You, it is not the Absolute. You exist as the Supreme by exhibiting the creative energy of matter.

Text 2
रूपं यदेतदवबोधरसोदयेन
शश्वन्निवृत्ततमस: सदनुग्रहाय ।
आदौ गृहीतमवतारशतैकबीजं
यन्नाभिपद्मभवनादहमाविरासम् ॥ २ ॥
rūpaṁ yad etad avabodha-rasodayena
śaśvan-nivṛtta-tamasaḥ sad-anugrahāya
ādau gṛhītam avatāra-śataika-bījaṁ
yan-nābhi-padma-bhavanād aham āvirāsam
Synonyms
rūpam — form; yat — which; etat — that; avabodha-rasa — of Your internal potency; udayena — with the manifestation; śaśvat — forever; nivṛtta — freed from; tamasaḥ — material contamination; sat-anugrahāya — for the sake of the devotees; ādau — original in the creative energy of matter; gṛhītam — accepted; avatāra — of incarnations; śata-eka-bījam — the root cause of hundreds; yat — that which; nābhi-padma — the navel lotus flower; bhavanāt — from the home; aham — myself; āvirāsam — generated.

Translation
The form which I see is eternally freed from material contamination and has advented to show mercy to the devotees as a manifestation of internal potency. This incarnation is the origin of many other incarnations, and I am born from the lotus flower grown from Your navel home.

Text 3
नात: परं परम यद्भवत: स्वरूप-
मानन्दमात्रमविकल्पमविद्धवर्च: ।
पश्यामि विश्वसृजमेकमविश्वमात्मन्
भूतेन्द्रियात्मकमदस्त उपाश्रितोऽस्मि ॥ ३ ॥
nātaḥ paraṁ parama yad bhavataḥ svarūpam
ānanda-mātram avikalpam aviddha-varcaḥ
paśyāmi viśva-sṛjam ekam aviśvam ātman
bhūtendriyātmaka-madas ta upāśrito ’smi
Synonyms
na — do not; ataḥ param — hereafter; parama — O Supreme; yat — that which; bhavataḥ — of Your Lordship; svarūpam — eternal form; ānanda-mātram — impersonal Brahman effulgence; avikalpam — without changes; aviddha-varcaḥ — without deterioration of potency; paśyāmi — do I see; viśva-sṛjam — creator of the cosmic manifestation; ekam — one without a second; aviśvam — and yet not of matter; ātman — O Supreme Cause; bhūta — body; indriya — senses; ātmaka — on such identification; madaḥ — pride; te — unto You; upāśritaḥ — surrendered; asmi — I am.

Translation
O my Lord, I do not see a form superior to Your present form of eternal bliss and knowledge. In Your impersonal Brahman effulgence in the spiritual sky, there is no occasional change and no deterioration of internal potency. I surrender unto You because whereas I am proud of my material body and senses, Your Lordship is the cause of the cosmic manifestation and yet You are untouched by matter.

Text 4
तद्वा इदं भुवनमङ्गल मङ्गलाय
ध्याने स्म नो दर्शितं त उपासकानाम् ।
तस्मै नमो भगवतेऽनुविधेम तुभ्यं
योऽनाद‍ृतो नरकभाग्भिरसत्प्रसङ्गै: ॥ ४ ॥
tad vā idaṁ bhuvana-maṅgala maṅgalāya
dhyāne sma no darśitaṁ ta upāsakānām
tasmai namo bhagavate ’nuvidhema tubhyaṁ
yo ’nādṛto naraka-bhāgbhir asat-prasaṅgaiḥ
Synonyms
tat — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa; vā — or; idam — this present form; bhuvana-maṅgala — O You who are all-auspicious for all the universes; maṅgalāya — for the sake of all prosperity; dhyāne — in meditation; sma — as it were; naḥ — unto us; darśitam — manifested; te — Your; upāsakānām — of the devotees; tasmai — unto Him; namaḥ — my respectful obeisances; bhagavate — unto the Personality of Godhead; anuvidhema — I perform; tubhyam — unto You; yaḥ — which; anādṛtaḥ — is neglected; naraka-bhāgbhiḥ — by persons destined for hell; asat-prasaṅgaiḥ — by material topics.

Translation
This present form, or any transcendental form expanded by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is equally auspicious for all the universes. Since You have manifested this eternal personal form upon whom Your devotees meditate, I therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto You. Those who are destined to be dispatched to the path of hell neglect Your personal form because of speculating on material topics.

Text 5
ये तु त्वदीयचरणाम्बुजकोशगन्धं
जिघ्रन्ति कर्णविवरै: श्रुतिवातनीतम् ।
भक्त्या गृहीतचरण: परया च तेषां
नापैषि नाथ हृदयाम्बुरुहात्स्वपुंसाम् ॥ ५ ॥
ye tu tvadīya-caraṇāmbuja-kośa-gandhaṁ
jighranti karṇa-vivaraiḥ śruti-vāta-nītam
bhaktyā gṛhīta-caraṇaḥ parayā ca teṣāṁ
nāpaiṣi nātha hṛdayāmburuhāt sva-puṁsām
Synonyms
ye — those who; tu — but; tvadīya — Your; caraṇa-ambuja — lotus feet; kośa — inside; gandham — flavor; jighranti — smell; karṇa-vivaraiḥ — through the channel of the ears; śruti-vāta-nītam — carried by the air of Vedic sound; bhaktyā — by devotional service; gṛhīta-caraṇaḥ — accepting the lotus feet; parayā — transcendental; ca — also; teṣām — for them; na — never; apaiṣi — separate; nātha — O my Lord; hṛdaya — heart; ambu-ruhāt — from the lotus of; sva-puṁsām — of Your own devotees.

Translation
O my Lord, persons who smell the aroma of Your lotus feet, carried by the air of Vedic sound through the holes of the ears, accept Your devotional service. For them You are never separated from the lotus of their hearts.

Text 6
तावद्भयं द्रविणदेहसुहृन्निमित्तं
शोक: स्पृहा परिभवो विपुलश्च लोभ: ।
तावन्ममेत्यसदवग्रह आर्तिमूलं
यावन्न तेऽङ्‌घ्रिमभयं प्रवृणीत लोक: ॥ ६ ॥
tāvad bhayaṁ draviṇa-deha-suhṛn-nimittaṁ
śokaḥ spṛhā paribhavo vipulaś ca lobhaḥ
tāvan mamety asad-avagraha ārti-mūlaṁ
yāvan na te ’ṅghrim abhayaṁ pravṛṇīta lokaḥ
Synonyms
tāvat — until then; bhayam — fear; draviṇa — wealth; deha — body; suhṛt — relatives; nimittam — for the matter of; śokaḥ — lamentation; spṛhā — desire; paribhavaḥ — paraphernalia; vipulaḥ — very great; ca — also; lobhaḥ — avarice; tāvat — up to that time; mama — mine; iti — thus; asat — perishable; avagrahaḥ — undertaking; ārti-mūlam — full of anxieties; yāvat — as long as; na — do not; te — Your; aṅghrim abhayam — safe lotus feet; pravṛṇīta — take shelter; lokaḥ — the people of the world.

Translation
O my Lord, the people of the world are embarrassed by all material anxieties — they are always afraid. They always try to protect wealth, body and friends, they are filled with lamentation and unlawful desires and paraphernalia, and they avariciously base their undertakings on the perishable conceptions of “my” and “mine.” As long as they do not take shelter of Your safe lotus feet, they are full of such anxieties.

Text 7
दैवेन ते हतधियो भवत: प्रसङ्गा-
त्सर्वाशुभोपशमनाद्विमुखेन्द्रिया ये ।
कुर्वन्ति कामसुखलेशलवाय दीना
लोभाभिभूतमनसोऽकुशलानि शश्वत् ॥ ७ ॥
daivena te hata-dhiyo bhavataḥ prasaṅgāt
sarvāśubhopaśamanād vimukhendriyā ye
kurvanti kāma-sukha-leśa-lavāya dīnā
lobhābhibhūta-manaso ’kuśalāni śaśvat
Synonyms
daivena — by fate of misfortune; te — they; hata-dhiyaḥ — bereft of memory; bhavataḥ — of You; prasaṅgāt — from the topics; sarva — all; aśubha — inauspiciousness; upaśamanāt — curbing down; vimukha — turned against; indriyāḥ — senses; ye — those; kurvanti — act; kāma — sense gratification; sukha — happiness; leśa — brief; lavāya — for a moment only; dīnāḥ — poor fellows; lobha-abhibhūta — overwhelmed by greed; manasaḥ — of one whose mind; akuśalāni — inauspicious activities; śaśvat — always.

Translation
O my Lord, persons who are bereft of the all-auspicious performance of chanting and hearing about Your transcendental activities are certainly unfortunate and are also bereft of good sense. They engage in inauspicious activities, enjoying sense gratification for a very little while.

Text 8
क्षुत्तृट्‌त्रिधातुभिरिमा मुहुरर्द्यमाना:
शीतोष्णवातवरषैरितरेतराच्च ।
कामाग्निनाच्युत रुषा च सुदुर्भरेण
सम्पश्यतो मन उरुक्रम सीदते मे ॥ ८ ॥
kṣut-tṛṭ-tridhātubhir imā muhur ardyamānāḥ
śītoṣṇa-vāta-varaṣair itaretarāc ca
kāmāgninācyuta-ruṣā ca sudurbhareṇa
sampaśyato mana urukrama sīdate me
Synonyms
kṣut — hunger; tṛṭ — thirst; tri-dhātubhiḥ — three humors, namely mucus, bile and wind; imāḥ — all of them; muhuḥ — always; ardyamānāḥ — perplexed; śīta — winter; uṣṇa — summer; vāta — wind; varaṣaiḥ — by rains; itara-itarāt — and many other disturbances; ca — also; kāma-agninā — by strong sex urges; acyuta-ruṣā — indefatigable anger; ca — also; sudurbhareṇa — most unbearable; sampaśyataḥ — so observing; manaḥ — mind; urukrama — O great actor; sīdate — becomes despondent; me — my.

Translation
O great actor, my Lord, all these poor creatures are constantly perplexed by hunger, thirst, severe cold, secretion and bile, attacked by coughing winter, blasting summer, rains and many other disturbing elements, and overwhelmed by strong sex urges and indefatigable anger. I take pity on them, and I am very much aggrieved for them.

Text 9
यावत्पृथक्त्वमिदमात्मन इन्द्रियार्थ-
मायाबलं भगवतो जन ईश पश्येत् ।
तावन्न संसृतिरसौ प्रतिसंक्रमेत
व्यर्थापि दु:खनिवहं वहती क्रियार्था ॥ ९ ॥
yāvat pṛthaktvam idam ātmana indriyārtha-
māyā-balaṁ bhagavato jana īśa paśyet
tāvan na saṁsṛtir asau pratisaṅkrameta
vyarthāpi duḥkha-nivahaṁ vahatī kriyārthā
Synonyms
yāvat — as long as; pṛthaktvam — separatism; idam — this; ātmanaḥ — of the body; indriya-artha — for sense gratification; māyā-balam — influence of external energy; bhagavataḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; janaḥ — a person; īśa — O my Lord; paśyet — sees; tāvat — so long; na — not; saṁsṛtiḥ — the influence of material existence; asau — that man; pratisaṅkrameta — can overcome; vyarthā api — although without meaning; duḥkha-nivaham — multiple miseries; vahatī — bringing; kriyā-arthā — for fruitive activities.

Translation
O my Lord, the material miseries are without factual existence for the soul. Yet as long as the conditioned soul sees the body as meant for sense enjoyment, he cannot get out of the entanglement of material miseries, being influenced by Your external energy.

Text 10
अह्न्यापृतार्तकरणा निशि नि:शयाना ।
नानामनोरथधिया क्षणभग्ननिद्रा: ।
दैवाहतार्थरचना ऋषयोऽपि देव
युष्मत्प्रसङ्गविमुखा इह संसरन्ति ॥ १० ॥
ahny āpṛtārta-karaṇā niśi niḥśayānā
nānā-manoratha-dhiyā kṣaṇa-bhagna-nidrāḥ
daivāhatārtha-racanā ṛṣayo ’pi deva
yuṣmat-prasaṅga-vimukhā iha saṁsaranti
Synonyms
ahni — during the daytime; āpṛta — engaged; ārta — distressing engagement; karaṇāḥ — senses; niśi — at night; niḥśayānāḥ — insomnia; nānā — various; manoratha — mental speculations; dhiyā — by intelligence; kṣaṇa — constantly; bhagna — broken; nidrāḥ — sleep; daiva — superhuman; āhata-artha — frustrated; racanāḥ — plans; ṛṣayaḥ — great sages; api — also; deva — O my Lord; yuṣmat — Your Lordship’s; prasaṅga — topic; vimukhāḥ — turned against; iha — in this (material world); saṁsaranti — do rotate.

Translation
Such nondevotees engage their senses in very troublesome and extensive work, and they suffer insomnia at night because their intelligence constantly breaks their sleep with various mental speculations. They are frustrated in all their various plans by supernatural power. Even great sages, if they are against Your transcendental topics, must rotate in this material world.

Text 11
त्वं भक्तियोगपरिभावितहृत्सरोज
आस्से श्रुतेक्षितपथो ननु नाथ पुंसाम् ।
यद्यद्धिया त उरुगाय विभावयन्ति
तत्तद्वपु: प्रणयसे सदनुग्रहाय ॥ ११ ॥
tvaṁ bhakti-yoga-paribhāvita-hṛt-saroja
āsse śrutekṣita-patho nanu nātha puṁsām
yad-yad-dhiyā ta urugāya vibhāvayanti
tat-tad-vapuḥ praṇayase sad-anugrahāya
Synonyms
tvam — unto You; bhakti-yoga — in devotional service; paribhāvita — being one-hundred-percent engaged; hṛt — of the heart; saroje — on the lotus; āsse — You reside; śruta-īkṣita — seen through the ear; pathaḥ — the path; nanu — now; nātha — O my Lord; puṁsām — of the devotees; yat-yat — whichever; dhiyā — by meditating; te — Your; urugāya — O multiglorious; vibhāvayanti — they specifically think of; tat-tat — the very same; vapuḥ — transcendental form; praṇayase — do You manifest; sat-anugrahāya — to show Your causeless mercy.

Translation
O my Lord, Your devotees can see You through the ears by the process of bona fide hearing, and thus their hearts become cleansed, and You take Your seat there. You are so merciful to Your devotees that You manifest Yourself in the particular eternal form of transcendence in which they always think of You.

Text 12
नातिप्रसीदति तथोपचितोपचारै-
राराधित: सुरगणैर्हृदिबद्धकामै: ।
यत्सर्वभूतदययासदलभ्ययैको
नानाजनेष्ववहित: सुहृदन्तरात्मा ॥ १२ ॥
nātiprasīdati tathopacitopacārair
ārādhitaḥ sura-gaṇair hṛdi baddha-kāmaiḥ
yat sarva-bhūta-dayayāsad-alabhyayaiko
nānā-janeṣv avahitaḥ suhṛd antar-ātmā
Synonyms
na — never; ati — very much; prasīdati — become satisfied; tathā — as much as; upacita — by pompous arrangement; upacāraiḥ — with much worshipable paraphernalia; ārādhitaḥ — being worshiped; sura-gaṇaiḥ — by the celestial demigods; hṛdi baddha-kāmaiḥ — with hearts full of all sorts of material desires; yat — that which; sarva — all; bhūta — living entities; dayayā — to show them causeless mercy; asat — nondevotee; alabhyayā — not being achieved; ekaḥ — one without a second; nānā — various; janeṣu — in living entities; avahitaḥ — perceived; suhṛt — well-wishing friend; antaḥ — within; ātmā — Supersoul.

Translation
My Lord, You are not very much satisfied by the worship of the demigods, who arrange for Your worship very pompously, with various paraphernalia, but who are full of material hankerings. You are situated in everyone’s heart as the Supersoul just to show Your causeless mercy, and You are the eternal well-wisher, but You are unavailable for the nondevotee.

Text 13
पुंसामतो विविधकर्मभिरध्वराद्यै-
र्दानेन चोग्रतपसा परिचर्यया च ।
आराधनं भगवतस्तव सत्क्रियार्थो
धर्मोऽर्पित: कर्हिचिद्‌म्रियते न यत्र ॥ १३ ॥
puṁsām ato vividha-karmabhir adhvarādyair
dānena cogra-tapasā paricaryayā ca
ārādhanaṁ bhagavatas tava sat-kriyārtho
dharmo ’rpitaḥ karhicid mriyate na yatra
Synonyms
puṁsām — of the people; ataḥ — therefore; vividha-karmabhiḥ — by various fruitive activities; adhvara-ādyaiḥ — by performance of Vedic rituals; dānena — by charities; ca — and; ugra — very hard; tapasā — austerity; paricaryayā — by transcendental service; ca — also; ārādhanam — worship; bhagavataḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; tava — Your; sat-kriyā-arthaḥ — simply for pleasing Your Lordship; dharmaḥ — religion; arpitaḥ — so offered; karhicit — at any time; mriyate — vanquishes; na — never; yatra — there.

Translation
But the pious activities of the people, such as performance of Vedic rituals, charity, austere penances and transcendental service, performed with a view to worship You and satisfy You by offering You the fruitive results, are also beneficial. Such acts of religion never go in vain.

Text 14
शश्वत्स्वरूपमहसैव निपीतभेद-
मोहाय बोधधिषणाय नम: परस्मै ।
विश्वोद्भवस्थितिलयेषु निमित्तलीला-
रासाय ते नम इदं चकृमेश्वराय ॥ १४ ॥
śaśvat svarūpa-mahasaiva nipīta-bheda-
mohāya bodha-dhiṣaṇāya namaḥ parasmai
viśvodbhava-sthiti-layeṣu nimitta-līlā-
rāsāya te nama idaṁ cakṛmeśvarāya
Synonyms
śaśvat — eternally; svarūpa — transcendental form; mahasā — by the glories; eva — certainly; nipīta — distinguished; bheda — differentiation; mohāya — unto the illusory conception; bodha — self-knowledge; dhiṣaṇāya — intelligence; namaḥ — obeisances; parasmai — unto the Transcendence; viśva-udbhava — creation of the cosmic manifestation; sthiti — maintenance; layeṣu — also destruction; nimitta — for the matter of; līlā — by such pastimes; rāsāya — for enjoyment; te — unto You; namaḥ — obeisances; idam — this; cakṛma — do I perform; īśvarāya — unto the Supreme.

Translation
Let me offer my obeisances unto the Supreme Transcendence, who is eternally distinguished by His internal potency. His indistinguishable impersonal feature is realized by intelligence for self-realization. I offer my obeisances unto Him who by His pastimes enjoys the creation, maintenance and dissolution of the cosmic manifestation.

Text 15
यस्यावतारगुणकर्मविडम्बनानि
नामानि येऽसुविगमे विवशा गृणन्ति ।
तेऽनैकजन्मशमलं सहसैव हित्वा
संयान्त्यपावृतामृतं तमजं प्रपद्ये ॥ १५ ॥
yasyāvatāra-guṇa-karma-viḍambanāni
nāmāni ye ’su-vigame vivaśā gṛṇanti
te ’naika-janma-śamalaṁ sahasaiva hitvā
saṁyānty apāvṛtāmṛtaṁ tam ajaṁ prapadye
Synonyms
yasya — whose; avatāra — incarnations; guṇa — transcendental qualities; karma — activities; viḍambanāni — all mysterious; nāmāni — transcendental names; ye — those; asu-vigame — while quitting this life; vivaśāḥ — automatically; gṛṇanti — invoke; te — they; anaika — many; janma — births; śamalam — accumulated sins; sahasā — immediately; eva — certainly; hitvā — giving up; saṁyānti — obtain; apāvṛta — open; amṛtam — immortality; tam — Him; ajam — the unborn; prapadye — I take shelter.

Translation
Let me take shelter of the lotus feet of Him whose incarnations, qualities and activities are mysterious imitations of worldly affairs. One who invokes His transcendental names, even unconsciously, at the time he quits this life, is certainly washed immediately of the sins of many, many births and attains Him without fail.

Text 16
यो वा अहं च गिरिशश्च विभु: स्वयं च
स्थित्युद्भवप्रलयहेतव आत्ममूलम् ।
भित्त्वा त्रिपाद्ववृध एक उरुप्ररोह-
स्तस्मै नमो भगवते भुवनद्रुमाय ॥ १६ ॥
yo vā ahaṁ ca giriśaś ca vibhuḥ svayaṁ ca
sthity-udbhava-pralaya-hetava ātma-mūlam
bhittvā tri-pād vavṛdha eka uru-prarohas
tasmai namo bhagavate bhuvana-drumāya
Synonyms
yaḥ — one who; vai — certainly; aham ca — also I; giriśaḥ ca — also Śiva; vibhuḥ — the Almighty; svayam — personality (as Viṣṇu); ca — and; sthiti — maintenance; udbhava — creation; pralaya — dissolution; hetavaḥ — the causes; ātma-mūlam — self-rooted; bhittvā — having penetrated; tri-pāt — three trunks; vavṛdhe — grew; ekaḥ — one without a second; uru — many; prarohaḥ — branches; tasmai — unto Him; namaḥ — obeisances; bhagavate — unto the Personality of Godhead; bhuvana-drumāya — unto the tree of the planetary system.

Translation
Your Lordship is the prime root of the tree of the planetary systems. This tree has grown by first penetrating the material nature in three trunks — as me, Śiva and You, the Almighty — for creation, maintenance and dissolution, and we three have grown with many branches. Therefore I offer my obeisances unto You, the tree of the cosmic manifestation.

Text 17
लोको विकर्मनिरत: कुशले प्रमत्त:
कर्मण्ययं त्वदुदिते भवदर्चने स्वे ।
यस्तावदस्य बलवानिह जीविताशां
सद्यश्छिनत्त्यनिमिषाय नमोऽस्तु तस्मै ॥ १७ ॥
loko vikarma-nirataḥ kuśale pramattaḥ
karmaṇy ayaṁ tvad-udite bhavad-arcane sve
yas tāvad asya balavān iha jīvitāśāṁ
sadyaś chinatty animiṣāya namo ’stu tasmai
Synonyms
lokaḥ — people in general; vikarma — work without sense; nirataḥ — engaged in; kuśale — in beneficial activity; pramattaḥ — negligent; karmaṇi — in activity; ayam — this; tvat — by You; udite — enunciated; bhavat — of You; arcane — in worship; sve — their own; yaḥ — who; tāvat — as long as; asya — of the people in general; balavān — very strong; iha — this; jīvita-āśām — struggle for existence; sadyaḥ — directly; chinatti — is cut to pieces; animiṣāya — by the eternal time; namaḥ — my obeisances; astu — let there be; tasmai — unto Him.

Translation
People in general all engage in foolish acts, not in the really beneficial activities enunciated directly by You for their guidance. As long as their tendency for foolish work remains powerful, all their plans in the struggle for existence will be cut to pieces. I therefore offer my obeisances unto Him who acts as eternal time.

Text 18
यस्माद्‌बिभेम्यहमपि द्विपरार्धधिष्ण्य-
मध्यासित: सकललोकनमस्कृतं यत् ।
तेपे तपो बहुसवोऽवरुरुत्समान-
स्तस्मै नमो भगवतेऽधिमखाय तुभ्यम् ॥ १८ ॥
yasmād bibhemy aham api dviparārdha-dhiṣṇyam
adhyāsitaḥ sakala-loka-namaskṛtaṁ yat
tepe tapo bahu-savo ’varurutsamānas
tasmai namo bhagavate ’dhimakhāya tubhyam
Synonyms
yasmāt — from whom; bibhemi — fear; aham — I; api — also; dvi-para-ardha — up to the limit of 4,300,000,000 × 2 × 30 × 12 × 100 solar years; dhiṣṇyam — place; adhyāsitaḥ — situated in; sakala-loka — all other planets; namaskṛtam — honored by; yat — that; tepe — underwent; tapaḥ — penances; bahu-savaḥ — many, many years; avarurutsamānaḥ — desiring to obtain You; tasmai — unto Him; namaḥ — I do offer my obeisances; bhagavate — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhimakhāya — unto Him who is the enjoyer of all sacrifices; tubhyam — unto Your Lordship.

Translation
Your Lordship, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You who are indefatigable time and the enjoyer of all sacrifices. Although I am situated in an abode which will continue to exist for a time duration of two parārdhas, although I am the leader of all other planets in the universe, and although I have undergone many, many years of penance for self-realization, still I offer my respects unto You.

Text 19
तिर्यङ्‍मनुष्यविबुधादिषु जीवयोनि-
ष्वात्मेच्छयात्मकृतसेतुपरीप्सया य: ।
रेमे निरस्तविषयोऽप्यवरुद्धदेह-
स्तस्मै नमो भगवते पुरुषोत्तमाय ॥ १९ ॥
tiryaṅ-manuṣya-vibudhādiṣu jīva-yoniṣv
ātmecchayātma-kṛta-setu-parīpsayā yaḥ
reme nirasta-viṣayo ’py avaruddha-dehas
tasmai namo bhagavate puruṣottamāya
Synonyms
tiryak — animals lower than human beings; manuṣya — human beings, etc.; vibudha-ādiṣu — amongst the demigods; jīva-yoniṣu — in different species of life; ātma — self; icchayā — by the will; ātma-kṛta — self-created; setu — obligations; parīpsayā — desiring to preserve; yaḥ — who; reme — performing transcendental pastimes; nirasta — not being affected; viṣayaḥ — material contamination; api — certainly; avaruddha — manifested; dehaḥ — transcendental body; tasmai — unto Him; namaḥ — my obeisances; bhagavate — unto the Personality of Godhead; puruṣottamāya — the primeval Lord.

Translation
O my Lord, by Your own will You appear in the various species of living entities, among animals lower than human beings as well as among the demigods, to perform Your transcendental pastimes. You are not affected by material contamination. You come just to fulfill the obligations of Your own principles of religion, and therefore, O Supreme Personality, I offer my obeisances unto You for manifesting such different forms.

Text 20
योऽविद्ययानुपहतोऽपि दशार्धवृत्त्या
निद्रामुवाह जठरीकृतलोकयात्र: ।
अन्तर्जलेऽहिकशिपुस्पर्शानुकूलां
भीमोर्मिमालिनि जनस्य सुखं विवृण्वन् ॥ २० ॥
yo ’vidyayānupahato ’pi daśārdha-vṛttyā
nidrām uvāha jaṭharī-kṛta-loka-yātraḥ
antar-jale ’hi-kaśipu-sparśānukūlāṁ
bhīmormi-mālini janasya sukhaṁ vivṛṇvan
Synonyms
yaḥ — one; avidyayā — influenced by nescience; anupahataḥ — without being affected; api — in spite of; daśa-ardha — five; vṛttyā — interaction; nidrām — sleep; uvāha — accepted; jaṭharī — within the abdomen; kṛta — doing so; loka-yātraḥ — maintenance of the different entities; antaḥ-jale — within the water of devastation; ahi-kaśipu — on the snake bed; sparśa-anukūlām — happy for the touch; bhīma-ūrmi — violent waves; mālini — chain of; janasya — of the intelligent person; sukham — happiness; vivṛṇvan — showing.

Translation
My Lord, You accept the pleasure of sleeping in the water of devastation, where there are violent waves, and You enjoy pleasure on the bed of snakes, showing the happiness of Your sleep to intelligent persons. At that time, all the universal planets are stationed within Your abdomen.

Text 21
यन्नाभिपद्मभवनादहमासमीड्य
लोकत्रयोपकरणो यदनुग्रहेण ।
तस्मै नमस्त उदरस्थभवाय योग-
निद्रावसानविकसन्नलिनेक्षणाय ॥ २१ ॥
yan-nābhi-padma-bhavanād aham āsam īḍya
loka-trayopakaraṇo yad-anugraheṇa
tasmai namas ta udara-stha-bhavāya yoga-
nidrāvasāna-vikasan-nalinekṣaṇāya
Synonyms
yat — whose; nābhi — navel; padma — lotus; bhavanāt — from the house of; aham — I; āsam — became manifested; īḍya — O worshipable one; loka-traya — the three worlds; upakaraṇaḥ — helping in the creation of; yat — whose; anugraheṇa — by the mercy; tasmai — unto Him; namaḥ — my obeisances; te — unto You; udara-stha — situated within the abdomen; bhavāya — having the universe; yoga-nidrā-avasāna — after the end of that transcendental sleep; vikasat — blossoming; nalina-īkṣaṇāya — unto Him whose opening eyes are like lotuses.

Translation
O object of my worship, I am born from the house of Your lotus navel for the purpose of creating the universe by Your mercy. All these planets of the universe were stationed within Your transcendental abdomen while You were enjoying sleep. Now, Your sleep having ended, Your eyes are open like blossoming lotuses in the morning.

Text 22
सोऽयं समस्तजगतां सुहृदेक आत्मा
सत्त्वेन यन्मृडयते भगवान् भगेन ।
तेनैव मे द‍ृशमनुस्पृशताद्यथाहं
स्रक्ष्यामि पूर्ववदिदं प्रणतप्रियोऽसौ ॥ २२ ॥
so ’yaṁ samasta-jagatāṁ suhṛd eka ātmā
sattvena yan mṛḍayate bhagavān bhagena
tenaiva me dṛśam anuspṛśatād yathāhaṁ
srakṣyāmi pūrvavad idaṁ praṇata-priyo ’sau
Synonyms
saḥ — He; ayam — the Lord; samasta-jagatām — of all the universes; suhṛt ekaḥ — the one friend and philosopher; ātmā — the Supersoul; sattvena — by the mode of goodness; yat — one who; mṛḍayate — causes happiness; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; bhagena — with six opulences; tena — by Him; eva — certainly; me — to me; dṛśam — power of introspection; anuspṛśatāt — let Him give; yathā — as; aham — I; srakṣyāmi — will be able to create; pūrva-vat — as before; idam — this universe; praṇata — surrendered; priyaḥ — dear; asau — He (the Lord).

Translation
Let the Supreme Lord be merciful towards me. He is the one friend and soul of all living entities in the world, and He maintains all, for their ultimate happiness, by His six transcendental opulences. May He be merciful towards me so that I, as before, may be empowered with the introspection to create, for I am also one of the surrendered souls who are dear to the Lord.

Text 23
एष प्रपन्नवरदो रमयात्मशक्त्या
यद्यत्करिष्यति गृहीतगुणावतार: ।
तस्मिन् स्वविक्रममिदं सृजतोऽपि चेतो
युञ्जीत कर्मशमलं च यथा विजह्याम् ॥ २३ ॥
eṣa prapanna-varado ramayātma-śaktyā
yad yat kariṣyati gṛhīta-guṇāvatāraḥ
tasmin sva-vikramam idaṁ sṛjato ’pi ceto
yuñjīta karma-śamalaṁ ca yathā vijahyām
Synonyms
eṣaḥ — this; prapanna — one who is surrendered; vara-daḥ — benefactor; ramayā — enjoying always with the goddess of fortune (Lakṣmī); ātma-śaktyā — with His internal potency; yat yat — whatever; kariṣyati — He may act; gṛhīta — accepting; guṇa-avatāraḥ — incarnation of the mode of goodness; tasmin — unto Him; sva-vikramam — with omnipotency; idam — this cosmic manifestation; sṛjataḥ — creating; api — in spite of; cetaḥ — heart; yuñjīta — be engaged; karma — work; śamalam — material affection; ca — also; yathā — as much as; vijahyām — I can give up.

Translation
The Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead, is always the benefactor of the surrendered souls. His activities are always enacted through His internal potency, Ramā, or the goddess of fortune. I pray only to engage in His service in the creation of the material world, and I pray that I not be materially affected by my works, for thus I may be able to give up the false prestige of being the creator.

Text 24
नाभिहृदादिह सतोऽम्भसि यस्य पुंसो
विज्ञानशक्तिरहमासमनन्तशक्ते: ।
रूपं विचित्रमिदमस्य विवृण्वतो मे
मा रीरिषीष्ट निगमस्य गिरां विसर्ग: ॥ २४ ॥
nābhi-hradād iha sato ’mbhasi yasya puṁso
vijñāna-śaktir aham āsam ananta-śakteḥ
rūpaṁ vicitram idam asya vivṛṇvato me
mā rīriṣīṣṭa nigamasya girāṁ visargaḥ
Synonyms
nābhi-hradāt — from the navel lake; iha — in this millennium; sataḥ — lying; ambhasi — in the water; yasya — one whose; puṁsaḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; vijñāna — of the total universe; śaktiḥ — energy; aham — I; āsam — was born; ananta — unlimited; śakteḥ — of the powerful; rūpam — form; vicitram — variegated; idam — this; asya — His; vivṛṇvataḥ — manifesting; me — unto me; mā — may not; rīriṣīṣṭa — vanish; nigamasya — of the Vedas; girām — of the sounds; visargaḥ — vibration.

Translation
The Lord’s potencies are innumerable. As He lies down in the water of devastation, I am born as the total universal energy from the navel lake in which the lotus sprouts. I am now engaged in manifesting His diverse energies in the form of the cosmic manifestation. I therefore pray that in the course of my material activities I may not be deviated from the vibration of the Vedic hymns.

Text 25
सोऽसावदभ्रकरुणो भगवान् विवृद्ध-
प्रेमस्मितेन नयनाम्बुरुहं विजृम्भन् ।
उत्थाय विश्वविजयाय च नो विषादं
माध्व्या गिरापनयतात्पुरुष: पुराण: ॥ २५ ॥
so ’sāv adabhra-karuṇo bhagavān vivṛddha-
prema-smitena nayanāmburuhaṁ vijṛmbhan
utthāya viśva-vijayāya ca no viṣādaṁ
mādhvyā girāpanayatāt puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — He (the Lord); asau — that; adabhra — unlimited; karuṇaḥ — merciful; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; vivṛddha — excessive; prema — love; smitena — by smiling; nayana-amburuham — the lotus eyes; vijṛmbhan — by opening; utthāya — for flourishing; viśva-vijayāya — for glorifying the cosmic creation; ca — as also; naḥ — our; viṣādam — dejection; mādhvyā — by sweet; girā — words; apanayatāt — let Him kindly remove; puruṣaḥ — the Supreme; purāṇaḥ — oldest.

Translation
The Lord, who is supreme and is the oldest of all, is unlimitedly merciful. I wish that He may smilingly bestow His benediction upon me by opening His lotus eyes. He can uplift the entire cosmic creation and remove our dejection by kindly speaking His directions.

Text 26
मैत्रेय उवाच
स्वसम्भवं निशाम्यैवं तपोविद्यासमाधिभि: ।
यावन्मनोवच: स्तुत्वा विरराम स खिन्नवत् ॥ २६ ॥
maitreya uvāca
sva-sambhavaṁ niśāmyaivaṁ
tapo-vidyā-samādhibhiḥ
yāvan mano-vacaḥ stutvā
virarāma sa khinnavat
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya said; sva-sambhavam — the source of his appearance; niśāmya — by seeing; evam — thus; tapaḥ — penance; vidyā — knowledge; samādhibhiḥ — as also by concentration of the mind; yāvat — as far as possible; manaḥ — mind; vacaḥ — words; stutvā — having prayed; virarāma — became silent; saḥ — he (Brahmā); khinna-vat — as if tired.

Translation
The sage Maitreya said: O Vidura, after observing the source of his appearance, namely the Personality of Godhead, Brahmā prayed for His mercy as far as his mind and words would permit him. Thus having prayed, he became silent, as if tired from his activities of penance, knowledge and mental concentration.

Texts 27-28
अथाभिप्रेतमन्वीक्ष्य ब्रह्मणो मधुसूदन: ।
विषण्णचेतसं तेन कल्पव्यतिकराम्भसा ॥ २७ ॥
लोकसंस्थानविज्ञान आत्मन: परिखिद्यत: ।
तमाहागाधया वाचा कश्मलं शमयन्निव ॥ २८ ॥
athābhipretam anvīkṣya
brahmaṇo madhusūdanaḥ
viṣaṇṇa-cetasaṁ tena
kalpa-vyatikarāmbhasā
loka-saṁsthāna-vijñāna
ātmanaḥ parikhidyataḥ
tam āhāgādhayā vācā
kaśmalaṁ śamayann iva
Synonyms
atha — thereupon; abhipretam — intention; anvīkṣya — observing; brahmaṇaḥ — of Brahmā; madhusūdanaḥ — the killer of the Madhu demon; viṣaṇṇa — depressed; cetasam — of the heart; tena — by him; kalpa — millennium; vyatikara-ambhasā — devastating water; loka-saṁsthāna — situation of the planetary system; vijñāne — in the science; ātmanaḥ — of himself; parikhidyataḥ — sufficiently anxious; tam — unto him; āha — said; agādhayā — deeply thoughtful; vācā — by words; kaśmalam — impurities; śamayan — removing; iva — like that.

Translation
The Lord saw that Brahmā was very anxious about the planning and construction of the different planetary systems and was depressed upon seeing the devastating water. He could understand the intention of Brahmā, and thus He spoke in deep, thoughtful words, removing all the illusion that had arisen.

Text 29
श्रीभगवानुवाच
मा वेदगर्भ गास्तन्द्रीं सर्ग उद्यममावह ।
तन्मयापादितं ह्यग्रे यन्मां प्रार्थयते भवान् ॥ २९ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
mā veda-garbha gās tandrīṁ
sarga udyamam āvaha
tan mayāpāditaṁ hy agre
yan māṁ prārthayate bhavān
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Lord, the Personality of Godhead, said; mā — do not; veda-garbha — O You who have the depth of all Vedic wisdom; gāḥ tandrīm — become dejected; sarge — for creation; udyamam — enterprises; āvaha — you just undertake; tat — that (which you want); mayā — by Me; āpāditam — executed; hi — certainly; agre — previously; yat — which; mām — from Me; prārthayate — begging; bhavān — you.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead then said: O Brahmā, O depth of Vedic wisdom, be neither depressed nor anxious about the execution of creation. What you are begging from Me has already been granted before.

Text 30
भूयस्त्वं तप आतिष्ठ विद्यां चैव मदाश्रयाम् ।
ताभ्यामन्तर्हृदि ब्रह्मन् लोकान्द्रक्ष्यस्यपावृतान् ॥ ३० ॥
bhūyas tvaṁ tapa ātiṣṭha
vidyāṁ caiva mad-āśrayām
tābhyām antar-hṛdi brahman
lokān drakṣyasy apāvṛtān
Synonyms
bhūyaḥ — again; tvam — yourself; tapaḥ — penance; ātiṣṭha — be situated; vidyām — in the knowledge; ca — also; eva — certainly; mat — My; āśrayām — under the protection; tābhyām — by those qualifications; antaḥ — within; hṛdi — in the heart; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; lokān — all the worlds; drakṣyasi — you will see; apāvṛtān — all disclosed.

Translation
O Brahmā, situate yourself in penance and meditation and follow the principles of knowledge to receive My favor. By these actions you will be able to understand everything from within your heart.

Text 31
तत आत्मनि लोके च भक्तियुक्त: समाहित: ।
द्रष्टासि मां ततं ब्रह्यन्मयि लोकांस्त्वमात्मन: ॥ ३१ ॥
tata ātmani loke ca
bhakti-yuktaḥ samāhitaḥ
draṣṭāsi māṁ tataṁ brahman
mayi lokāṁs tvam ātmanaḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; ātmani — in yourself; loke — in the universe; ca — also; bhakti-yuktaḥ — being situated in devotional service; samāhitaḥ — being completely absorbed; draṣṭā asi — you shall see; mām — Me; tatam — spread throughout; brahman — O Brahmā; mayi — in Me; lokān — all the universe; tvam — you; ātmanaḥ — the living entities.

Translation
O Brahmā, when you are absorbed in devotional service, in the course of your creative activities, you will see Me in you and throughout the universe, and you will see that you yourself, the universe and the living entities are all in Me.

Text 32
यदा तु सर्वभूतेषु दारुष्वग्निमिव स्थितम् ।
प्रतिचक्षीत मां लोको जह्यात्तर्ह्येव कश्मलम् ॥ ३२ ॥
yadā tu sarva-bhūteṣu
dāruṣv agnim iva sthitam
praticakṣīta māṁ loko
jahyāt tarhy eva kaśmalam
Synonyms
yadā — when; tu — but; sarva — all; bhūteṣu — in the living entities; dāruṣu — in wood; agnim — fire; iva — like; sthitam — situated; praticakṣīta — you shall see; mām — Me; lokaḥ — and the universe; jahyāt — can give up; tarhi — then at once; eva — certainly; kaśmalam — illusion.

Translation
You will see Me in all living entities as well as all over the universe, just as fire is situated in wood. Only in that state of transcendental vision will you be able to be free from all kinds of illusion.

Text 33
यदा रहितमात्मानं भूतेन्द्रियगुणाशयै: ।
स्वरूपेण मयोपेतं पश्यन् स्वाराज्यमृच्छति ॥ ३३ ॥
yadā rahitam ātmānaṁ
bhūtendriya-guṇāśayaiḥ
svarūpeṇa mayopetaṁ
paśyan svārājyam ṛcchati
Synonyms
yadā — when; rahitam — freed from; ātmānam — self; bhūta — material elements; indriya — material senses; guṇa-āśayaiḥ — under the influence of the material modes of nature; svarūpeṇa — in pure existence; mayā — by Me; upetam — approaching; paśyan — by seeing; svārājyam — spiritual kingdom; ṛcchati — enjoy.

Translation
When you are free from the conception of gross and subtle bodies and when your senses are free from all influences of the modes of material nature, you will realize your pure form in My association. At that time you will be situated in pure consciousness.

Text 34
नानाकर्मवितानेन प्रजा बह्वी: सिसृक्षत: ।
नात्मावसीदत्यस्मिंस्ते वर्षीयान्मदनुग्रह: ॥ ३४ ॥
nānā-karma-vitānena
prajā bahvīḥ sisṛkṣataḥ
nātmāvasīdaty asmiṁs te
varṣīyān mad-anugrahaḥ
Synonyms
nānā-karma — varieties of service; vitānena — by expansion of; prajāḥ — population; bahvīḥ — innumerable; sisṛkṣataḥ — desiring to increase; na — never; ātmā — self; avasīdati — will be bereaved; asmin — in the matter; te — of you; varṣīyān — always increasing; mat — My; anugrahaḥ — causeless mercy.

Translation
Since you have desired to increase the population innumerably and expand your varieties of service, you shall never be deprived in this matter because My causeless mercy upon you will always increase for all time.

Text 35
ऋषिमाद्यं न बध्नाति पापीयांस्त्वां रजोगुण: ।
यन्मनो मयि निर्बद्धं प्रजा: संसृजतोऽपि ते ॥ ३५ ॥
ṛṣim ādyaṁ na badhnāti
pāpīyāṁs tvāṁ rajo-guṇaḥ
yan mano mayi nirbaddhaṁ
prajāḥ saṁsṛjato ’pi te
Synonyms
ṛṣim — unto the great sage; ādyam — the first of the kind; na — never; badhnāti — encroaches; pāpīyān — vicious; tvām — you; rajaḥ-guṇaḥ — the material mode of passion; yat — because; manaḥ — mind; mayi — in Me; nirbaddham — compact in; prajāḥ — progeny; saṁsṛjataḥ — generating; api — in spite of; te — your.

Translation
You are the original ṛṣi, and because your mind is always fixed on Me, even though you will be engaged in generating various progeny the vicious mode of passion will never encroach upon you.

Text 36
ज्ञातोऽहं भवता त्वद्य दुर्विज्ञेयोऽपि देहिनाम् ।
यन्मां त्वं मन्यसेऽयुक्तं भूतेन्द्रियगुणात्मभि: ॥ ३६ ॥
jñāto ’haṁ bhavatā tv adya
durvijñeyo ’pi dehinām
yan māṁ tvaṁ manyase ’yuktaṁ
bhūtendriya-guṇātmabhiḥ
Synonyms
jñātaḥ — known; aham — Myself; bhavatā — by you; tu — but; adya — today; duḥ — difficult; vijñeyaḥ — to be known; api — in spite of; dehinām — for the conditioned soul; yat — because; mām — Me; tvam — you; manyase — understand; ayuktam — without being made of; bhūta — material elements; indriya — material senses; guṇa — material modes; ātmabhiḥ — and false ego like the conditioned soul.

Translation
Although I am not easily knowable by the conditioned soul, you have known Me today because you know that My personality is not constituted of anything material, and specifically not of the five gross and three subtle elements.

Text 37
तुभ्यं मद्विचिकित्सायामात्मा मे दर्शितोऽबहि: ।
नालेन सलिले मूलं पुष्करस्य विचिन्वत: ॥ ३७ ॥
tubhyaṁ mad-vicikitsāyām
ātmā me darśito ’bahiḥ
nālena salile mūlaṁ
puṣkarasya vicinvataḥ
Synonyms
tubhyam — unto you; mat — Me; vicikitsāyām — on your trying to know; ātmā — self; me — of Myself; darśitaḥ — exhibited; abahiḥ — from within; nālena — through the stem; salile — in the water; mūlam — root; puṣkarasya — of the lotus, the primeval source; vicinvataḥ — contemplating.

Translation
When you were contemplating whether there was a source to the stem of the lotus of your birth and you even entered into that stem, you could not trace out anything. But at that time I manifested My form from within.

Text 38
यच्चकर्थाङ्ग मतस्तोत्रं मत्कथाभ्युदयाङ्कितम् ।
यद्वा तपसि ते निष्ठा स एष मदनुग्रह: ॥ ३८ ॥
yac cakarthāṅga mat-stotraṁ
mat-kathābhyudayāṅkitam
yad vā tapasi te niṣṭhā
sa eṣa mad-anugrahaḥ
Synonyms
yat — that which; cakartha — performed; aṅga — O Brahmā; mat-stotram — prayers for Me; mat-kathā — words regarding My activities; abhyudaya-aṅkitam — enumerating My transcendental glories; yat — or that; vā — either; tapasi — in penance; te — your; niṣṭhā — faith; saḥ — that; eṣaḥ — all these; mat — My; anugrahaḥ — causeless mercy.

Translation
O Brahmā, the prayers that you have chanted praising the glories of My transcendental activities, the penances you have undertaken to understand Me, and your firm faith in Me — all these are to be considered My causeless mercy.

Text 39
प्रीतोऽहमस्तु भद्रं ते लोकानां विजयेच्छया ।
यदस्तौषीर्गुणमयं निर्गुणं मानुवर्णयन् ॥ ३९ ॥
prīto ’ham astu bhadraṁ te
lokānāṁ vijayecchayā
yad astauṣīr guṇamayaṁ
nirguṇaṁ mānuvarṇayan
Synonyms
prītaḥ — pleased; aham — Myself; astu — let it be so; bhadram — all benediction; te — unto you; lokānām — of the planets; vijaya — for glorification; icchayā — by your desire; yat — that which; astauṣīḥ — you prayed for; guṇa-mayam — describing all transcendental qualities; nirguṇam — although I am free from all material qualities; mā — Me; anuvarṇayan — nicely describing.

Translation
I am very much pleased by your description of Me in terms of My transcendental qualities, which appear mundane to the mundaners. I grant you all benedictions in your desire to glorify all the planets by your activities.

Text 40
य एतेन पुमान्नित्यं स्तुत्वा स्तोत्रेण मां भजेत् ।
तस्याशु सम्प्रसीदेयं सर्वकामवरेश्वर: ॥ ४० ॥
ya etena pumān nityaṁ
stutvā stotreṇa māṁ bhajet
tasyāśu samprasīdeyaṁ
sarva-kāma-vareśvaraḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — anyone who; etena — by this; pumān — human being; nityam — regularly; stutvā — praying; stotreṇa — by the verses; mām — Me; bhajet — may worship; tasya — his; āśu — very soon; samprasīdeyam — I shall fulfill; sarva — all; kāma — desires; vara-īśvaraḥ — the Lord of all benediction.

Translation
Any human being who prays like Brahmā, and who thus worships Me, shall very soon be blessed with the fulfillment of all his desires, for I am the Lord of all benediction.

Text 41
पूर्तेन तपसा यज्ञैर्दानैर्योगसमाधिना ।
राद्धं नि:श्रेयसं पुंसां मत्प्रीतिस्तत्त्वविन्मतम् ॥ ४१ ॥
pūrtena tapasā yajñair
dānair yoga-samādhinā
rāddhaṁ niḥśreyasaṁ puṁsāṁ
mat-prītis tattvavin-matam
Synonyms
pūrtena — by traditional good work; tapasā — by penances; yajñaiḥ — by sacrifices; dānaiḥ — by charities; yoga — by mysticism; samādhinā — by trance; rāddham — success; niḥśreyasam — ultimately beneficial; puṁsām — of the human being; mat — of Me; prītiḥ — satisfaction; tattva-vit — expert transcendentalist; matam — opinion.

Translation
It is the opinion of expert transcendentalists that the ultimate goal of performing all traditional good works, penances, sacrifices, charities, mystic activities, trances, etc., is to invoke My satisfaction.

Text 42
अहमात्मात्मनां धात: प्रेष्ठ: सन् प्रेयसामपि ।
अतो मयि रतिं कुर्याद्देहादिर्यत्कृते प्रिय: ॥ ४२ ॥
aham ātmātmanāṁ dhātaḥ
preṣṭhaḥ san preyasām api
ato mayi ratiṁ kuryād
dehādir yat-kṛte priyaḥ
Synonyms
aham — I am; ātmā — the Supersoul; ātmanām — of all other souls; dhātaḥ — director; preṣṭhaḥ — the dearest; san — being; preyasām — of all dear things; api — certainly; ataḥ — therefore; mayi — unto Me; ratim — attachment; kuryāt — one should do; deha-ādiḥ — the body and mind; yat-kṛte — on whose account; priyaḥ — very dear.

Translation
I am the Supersoul of every individual. I am the supreme director and the dearest. People are wrongly attached to the gross and subtle bodies, but they should be attached to Me only.

Text 43
सर्ववेदमयेनेदमात्मनात्मात्मयोनिना ।
प्रजा: सृज यथापूर्वं याश्च मय्यनुशेरते ॥ ४३ ॥
sarva-veda-mayenedam
ātmanātmātma-yoninā
prajāḥ sṛja yathā-pūrvaṁ
yāś ca mayy anuśerate
Synonyms
sarva — all; veda-mayena — under complete Vedic wisdom; idam — this; ātmanā — by the body; ātmā — you; ātma-yoninā — directly born of the Lord; prajāḥ — living entities; sṛja — generate; yathā-pūrvam — as it was hereinbefore; yāḥ — which; ca — also; mayi — in Me; anuśerate — lie.

Translation
By following My instructions you can now generate the living entities as before, by dint of your complete Vedic wisdom and the body you have directly received from Me, the supreme cause of everything.

Text 44
मैत्रेय उवाच
तस्मा एवं जगत्स्रष्ट्रे प्रधानपुरुषेश्वर: ।
व्यज्येदं स्वेन रूपेण कञ्जनाभस्तिरोदधे ॥ ४४ ॥
maitreya uvāca
tasmā evaṁ jagat-sraṣṭre
pradhāna-puruṣeśvaraḥ
vyajyedaṁ svena rūpeṇa
kañja-nābhas tirodadhe
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the sage Maitreya said; tasmai — unto him; evam — thus; jagat-sraṣṭre — unto the creator of the universe; pradhāna-puruṣa-īśvaraḥ — the primeval Lord, the Personality of Godhead; vyajya idam — after instructing this; svena — in His person; rūpeṇa — by the form; kañja-nābhaḥ — the Personality of Godhead Nārāyaṇa; tirodadhe — disappeared.

Translation
The sage Maitreya said: After instructing Brahmā, the creator of the universe, to expand, the primeval Lord, the Personality of Godhead in His personal form as Nārāyaṇa, disappeared.