Text 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
मनोस्तु शतरूपायां तिस्र: कन्याश्च जज्ञिरे ।
आकूतिर्देवहूतिश्च प्रसूतिरिति विश्रुता: ॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvāca
manos tu śatarūpāyāṁ
tisraḥ kanyāś ca jajñire
ākūtir devahūtiś ca
prasūtir iti viśrutāḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya said; manoḥ tu — of Svāyambhuva Manu; śatarūpāyām — in his wife, Śatarūpā; tisraḥ — three; kanyāḥ ca — daughters also; jajñire — gave birth; ākūtiḥ — named Ākūti; devahūtiḥ — named Devahūti; ca — also; prasūtiḥ — named Prasūti; iti — thus; viśrutāḥ — well known.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya said: Svāyambhuva Manu begot three daughters in his wife, Śatarūpā, and their names were Ākūti, Devahūti and Prasūti.

Text 2
आकूतिं रुचये प्रादादपि भ्रातृमतीं नृप: ।
पुत्रिकाधर्ममाश्रित्य शतरूपानुमोदित: ॥ २ ॥
ākūtiṁ rucaye prādād
api bhrātṛmatīṁ nṛpaḥ
putrikā-dharmam āśritya
śatarūpānumoditaḥ
Synonyms
ākūtim — Ākūti; rucaye — unto the great sage Ruci; prādāt — handed over; api — although; bhrātṛ-matīm — daughter having a brother; nṛpaḥ — the King; putrikā — get the resultant son; dharmam — religious rites; āśritya — taking shelter; śatarūpā — by the wife of Svāyambhuva Manu; anumoditaḥ — being sanctioned.

Translation
Ākūti had two brothers, but in spite of her brothers, King Svāyambhuva Manu handed her over to Prajāpati Ruci on the condition that the son born of her be returned to Manu as his son. This he did in consultation with his wife, Śatarūpā.

Text 3
प्रजापति: स भगवान् रुचिस्तस्यामजीजनत् ।
मिथुनं ब्रह्मवर्चस्वी परमेण समाधिना ॥ ३ ॥
prajāpatiḥ sa bhagavān
rucis tasyām ajījanat
mithunaṁ brahma-varcasvī
parameṇa samādhinā
Synonyms
prajāpatiḥ — one who is entrusted with begetting children; saḥ — he; bhagavān — the most opulent; ruciḥ — the great sage Ruci; tasyām — in her; ajījanat — gave birth; mithunam — couple; brahma-varcasvī — spiritually very much powerful; parameṇa — with great strength; samādhinā — in trance.

Translation
Ruci, who was very powerful in his brahminical qualifications and was appointed one of the progenitors of the living entities, begot one son and one daughter by his wife, Ākūti.

Text 4
यस्तयो: पुरुष: साक्षाद्विष्णुर्यज्ञस्वरूपधृक् ।
या स्त्री सा दक्षिणा भूतेरंशभूतानपायिनी ॥ ४ ॥
yas tayoḥ puruṣaḥ sākṣād
viṣṇur yajña-svarūpa-dhṛk
yā strī sā dakṣiṇā bhūter
aṁśa-bhūtānapāyinī
Synonyms
yaḥ — one who; tayoḥ — out of them; puruṣaḥ — male; sākṣāt — directly; viṣṇuḥ — the Supreme Lord; yajña — Yajña; svarūpa-dhṛk — accepting the form; yā — the other; strī — female; sā — she; dakṣiṇā — Dakṣiṇā; bhūteḥ — of the goddess of fortune; aṁśa-bhūtā — being a plenary expansion; anapāyinī — never to be separated.

Translation
Of the two children born of Ākūti, the male child was directly an incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and His name was Yajña, which is another name of Lord Viṣṇu. The female child was a partial incarnation of Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune, the eternal consort of Lord Viṣṇu.

Text 5
आनिन्ये स्वगृहं पुत्र्या: पुत्रं विततरोचिषम् ।
स्वायम्भुवो मुदा युक्तो रुचिर्जग्राह दक्षिणाम् ॥ ५ ॥
āninye sva-gṛhaṁ putryāḥ
putraṁ vitata-rociṣam
svāyambhuvo mudā yukto
rucir jagrāha dakṣiṇām
Synonyms
āninye — brought to; sva-gṛham — home; putryāḥ — born of the daughter; putram — the son; vitata-rociṣam — very powerful; svāyambhuvaḥ — the Manu named Svāyambhuva; mudā — being very pleased; yuktaḥ — with; ruciḥ — the great sage Ruci; jagrāha — kept; dakṣiṇām — the daughter named Dakṣiṇā.

Translation
Svāyambhuva Manu very gladly brought home the beautiful boy named Yajña, and Ruci, his son-in-law, kept with him the daughter, Dakṣiṇā.

Text 6
तां कामयानां भगवानुवाह यजुषां पति: ।
तुष्टायां तोषमापन्नोऽजनयद् द्वादशात्मजान् ॥ ६ ॥
tāṁ kāmayānāṁ bhagavān
uvāha yajuṣāṁ patiḥ
tuṣṭāyāṁ toṣam āpanno
’janayad dvādaśātmajān
Synonyms
tām — her; kāmayānām — desiring; bhagavān — the Lord; uvāha — married; yajuṣām — of all sacrifices; patiḥ — master; tuṣṭāyām — in His wife, who was very much pleased; toṣam — great pleasure; āpannaḥ — having obtained; ajanayat — gave birth; dvādaśa — twelve; ātmajān — sons.

Translation
The Lord of the ritualistic performance of yajña later married Dakṣiṇā, who was anxious to have the Personality of Godhead as her husband, and in this wife the Lord was also very much pleased to beget twelve children.

Text 7
तोष: प्रतोष: सन्तोषो भद्र: शान्तिरिडस्पति: ।
इध्म: कविर्विभु: स्वह्न: सुदेवो रोचनो द्विषट् ॥ ७ ॥
toṣaḥ pratoṣaḥ santoṣo
bhadraḥ śāntir iḍaspatiḥ
idhmaḥ kavir vibhuḥ svahnaḥ
sudevo rocano dvi-ṣaṭ
Synonyms
toṣaḥ — Toṣa; pratoṣaḥ — Pratoṣa; santoṣaḥ — Santoṣa; bhadraḥ — Bhadra; śāntiḥ — Śānti; iḍaspatiḥ — Iḍaspati; idhmaḥ — Idhma; kaviḥ — Kavi; vibhuḥ — Vibhu; svahnaḥ — Svahna; sudevaḥ — Sudeva; rocanaḥ — Rocana; dvi-ṣaṭ — twelve.

Translation
The twelve boys born of Yajña and Dakṣiṇā were named Toṣa, Pratoṣa, Santoṣa, Bhadra, Śānti, Iḍaspati, Idhma, Kavi, Vibhu, Svahna, Sudeva and Rocana.

Text 8
तुषिता नाम ते देवा आसन्स्वायम्भुवान्तरे ।
मरीचिमिश्रा ऋषयो यज्ञ: सुरगणेश्वर: ॥ ८ ॥
tuṣitā nāma te devā
āsan svāyambhuvāntare
marīci-miśrā ṛṣayo
yajñaḥ sura-gaṇeśvaraḥ
Synonyms
tuṣitāḥ — the category of the Tuṣitas; nāma — of the name; te — all of them; devāḥ — demigods; āsan — became; svāyambhuva — the name of the Manu; antare — at that period; marīci-miśrāḥ — headed by Marīci; ṛṣayaḥ — great sages; yajñaḥ — the incarnation of Lord Viṣṇu; sura-gaṇa-īśvaraḥ — the king of the demigods.

Translation
During the time of Svāyambhuva Manu, these sons all became the demigods collectively named the Tuṣitas. Marīci became the head of the seven ṛṣis, and Yajña became the king of the demigods, Indra.

Text 9
प्रियव्रतोत्तानपादौ मनुपुत्रौ महौजसौ ।
तत्पुत्रपौत्रनप्तृणामनुवृत्तं तदन्तरम् ॥ ९ ॥
priyavratottānapādau
manu-putrau mahaujasau
tat-putra-pautra-naptṝṇām
anuvṛttaṁ tad-antaram
Synonyms
priyavrata — Priyavrata; uttānapādau — Uttānapāda; manu-putrau — sons of Manu; mahā-ojasau — very great, powerful; tat — their; putra — sons; pautra — grandsons; naptṝṇām — grandsons from the daughter; anuvṛttam — following; tat-antaram — in that Manu’s period.

Translation
Svāyambhuva Manu’s two sons, Priyavrata and Uttānapāda, became very powerful kings, and their sons and grandsons spread all over the three worlds during that period.

Text 10
देवहूतिमदात्तात कर्दमायात्मजां मनु: ।
तत्सम्बन्धि श्रुतप्रायं भवता गदतो मम ॥ १० ॥
devahūtim adāt tāta
kardamāyātmajāṁ manuḥ
tat-sambandhi śruta-prāyaṁ
bhavatā gadato mama
Synonyms
devahūtim — Devahūti; adāt — handed over; tāta — my dear son; kardamāya — unto the great sage Kardama; ātmajām — daughter; manuḥ — Lord Svāyambhuva Manu; tat-sambandhi — in that connection; śruta-prāyam — heard almost in full; bhavatā — by you; gadataḥ — spoken; mama — by me.

Translation
My dear son, Svāyambhuva Manu handed over his very dear daughter Devahūti to Kardama Muni. I have already spoken to you about them, and you have heard about them almost in full.

Text 11
दक्षाय ब्रह्मपुत्राय प्रसूतिं भगवान्मनु: ।
प्रायच्छद्यत्कृत: सर्गस्त्रिलोक्यां विततो महान् ॥ ११ ॥
dakṣāya brahma-putrāya
prasūtiṁ bhagavān manuḥ
prāyacchad yat-kṛtaḥ sargas
tri-lokyāṁ vitato mahān
Synonyms
dakṣāya — unto Prajāpati Dakṣa; brahma-putrāya — the son of Lord Brahmā; prasūtim — Prasūti; bhagavān — the great personality; manuḥ — Svāyambhuva Manu; prāyacchat — handed over; yat-kṛtaḥ — done by whom; sargaḥ — creation; tri-lokyām — in the three worlds; vitataḥ — expanded; mahān — greatly.

Translation
Svāyambhuva Manu handed over his daughter Prasūti to the son of Brahmā named Dakṣa, who was also one of the progenitors of the living entities. The descendants of Dakṣa are spread throughout the three worlds.

Text 12
या: कर्दमसुता: प्रोक्ता नव ब्रह्मर्षिपत्नय: ।
तासां प्रसूतिप्रसवं प्रोच्यमानं निबोध मे ॥ १२ ॥
yāḥ kardama-sutāḥ proktā
nava brahmarṣi-patnayaḥ
tāsāṁ prasūti-prasavaṁ
procyamānaṁ nibodha me
Synonyms
yāḥ — those who; kardama-sutāḥ — the daughters of Kardama; proktāḥ — were mentioned; nava — nine; brahma-ṛṣi — great sages of spiritual knowledge; patnayaḥ — wives; tāsām — their; prasūti-prasavam — generations of sons and grandsons; procyamānam — describing; nibodha — try to understand; me — from me.

Translation
You have already been informed about the nine daughters of Kardama Muni, who were handed over to nine different sages. I shall now describe the descendants of those nine daughters. Please hear from me.

Text 13
पत्नी मरीचेस्तु कला सुषुवे कर्दमात्मजा ।
कश्यपं पूर्णिमानं च ययोरापूरितं जगत् ॥ १३ ॥
patnī marīces tu kalā
suṣuve kardamātmajā
kaśyapaṁ pūrṇimānaṁ ca
yayor āpūritaṁ jagat
Synonyms
patnī — wife; marīceḥ — of the sage named Marīci; tu — also; kalā — named Kalā; suṣuve — gave birth; kardama-ātmajā — daughter of Kardama Muni; kaśyapam — of the name Kaśyapa; pūrṇimānam ca — and of the name Pūrṇimā; yayoḥ — by whom; āpūritam — spread all over; jagat — the world.

Translation
Kardama Muni’s daughter Kalā, who was married to Marīci, gave birth to two children, whose names were Kaśyapa and Pūrṇimā. Their descendants are spread all over the world.

Text 14
पूर्णिमासूत विरजं विश्वगं च परन्तप ।
देवकुल्यां हरे: पादशौचाद्याभूत्सरिद्दिव: ॥ १४ ॥
pūrṇimāsūta virajaṁ
viśvagaṁ ca parantapa
devakulyāṁ hareḥ pāda-
śaucād yābhūt sarid divaḥ
Synonyms
pūrṇimā — Pūrṇimā; asūta — begot; virajam — a son named Viraja; viśvagam ca — and named Viśvaga; param-tapa — O annihilator of enemies; devakulyām — a daughter named Devakulyā; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pāda-śaucāt — by the water which washed His lotus feet; yā — she; abhūt — became; sarit divaḥ — the transcendental water within the banks of the Ganges.

Translation
My dear Vidura, of the two sons, Kaśyapa and Pūrṇimā, Pūrṇimā begot three children, namely Viraja, Viśvaga and Devakulyā. Of these three, Devakulyā was the water which washed the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead and which later on transformed into the Ganges of the heavenly planets.

Text 15
अत्रे: पत्‍न्यनसूया त्रीञ्जज्ञे सुयशस: सुतान् ।
दत्तं दुर्वाससं सोममात्मेशब्रह्मसम्भवान् ॥ १५ ॥
atreḥ patny anasūyā trīñ
jajñe suyaśasaḥ sutān
dattaṁ durvāsasaṁ somam
ātmeśa-brahma-sambhavān
Synonyms
atreḥ — of Atri Muni; patnī — wife; anasūyā — named Anasūyā; trīn — three; jajñe — bore; su-yaśasaḥ — very famous; sutān — sons; dattam — Dattātreya; durvāsasam — Durvāsā; somam — Soma (the moon-god); ātma — the Supersoul; īśa — Lord Śiva; brahma — Lord Brahmā; sambhavān — incarnations of.

Translation
Anasūyā, the wife of Atri Muni, gave birth to three very famous sons — Soma, Dattātreya and Durvāsā — who were partial representations of Lord Viṣṇu, Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā. Soma was a partial representation of Lord Brahmā, Dattātreya was a partial representation of Lord Viṣṇu, and Durvāsā was a partial representation of Lord Śiva.

Text 16
विदुर उवाच
अत्रेर्गृहे सुरश्रेष्ठा: स्थित्युत्पत्त्यन्तहेतव: ।
किञ्चिच्चिकीर्षवो जाता एतदाख्याहि मे गुरो ॥ १६ ॥
vidura uvāca
atrer gṛhe sura-śreṣṭhāḥ
sthity-utpatty-anta-hetavaḥ
kiñcic cikīrṣavo jātā
etad ākhyāhi me guro
Synonyms
viduraḥ uvāca — Śrī Vidura said; atreḥ gṛhe — in the house of Atri; sura-śreṣṭhāḥ — chief demigods; sthiti — maintenance; utpatti — creation; anta — destruction; hetavaḥ — causes; kiñcit — something; cikīrṣavaḥ — desiring to do; jātāḥ — appeared; etat — this; ākhyāhi — tell; me — to me; guro — my dear spiritual master.

Translation
After hearing this, Vidura inquired from Maitreya: My dear master, how is it that the three deities Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva, who are the creator, maintainer and destroyer of the whole creation, became the offspring of the wife of Atri Muni?

Text 17
मैत्रेय उवाच
ब्रह्मणा चोदित: सृष्टावत्रिर्ब्रह्मविदां वर: ।
सह पत्‍न्या ययावृक्षं कुलाद्रिं तपसि स्थित: ॥ १७ ॥
maitreya uvāca
brahmaṇā coditaḥ sṛṣṭāv
atrir brahma-vidāṁ varaḥ
saha patnyā yayāv ṛkṣaṁ
kulādriṁ tapasi sthitaḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Śrī Maitreya Ṛṣi said; brahmaṇā — by Lord Brahmā; coditaḥ — being inspired; sṛṣṭau — for creation; atriḥ — Atri; brahma-vidām — of the persons learned in spiritual knowledge; varaḥ — the chief; saha — with; patnyā — wife; yayau — went; ṛkṣam — to the mountain named Ṛkṣa; kula-adrim — great mountain; tapasi — for austerities; sthitaḥ — remained.

Translation
Maitreya said: When Lord Brahmā ordered Atri Muni to create generations after marrying Anasūyā, Atri Muni and his wife went to perform severe austerities in the valley of the mountain known as Ṛkṣa.

Text 18
तस्मिन् प्रसूनस्तबकपलाशाशोककानने ।
वार्भि: स्रवद्‌भिरुद्‍घुष्टेनिर्विन्ध्याया: समन्तत: ॥ १८ ॥
tasmin prasūna-stabaka-
palāśāśoka-kānane
vārbhiḥ sravadbhir udghuṣṭe
nirvindhyāyāḥ samantataḥ
Synonyms
tasmin — in that; prasūna-stabaka — bunches of flowers; palāśa — palāśa trees; aśoka — aśoka trees; kānane — in the forest garden; vārbhiḥ — by the waters; sravadbhiḥ — flowing; udghuṣṭe — in sound; nirvindhyāyāḥ — of the river Nirvindhyā; samantataḥ — everywhere.

Translation
In that mountain valley flows a river named Nirvindhyā. On the bank of the river are many aśoka trees and other plants full of palāśa flowers, and there is always the sweet sound of water flowing from a waterfall. The husband and wife reached that beautiful place.

Text 19
प्राणायामेन संयम्य मनो वर्षशतं मुनि: ।
अतिष्ठदेकपादेन निर्द्वन्द्वोऽनिलभोजन: ॥ १९ ॥
prāṇāyāmena saṁyamya
mano varṣa-śataṁ muniḥ
atiṣṭhad eka-pādena
nirdvandvo ’nila-bhojanaḥ
Synonyms
prāṇāyāmena — by practice of the breathing exercise; saṁyamya — controlling; manaḥ — mind; varṣa-śatam — one hundred years; muniḥ — the great sage; atiṣṭhat — remained there; eka-pādena — standing on one leg; nirdvandvaḥ — without duality; anila — air; bhojanaḥ — eating.

Translation
There the great sage concentrated his mind by the yogic breathing exercises, and thereby controlling all attachment, he remained standing on one leg only, eating nothing but air, and stood there on one leg for one hundred years.

Text 20
शरणं तं प्रपद्येऽहं य एव जगदीश्वर: ।
प्रजामात्मसमां मह्यं प्रयच्छत्विति चिन्तयन् ॥ २० ॥
śaraṇaṁ taṁ prapadye ’haṁ
ya eva jagad-īśvaraḥ
prajām ātma-samāṁ mahyaṁ
prayacchatv iti cintayan
Synonyms
śaraṇam — taking shelter; tam — unto Him; prapadye — surrender; aham — I; yaḥ — one who; eva — certainly; jagat-īśvaraḥ — master of the universe; prajām — son; ātma-samām — like Himself; mahyam — unto me; prayacchatu — let Him give; iti — thus; cintayan — thinking.

Translation
He was thinking: May the Lord of the universe, of whom I have taken shelter, kindly be pleased to offer me a son exactly like Him.

Text 21
तप्यमानं त्रिभुवनं प्राणायामैधसाग्निना ।
निर्गतेन मुनेर्मूर्ध्न: समीक्ष्य प्रभवस्त्रय: ॥ २१ ॥
tapyamānaṁ tri-bhuvanaṁ
prāṇāyāmaidhasāgninā
nirgatena muner mūrdhnaḥ
samīkṣya prabhavas trayaḥ
Synonyms
tapyamānam — while practicing austerities; tri-bhuvanam — the three worlds; prāṇāyāma — practice by breathing exercise; edhasā — fuel; agninā — by the fire; nirgatena — issuing out; muneḥ — of the great sage; mūrdhnaḥ — the top of the head; samīkṣya — looking over; prabhavaḥ trayaḥ — the three great gods (Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara).

Translation
While Atri Muni was engaged in these severe austerities, a blazing fire came out of his head by virtue of his breathing exercise, and that fire was seen by the three principal deities of the three worlds.

Text 22
अप्सरोमुनिगन्धर्वसिद्धविद्याधरोरगै: ।
वितायमानयशसस्तदाश्रमपदं ययु: ॥ २२ ॥
apsaro-muni-gandharva-
siddha-vidyādharoragaiḥ
vitāyamāna-yaśasas
tad-āśrama-padaṁ yayuḥ
Synonyms
apsaraḥ — heavenly society women; muni — great sages; gandharva — inhabitants of the Gandharva planet; siddha — of Siddhaloka; vidyādhara — other demigods; uragaiḥ — the inhabitants of Nāgaloka; vitāyamāna — being spread; yaśasaḥ — fame, reputation; tat — his; āśrama-padam — hermitage; yayuḥ — went.

Translation
At that time, the three deities approached the hermitage of Atri Muni, accompanied by the denizens of the heavenly planets, such as the celestial beauties, the Gandharvas, the Siddhas, the Vidyādharas and the Nāgas. Thus they entered the āśrama of the great sage, who had become famous by his austerities.

Text 23
तत्प्रादुर्भावसंयोगविद्योतितमना मुनि: ।
उत्तिष्ठन्नेकपादेन ददर्श विबुधर्षभान् ॥ २३ ॥
tat-prādurbhāva-saṁyoga-
vidyotita-manā muniḥ
uttiṣṭhann eka-pādena
dadarśa vibudharṣabhān
Synonyms
tat — their; prādurbhāva — appearance; saṁyoga — simultaneously; vidyotita — enlightened; manāḥ — in the mind; muniḥ — the great sage; uttiṣṭhan — being awakened; eka-pādena — even on one leg; dadarśa — saw; vibudha — demigods; ṛṣabhān — the great personalities.

Translation
The sage was standing on one leg, but as soon as he saw that the three deities had appeared before him, he was so pleased to see them all together that despite great difficulty he approached them on one leg.

Text 24
प्रणम्य दण्डवद्भूमावुपतस्थेऽर्हणाञ्जलि: ।
वृषहंससुपर्णस्थान् स्वै: स्वैश्चिह्नैश्च चिह्नितान् ॥ २४ ॥
praṇamya daṇḍavad bhūmāv
upatasthe ’rhaṇāñjaliḥ
vṛṣa-haṁsa-suparṇa-sthān
svaiḥ svaiś cihnaiś ca cihnitān
Synonyms
praṇamya — offering obeisances; daṇḍa-vat — like a rod; bhūmau — ground; upatasthe — fell down; arhaṇa — all paraphernalia for worship; añjaliḥ — folded hands; vṛṣa — bull; haṁsa — swan; suparṇa — the Garuḍa bird; sthān — situated; svaiḥ — own; svaiḥ — own; cihnaiḥ — by symbols; ca — and; cihnitān — being recognized.

Translation
Thereafter he began to offer prayers to the three deities, who were seated on different carriers — a bull, a swan and Garuḍa — and who held in their hands a drum, kuśa grass and a discus. The sage offered them his respects by falling down like a stick.

Text 25
कृपावलोकेन हसद्वदनेनोपलम्भितान् ।
तद्रोचिषा प्रतिहते निमील्य मुनिरक्षिणी ॥ २५ ॥
kṛpāvalokena hasad-
vadanenopalambhitān
tad-rociṣā pratihate
nimīlya munir akṣiṇī
Synonyms
kṛpā-avalokena — glancing with mercy; hasat — smiling; vadanena — with faces; upalambhitān — appearing very much satisfied; tat — their; rociṣā — by the glaring effulgence; pratihate — being dazzled; nimīlya — closing; muniḥ — the sage; akṣiṇī — his eyes.

Translation
Atri Muni was greatly pleased to see that the three devas were gracious towards him. His eyes were dazzled by the effulgence of their bodies, and therefore he closed his eyes for the time being.

Texts 26-27
चेतस्तत्प्रवणं युञ्जन्नस्तावीत्संहताञ्जलि: ।
श्लक्ष्णया सूक्तया वाचा सर्वलोकगरीयस: ॥ २६ ॥
अत्रिरुवाच
विश्वोद्भवस्थितिलयेषु विभज्यमानै-
र्मायागुणैरनुयुगं विगृहीतदेहा: । ते ब्रह्मविष्णुगिरिशा: प्रणतोऽस्म्यहं व-स्तेभ्य: क एव भवतां म इहोपहूत: ॥ २७ ॥
cetas tat-pravaṇaṁ yuñjann
astāvīt saṁhatāñjaliḥ
ślakṣṇayā sūktayā vācā
sarva-loka-garīyasaḥ
atrir uvāca
viśvodbhava-sthiti-layeṣu vibhajyamānair
māyā-guṇair anuyugaṁ vigṛhīta-dehāḥ
te brahma-viṣṇu-giriśāḥ praṇato ’smy ahaṁ vas
tebhyaḥ ka eva bhavatāṁ ma ihopahūtaḥ
Synonyms
cetaḥ — heart; tat-pravaṇam — fixing on them; yuñjan — making; astāvīt — offered prayers; saṁhata-añjaliḥ — with folded hands; ślakṣṇayā — ecstatic; sūktayā — prayers; vācā — words; sarva-loka — all over the world; garīyasaḥ — honorable; atriḥ uvāca — Atri said; viśva — the universe; udbhava — creation; sthiti — maintenance; layeṣu — in destruction; vibhajyamānaiḥ — being divided; māyā-guṇaiḥ — by the external modes of nature; anuyugam — according to different millenniums; vigṛhīta — accepted; dehāḥ — bodies; te — they; brahma — Lord Brahmā; viṣṇu — Lord Viṣṇu; giriśāḥ — Lord Śiva; praṇataḥ — bowed; asmi — am; aham — I; vaḥ — unto you; tebhyaḥ — from them; kaḥ — who; eva — certainly; bhavatām — of you; me — by me; iha — here; upahūtaḥ — called for.

Translation
But since his heart was already attracted by the deities, somehow or other he gathered his senses, and with folded hands and sweet words he began to offer prayers to the predominating deities of the universe. The great sage Atri said: O Lord Brahmā, Lord Viṣṇu and Lord Śiva, you have divided yourself into three bodies by accepting the three modes of material nature, as you do in every millennium for the creation, maintenance and dissolution of the cosmic manifestation. I offer my respectful obeisances unto all of you and beg to inquire whom of you three I have called by my prayer.

Text 28
एको मयेह भगवान्विविधप्रधानै-
श्चित्तीकृत: प्रजननाय कथं नु यूयम् ।
अत्रागतास्तनुभृतां मनसोऽपि दूराद्
ब्रूत प्रसीदत महानिह विस्मयो मे ॥ २८ ॥
eko mayeha bhagavān vividha-pradhānaiś
cittī-kṛtaḥ prajananāya kathaṁ nu yūyam
atrāgatās tanu-bhṛtāṁ manaso ’pi dūrād
brūta prasīdata mahān iha vismayo me
Synonyms
ekaḥ — one; mayā — by me; iha — here; bhagavān — great personality; vividha — various; pradhānaiḥ — by paraphernalia; cittī-kṛtaḥ — fixed in mind; prajananāya — for begetting a child; katham — why; nu — however; yūyam — all of you; atra — here; āgatāḥ — appeared; tanu-bhṛtām — of the embodied; manasaḥ — the minds; api — although; dūrāt — from far beyond; brūta — kindly explain; prasīdata — being merciful to me; mahān — very great; iha — this; vismayaḥ — doubt; me — of mine.

Translation
I called for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, desiring a son like Him, and I thought of Him only. But although He is far beyond the mental speculation of man, all three of you have come here. Kindly let me know how you have come, for I am greatly bewildered about this.

Text 29
मैत्रेय उवाच
इति तस्य वच: श्रुत्वा त्रयस्ते विबुधर्षभा: ।
प्रत्याहु: श्लक्ष्णया वाचा प्रहस्य तमृषिं प्रभो ॥ २९ ॥
maitreya uvāca
iti tasya vacaḥ śrutvā
trayas te vibudharṣabhāḥ
pratyāhuḥ ślakṣṇayā vācā
prahasya tam ṛṣiṁ prabho
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the sage Maitreya said; iti — thus; tasya — his; vacaḥ — words; śrutvā — after hearing; trayaḥ te — all three; vibudha — demigods; ṛṣabhāḥ — chiefs; pratyāhuḥ — replied; ślakṣṇayā — gentle; vācā — voices; prahasya — smiling; tam — unto him; ṛṣim — the great sage; prabho — O mighty one.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya continued: Upon hearing Atri Muni speak in that way, the three great deities smiled, and they replied in the following sweet words.

Text 30
देवा ऊचु:
यथा कृतस्ते सङ्कल्पो भाव्यं तेनैव नान्यथा ।
सत्सङ्कल्पस्य ते ब्रह्मन् यद्वै ध्यायति ते वयम् ॥ ३० ॥
devā ūcuḥ
yathā kṛtas te saṅkalpo
bhāvyaṁ tenaiva nānyathā
sat-saṅkalpasya te brahman
yad vai dhyāyati te vayam
Synonyms
devāḥ ūcuḥ — the demigods replied; yathā — as; kṛtaḥ — done; te — by you; saṅkalpaḥ — determination; bhāvyam — to be done; tena eva — by that; na anyathā — not otherwise; sat-saṅkalpasya — one whose determination is never lost; te — of you; brahman — O dear brāhmaṇa; yat — that which; vai — certainly; dhyāyati — meditating; te — all of them; vayam — we are.

Translation
The three deities told Atri Muni: Dear brāhmaṇa, you are perfect in your determination, and therefore as you have decided, so it will happen; it will not happen otherwise. We are all the same person upon whom you were meditating, and therefore we have all come to you.

Text 31
अथास्मदंशभूतास्ते आत्मजा लोकविश्रुता: ।
भवितारोऽङ्ग भद्रं ते विस्रप्स्यन्ति च ते यश: ॥ ३१ ॥
athāsmad-aṁśa-bhūtās te
ātmajā loka-viśrutāḥ
bhavitāro ’ṅga bhadraṁ te
visrapsyanti ca te yaśaḥ
Synonyms
atha — therefore; asmat — our; aṁśa-bhūtāḥ — plenary expansions; te — your; ātmajāḥ — sons; loka-viśrutāḥ — very famous in the world; bhavitāraḥ — in the future will be born; aṅga — dear great sage; bhadram — all good fortune; te — unto you; visrapsyanti — will spread; ca — also; te — your; yaśaḥ — reputation.

Translation
You will have sons who will represent a partial manifestation of our potency, and because we desire all good fortune for you, those sons will glorify your reputation throughout the world.

Text 32
एवं कामवरं दत्त्वा प्रतिजग्मु: सुरेश्वरा: ।
सभाजितास्तयो: सम्यग्दम्पत्योर्मिषतोस्तत: ॥ ३२ ॥
evaṁ kāma-varaṁ dattvā
pratijagmuḥ sureśvarāḥ
sabhājitās tayoḥ samyag
dampatyor miṣatos tataḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; kāma-varam — desired benediction; dattvā — offering; pratijagmuḥ — returned; sura-īśvarāḥ — the chief demigods; sabhājitāḥ — being worshiped; tayoḥ — while they; samyak — perfectly; dampatyoḥ — the husband and wife; miṣatoḥ — were looking on; tataḥ — from there.

Translation
Thus, while the couple looked on, the three deities Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Maheśvara disappeared from that place after bestowing upon Atri Muni the benediction.

Text 33
सोमोऽभूद्ब्रह्मणोंऽशेन दत्तो विष्णोस्तु योगवित् ।
दुर्वासा: शङ्करस्यांशो निबोधाङ्गिरस: प्रजा: ॥ ३३ ॥
somo ’bhūd brahmaṇo ’ṁśena
datto viṣṇos tu yogavit
durvāsāḥ śaṅkarasyāṁśo
nibodhāṅgirasaḥ prajāḥ
Synonyms
somaḥ — the king of the moon planet; abhūt — appeared; brahmaṇaḥ — of Lord Brahmā; aṁśena — partial expansion; dattaḥ — Dattātreya; viṣṇoḥ — of Viṣṇu; tu — but; yoga-vit — very powerful yogī; durvāsāḥ — Durvāsā; śaṅkarasya aṁśaḥ — partial expansion of Lord Śiva; nibodha — just try to understand; aṅgirasaḥ — of the great sage Aṅgirā; prajāḥ — generations.

Translation
Thereafter, from the partial representation of Brahmā, the moon-god was born of them; from the partial representation of Viṣṇu, the great mystic Dattātreya was born; and from the partial representation of Śaṅkara [Lord Śiva], Durvāsā was born. Now you may hear from me of the many sons of Aṅgirā.

Text 34
श्रद्धा त्वङ्गिरस: पत्नी चतस्रोऽसूत कन्यका: ।
सिनीवाली कुहू राका चतुर्थ्यनुमतिस्तथा ॥ ३४ ॥
śraddhā tv aṅgirasaḥ patnī
catasro ’sūta kanyakāḥ
sinīvālī kuhū rākā
caturthy anumatis tathā
Synonyms
śraddhā — Śraddhā; tu — but; aṅgirasaḥ — of Aṅgirā Ṛṣi; patnī — wife; catasraḥ — four; asūta — gave birth; kanyakāḥ — daughters; sinīvālī — Sinīvālī; kuhūḥ — Kuhū; rākā — Rākā; caturthī — the fourth one; anumatiḥ — Anumati; tathā — also.

Translation
Aṅgirā’s wife, Śraddhā, gave birth to four daughters, named Sinīvālī, Kuhū, Rākā and Anumati.

Text 35
तत्पुत्रावपरावास्तां ख्यातौ स्वारोचिषेऽन्तरे ।
उतथ्यो भगवान्साक्षाद् ब्रह्मिष्ठश्च बृहस्पति: ॥ ३५ ॥
tat-putrāv aparāv āstāṁ
khyātau svārociṣe ’ntare
utathyo bhagavān sākṣād
brahmiṣṭhaś ca bṛhaspatiḥ
Synonyms
tat — his; putrau — sons; aparau — others; āstām — were born; khyātau — very famous; svārociṣe — in the Svārociṣa millennium; antare — of the Manu; utathyaḥ — Utathya; bhagavān — very mighty; sākṣāt — directly; brahmiṣṭhaḥ ca — fully spiritually advanced; bṛhaspatiḥ — Bṛhaspati.

Translation
Besides these four daughters, she also had another two sons. One of them was known as Utathya, and the other was the learned scholar Bṛhaspati.

Text 36
पुलस्त्योऽजनयत्पत्‍न्यामगस्त्यं च हविर्भुवि ।
सोऽन्यजन्मनि दह्राग्निर्विश्रवाश्च महातपा: ॥ ३६ ॥
pulastyo ’janayat patnyām
agastyaṁ ca havirbhuvi
so ’nya-janmani dahrāgnir
viśravāś ca mahā-tapāḥ
Synonyms
pulastyaḥ — the sage Pulastya; ajanayat — begot; patnyām — in his wife; agastyam — the great sage Agastya; ca — also; havirbhuvi — in Havirbhū; saḥ — he (Agastya); anya-janmani — in the next birth; dahra-agniḥ — the digesting fire; viśravāḥ — Viśravā; ca — and; mahā-tapāḥ — greatly powerful because of austerity.

Translation
Pulastya begot in his wife, Havirbhū, one son of the name Agastya, who in his next birth became Dahrāgni. Besides him, Pulastya begot another very great and saintly son, whose name was Viśravā.

Text 37
तस्य यक्षपतिर्देव: कुबेरस्त्विडविडासुत: ।
रावण: कुम्भकर्णश्च तथान्यस्यां विभीषण: ॥ ३७ ॥
tasya yakṣa-patir devaḥ
kuberas tv iḍaviḍā-sutaḥ
rāvaṇaḥ kumbhakarṇaś ca
tathānyasyāṁ vibhīṣaṇaḥ
Synonyms
tasya — his; yakṣa-patiḥ — the king of the Yakṣas; devaḥ — demigod; kuberaḥ — Kuvera; tu — and; iḍaviḍā — of Iḍaviḍā; sutaḥ — son; rāvaṇaḥ — Rāvaṇa; kumbhakarṇaḥ — Kumbhakarṇa; ca — also; tathā — so; anyasyām — in the other; vibhīṣaṇaḥ — Vibhīṣaṇa.

Translation
Viśravā had two wives. The first wife was Iḍaviḍā, from whom Kuvera, the master of all Yakṣas, was born, and the next wife was named Keśinī, from whom three sons were born — Rāvaṇa, Kumbhakarṇa and Vibhīṣaṇa.

Text 38
पुलहस्य गतिर्भार्या त्रीनसूत सती सुतान् ।
कर्मश्रेष्ठं वरीयांसं सहिष्णुं च महामते ॥ ३८ ॥
pulahasya gatir bhāryā
trīn asūta satī sutān
karmaśreṣṭhaṁ varīyāṁsaṁ
sahiṣṇuṁ ca mahā-mate
Synonyms
pulahasya — of Pulaha; gatiḥ — Gati; bhāryā — wife; trīn — three; asūta — gave birth; satī — chaste; sutān — sons; karma-śreṣṭham — very expert in fruitive activities; varīyāṁsam — very respectable; sahiṣṇum — very tolerant; ca — also; mahā-mate — O great Vidura.

Translation
Gati, the wife of the sage Pulaha, gave birth to three sons, named Karmaśreṣṭha, Varīyān and Sahiṣṇu, and all of them were great sages.

Text 39
क्रतोरपि क्रिया भार्या वालखिल्यानसूयत ।
ऋषीन्षष्टिसहस्राणि ज्वलतो ब्रह्मतेजसा ॥ ३९ ॥
krator api kriyā bhāryā
vālakhilyān asūyata
ṛṣīn ṣaṣṭi-sahasrāṇi
jvalato brahma-tejasā
Synonyms
kratoḥ — of the great sage Kratu; api — also; kriyā — Kriyā; bhāryā — wife; vālakhilyān — just like Vālakhilya; asūyata — begot; ṛṣīn — sages; ṣaṣṭi — sixty; sahasrāṇi — thousand; jvalataḥ — very brilliant; brahma-tejasā — by dint of the Brahman effulgence.

Translation
Kratu’s wife, Kriyā, gave birth to sixty thousand great sages, named the Vālakhilyas. All these sages were greatly advanced in spiritual knowledge, and their bodies were illuminated by such knowledge.

Text 40
ऊर्जायां जज्ञिरे पुत्रा वसिष्ठस्य परन्तप ।
चित्रकेतुप्रधानास्ते सप्त ब्रह्मर्षयोऽमला: ॥ ४० ॥
ūrjāyāṁ jajñire putrā
vasiṣṭhasya parantapa
citraketu-pradhānās te
sapta brahmarṣayo ’malāḥ
Synonyms
ūrjāyām — in Ūrjā; jajñire — took birth; putrāḥ — sons; vasiṣṭhasya — of the great sage Vasiṣṭha; parantapa — O great one; citraketu — Citraketu; pradhānāḥ — headed by; te — all the sons; sapta — seven; brahma-ṛṣayaḥ — great sages with spiritual knowledge; amalāḥ — without contamination.

Translation
The great sage Vasiṣṭha begot in his wife, Ūrjā [sometimes called Arundhatī], seven spotlessly great sages, headed by the sage named Citraketu.

Text 41
चित्रकेतु: सुरोचिश्च विरजा मित्र एव च ।
उल्बणो वसुभृद्यानो द्युमान्शक्त्यादयोऽपरे ॥ ४१ ॥
citraketuḥ surociś ca
virajā mitra eva ca
ulbaṇo vasubhṛdyāno
dyumān śakty-ādayo ’pare
Synonyms
citraketuḥ — Citraketu; surociḥ ca — and Suroci; virajāḥ — Virajā; mitraḥ — Mitra; eva — also; ca — and; ulbaṇaḥ — Ulbaṇa; vasubhṛdyānaḥ — Vasubhṛdyāna; dyumān — Dyumān; śakti-ādayaḥ — sons headed by Śakti; apare — from his other wife.

Translation
The names of these seven sages are as follows: Citraketu, Suroci, Virajā, Mitra, Ulbaṇa, Vasubhṛdyāna and Dyumān. Some other very competent sons were born from Vasiṣṭha’s other wife.

Text 42
चित्तिस्त्वथर्वण: पत्नी लेभे पुत्रं धृतव्रतम् ।
दध्यञ्चमश्वशिरसं भृगोर्वंशं निबोध मे ॥ ४२ ॥
cittis tv atharvaṇaḥ patnī
lebhe putraṁ dhṛta-vratam
dadhyañcam aśvaśirasaṁ
bhṛgor vaṁśaṁ nibodha me
Synonyms
cittiḥ — Citti; tu — also; atharvaṇaḥ — of Atharvā; patnī — wife; lebhe — got; putram — son; dhṛta-vratam — completely dedicated to a vow; dadhyañcam — Dadhyañca; aśvaśirasam — Aśvaśirā; bhṛgoḥ vaṁśam — generations of Bhṛgu; nibodha — try to understand; me — from me.

Translation
Citti, wife of the sage Atharvā, gave birth to a son named Aśvaśirā by accepting a great vow called Dadhyañca. Now you may hear from me about the descendants of the sage Bhṛgu.

Text 43
भृगु: ख्यात्यां महाभाग: पत्‍न्यां पुत्रानजीजनत् ।
धातारं च विधातारं श्रियं च भगवत्पराम् ॥ ४३ ॥
bhṛguḥ khyātyāṁ mahā-bhāgaḥ
patnyāṁ putrān ajījanat
dhātāraṁ ca vidhātāraṁ
śriyaṁ ca bhagavat-parām
Synonyms
bhṛguḥ — the great sage Bhṛgu; khyātyām — in his wife, Khyāti; mahā-bhāgaḥ — greatly fortunate; patnyām — unto the wife; putrān — sons; ajījanat — gave birth; dhātāram — Dhātā; ca — also; vidhātāram — Vidhātā; śriyam — a daughter named Śrī; ca bhagavat-parām — and a great devotee of the Lord.

Translation
The sage Bhṛgu was highly fortunate. In his wife, known as Khyāti, he begot two sons, named Dhātā and Vidhātā, and one daughter, named Śrī, who was very much devoted to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 44
आयतिं नियतिं चैव सुते मेरुस्तयोरदात् ।
ताभ्यां तयोरभवतां मृकण्ड: प्राण एव च ॥ ४४ ॥
āyatiṁ niyatiṁ caiva
sute merus tayor adāt
tābhyāṁ tayor abhavatāṁ
mṛkaṇḍaḥ prāṇa eva ca
Synonyms
āyatim — Āyati; niyatim — Niyati; ca eva — also; sute — daughters; meruḥ — the sage Meru; tayoḥ — unto those two; adāt — gave in marriage; tābhyām — out of them; tayoḥ — both of them; abhavatām — appeared; mṛkaṇḍaḥ — Mṛkaṇḍa; prāṇaḥ — Prāṇa; eva — certainly; ca — and.

Translation
The sage Meru had two daughters, named Āyati and Niyati, whom he gave in charity to Dhātā and Vidhātā. Āyati and Niyati gave birth to two sons, Mṛkaṇḍa and Prāṇa.

Text 45
मार्कण्डेयो मृकण्डस्य प्राणाद्वेदशिरा मुनि: ।
कविश्च भार्गवो यस्य भगवानुशना सुत: ॥ ४५ ॥
mārkaṇḍeyo mṛkaṇḍasya
prāṇād vedaśirā muniḥ
kaviś ca bhārgavo yasya
bhagavān uśanā sutaḥ
Synonyms
mārkaṇḍeyaḥ — Mārkaṇḍeya; mṛkaṇḍasya — of Mṛkaṇḍa; prāṇāt — from Prāṇa; vedaśirāḥ — Vedaśirā; muniḥ — great sage; kaviḥ ca — of the name Kavi; bhārgavaḥ — of the name Bhārgava; yasya — whose; bhagavān — greatly powerful; uśanā — Śukrācārya; sutaḥ — son.

Translation
From Mṛkaṇḍa, Mārkaṇḍeya Muni was born, and from Prāṇa, the sage Vedaśirā, whose son was Uśanā [Śukrācārya], also known as Kavi. Thus Kavi also belonged to the descendants of the Bhṛgu dynasty.

Texts 46-47
त एते मुनय: क्षत्तर्लोकान्सर्गैरभावयन् ।
एष कर्दमदौहित्रसन्तान: कथितस्तव ॥ ४६ ॥
श‍ृण्वत: श्रद्दधानस्य सद्य: पापहर: पर: ।
प्रसूतिं मानवीं दक्ष उपयेमे ह्यजात्मज: ॥ ४७ ॥
ta ete munayaḥ kṣattar
lokān sargair abhāvayan
eṣa kardama-dauhitra-
santānaḥ kathitas tava
śṛṇvataḥ śraddadhānasya
sadyaḥ pāpa-haraḥ paraḥ
prasūtiṁ mānavīṁ dakṣa
upayeme hy ajātmajaḥ
Synonyms
te — they; ete — all; munayaḥ — great sages; kṣattaḥ — O Vidura; lokān — the three worlds; sargaiḥ — with their descendants; abhāvayan — filled; eṣaḥ — this; kardama — of the sage Kardama; dauhitra — grandsons; santānaḥ — offspring; kathitaḥ — already spoken; tava — unto you; śṛṇvataḥ — hearing; śraddadhānasya — of the faithful; sadyaḥ — immediately; pāpa-haraḥ — reducing all sinful activities; paraḥ — great; prasūtim — Prasūti; mānavīm — daughter of Manu; dakṣaḥ — King Dakṣa; upayeme — married; hi — certainly; aja-ātmajaḥ — son of Brahmā.

Translation
My dear Vidura, the population of the universe was thus increased by the descendants of these sages and the daughters of Kardama. Anyone who hears the descriptions of this dynasty with faith will be relieved from all sinful reactions. Another of Manu’s daughters, known as Prasūti, married the son of Brahmā named Dakṣa.

Text 48
तस्यां ससर्ज दुहितृ: षोडशामललोचना: ।
त्रयोदशादाद्धर्माय तथैकामग्नये विभु: ॥ ४८ ॥
tasyāṁ sasarja duhitṝḥ
ṣoḍaśāmala-locanāḥ
trayodaśādād dharmāya
tathaikām agnaye vibhuḥ
Synonyms
tasyām — unto her; sasarja — created; duhitṝḥ — daughters; ṣoḍaśa — sixteen; amala-locanāḥ — with lotuslike eyes; trayodaśa — thirteen; adāt — gave; dharmāya — to Dharma; tathā — so; ekām — one daughter; agnaye — to Agni; vibhuḥ — Dakṣa.

Translation
Dakṣa begot sixteen very beautiful daughters with lotuslike eyes in his wife Prasūti. Of these sixteen daughters, thirteen were given in marriage to Dharma, and one daughter was given to Agni.

Texts 49-52
पितृभ्य एकां युक्तेभ्यो भवायैकां भवच्छिदे ।
श्रद्धा मैत्री दया शान्तिस्तुष्टि: पुष्टि: क्रियोन्नति: ॥ ४९ ॥
बुद्धिर्मेधा तितिक्षा ह्रीर्मूर्तिर्धर्मस्य पत्नय: ।
श्रद्धासूत शुभं मैत्री प्रसादमभयं दया ॥ ५० ॥
शान्ति: सुखं मुदं तुष्टि: स्मयं पुष्टिरसूयत ।
योगं क्रियोन्नतिर्दर्पमर्थं बुद्धिरसूयत ॥ ५१ ॥
मेधा स्मृतिं तितिक्षा तु क्षेमं ह्री: प्रश्रयं सुतम् ।
मूर्ति: सर्वगुणोत्पत्तिर्नरनारायणावृषी ॥ ५२ ॥
pitṛbhya ekāṁ yuktebhyo
bhavāyaikāṁ bhava-cchide
śraddhā maitrī dayā śāntis
tuṣṭiḥ puṣṭiḥ kriyonnatiḥ
buddhir medhā titikṣā hrīr
mūrtir dharmasya patnayaḥ
śraddhāsūta śubhaṁ maitrī
prasādam abhayaṁ dayā
śāntiḥ sukhaṁ mudaṁ tuṣṭiḥ
smayaṁ puṣṭir asūyata
yogaṁ kriyonnatir darpam
arthaṁ buddhir asūyata
medhā smṛtiṁ titikṣā tu
kṣemaṁ hrīḥ praśrayaṁ sutam
mūrtiḥ sarva-guṇotpattir
nara-nārāyaṇāv ṛṣī
Synonyms
pitṛbhyaḥ — to the Pitās; ekām — one daughter; yuktebhyaḥ — the assembled; bhavāya — to Lord Śiva; ekām — one daughter; bhava-chide — who delivers from the material entanglement; śraddhā, maitrī, dayā, śāntiḥ, tuṣṭiḥ, puṣṭiḥ, kriyā, unnatiḥ, buddhiḥ, medhā, titikṣā, hrīḥ, mūrtiḥ — names of thirteen daughters of Dakṣa; dharmasya — of Dharma; patnayaḥ — the wives; śraddhā — Śraddhā; asūta — gave birth to; śubham — Śubha; maitrī — Maitrī; prasādam — Prasāda; abhayam — Abhaya; dayā — Dayā; śāntiḥ — Śānti; sukham — Sukha; mudam — Muda; tuṣṭiḥ — Tuṣṭi; smayam — Smaya; puṣṭiḥ — Puṣṭi; asūyata — gave birth to; yogam — Yoga; kriyā — Kriyā; unnatiḥ — Unnati; darpam — Darpa; artham — Artha; buddhiḥ — Buddhi; asūyata — begot; medhā — Medhā; smṛtim — Smṛti; titikṣā — Titikṣā; tu — also; kṣemam — Kṣema; hrīḥ — Hrī; praśrayam — Praśraya; sutam — son; mūrtiḥ — Mūrti; sarva-guṇa — of all respectable qualities; utpattiḥ — the reservoir; nara-nārāyaṇau — both Nara and Nārāyaṇa; ṛṣī — the two sages.

Translation
One of the remaining two daughters was given in charity to the Pitṛloka, where she resides very amicably, and the other was given to Lord Śiva, who is the deliverer of sinful persons from material entanglement. The names of the thirteen daughters of Dakṣa who were given to Dharma are Śraddhā, Maitrī, Dayā, Śānti, Tuṣṭi, Puṣṭi, Kriyā, Unnati, Buddhi, Medhā, Titikṣā, Hrī and Mūrti. These thirteen daughters produced the following sons: Śraddhā gave birth to Śubha, Maitrī produced Prasāda, Dayā gave birth to Abhaya, Śānti gave birth to Sukha, Tuṣṭi gave birth to Muda, Puṣṭi gave birth to Smaya, Kriyā gave birth to Yoga, Unnati gave birth to Darpa, Buddhi gave birth to Artha, Medhā gave birth to Smṛti, Titikṣā gave birth to Kṣema, and Hrī gave birth to Praśraya. Mūrti, a reservoir of all respectable qualities, gave birth to Śrī Nara-Nārāyaṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 53
ययोर्जन्मन्यदो विश्वमभ्यनन्दत्सुनिर्वृतम् ।
मनांसि ककुभो वाता: प्रसेदु: सरितोऽद्रय: ॥ ५३ ॥
yayor janmany ado viśvam
abhyanandat sunirvṛtam
manāṁsi kakubho vātāḥ
praseduḥ sarito ’drayaḥ
Synonyms
yayoḥ — both of whom (Nara and Nārāyaṇa); janmani — on the appearance; adaḥ — that; viśvam — universe; abhyanandat — became glad; su-nirvṛtam — full of joy; manāṁsi — everyone’s mind; kakubhaḥ — the directions; vātāḥ — the air; praseduḥ — became pleasant; saritaḥ — the rivers; adrayaḥ — the mountains.

Translation
On the occasion of the appearance of Nara-Nārāyaṇa, the entire world was full of joy. Everyone’s mind became tranquil, and thus in all directions the air, the rivers and the mountains became pleasant.

Texts 54-55
दिव्यवाद्यन्त तूर्याणि पेतु: कुसुमवृष्टय: ।
मुनयस्तुष्टुवुस्तुष्टा जगुर्गन्धर्वकिन्नरा: ॥ ५४ ॥
नृत्यन्ति स्म स्त्रियो देव्य आसीत्परममङ्गलम् ।
देवा ब्रह्मादय: सर्वे उपतस्थुरभिष्टवै: ॥ ५५ ॥
divy avādyanta tūryāṇi
petuḥ kusuma-vṛṣṭayaḥ
munayas tuṣṭuvus tuṣṭā
jagur gandharva-kinnarāḥ
nṛtyanti sma striyo devya
āsīt parama-maṅgalam
devā brahmādayaḥ sarve
upatasthur abhiṣṭavaiḥ
Synonyms
divi — in the heavenly planets; avādyanta — vibrated; tūryāṇi — a band of instruments; petuḥ — they showered; kusuma — of flowers; vṛṣṭayaḥ — showers; munayaḥ — the sages; tuṣṭuvuḥ — chanted Vedic prayers; tuṣṭāḥ — pacified; jaguḥ — began to sing; gandharva — the Gandharvas; kinnarāḥ — the Kinnaras; nṛtyanti sma — danced; striyaḥ — the beautiful damsels; devyaḥ — of the heavenly planets; āsīt — were visible; parama-maṅgalam — the highest good fortune; devāḥ — the demigods; brahma-ādayaḥ — Brahmā and others; sarve — all; upatasthuḥ — worshiped; abhiṣṭavaiḥ — with respectful prayers.

Translation
In the heavenly planets, bands began to play, and they showered flowers from the sky. The pacified sages chanted Vedic prayers, the denizens of heaven known as the Gandharvas and Kinnaras sang, the beautiful damsels of the heavenly planets danced, and in this way, at the time of the appearance of Nara-Nārāyaṇa, all signs of good fortune were visible. Just at that time, great demigods like Brahmā also offered their respectful prayers.

Text 56
देवा ऊचु:
यो मायया विरचितं निजयात्मनीदं
खे रूपभेदमिव तत्प्रतिचक्षणाय ।
एतेन धर्मसदने ऋषिमूर्तिनाद्य
प्रादुश्चकार पुरुषाय नम: परस्मै ॥ ५६ ॥
devā ūcuḥ
yo māyayā viracitaṁ nijayātmanīdaṁ
khe rūpa-bhedam iva tat-praticakṣaṇāya
etena dharma-sadane ṛṣi-mūrtinādya
prāduścakāra puruṣāya namaḥ parasmai
Synonyms
devāḥ — the demigods; ūcuḥ — said; yaḥ — who; māyayā — by the external energy; viracitam — was created; nijayā — by His own; ātmani — being situated in Him; idam — this; khe — in the sky; rūpa-bhedam — bunches of clouds; iva — as if; tat — of Himself; praticakṣaṇāya — for manifesting; etena — with this; dharma-sadane — in the house of Dharma; ṛṣi-mūrtinā — with the form of a sage; adya — today; prāduścakāra — appeared; puruṣāya — unto the Personality of Godhead; namaḥ — respectful obeisances; parasmai — the Supreme.

Translation
The demigods said: Let us offer our respectful obeisances unto the transcendental Personality of Godhead, who created as His external energy this cosmic manifestation, which is situated in Him as the air and clouds are situated in space, and who has now appeared in the form of Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi in the house of Dharma.

Text 57
सोऽयं स्थितिव्यतिकरोपशमाय सृष्टान्
सत्त्वेन न: सुरगणाननुमेयतत्त्व: ।
द‍ृश्याददभ्रकरुणेन विलोकनेन
यच्छ्रीनिकेतममलं क्षिपतारविन्दम् ॥ ५७ ॥
so ’yaṁ sthiti-vyatikaropaśamāya sṛṣṭān
sattvena naḥ sura-gaṇān anumeya-tattvaḥ
dṛśyād adabhra-karuṇena vilokanena
yac chrī-niketam amalaṁ kṣipatāravindam
Synonyms
saḥ — that; ayam — He; sthiti — of the created world; vyatikara — calamities; upaśamāya — for destroying; sṛṣṭān — created; sattvena — by the mode of goodness; naḥ — us; sura-gaṇān — the demigods; anumeya-tattvaḥ — understood by the Vedas; dṛśyāt — glance over; adabhra-karuṇena — merciful; vilokanena — glance; yat — which; śrī-niketam — the home of the goddess of fortune; amalam — spotless; kṣipata — supersedes; aravindam — lotus.

Translation
Let that Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is understood by truly authorized Vedic literature and who has created peace and prosperity to destroy all calamities of the created world, be kind enough to bestow His glance upon the demigods. His merciful glance can supersede the beauty of the spotless lotus flower which is the home of the goddess of fortune.

Text 58
एवं सुरगणैस्तात भगवन्तावभिष्टुतौ ।
लब्धावलोकैर्ययतुरर्चितौ गन्धमादनम् ॥ ५८ ॥
evaṁ sura-gaṇais tāta
bhagavantāv abhiṣṭutau
labdhāvalokair yayatur
arcitau gandhamādanam
Synonyms
evam — thus; sura-gaṇaiḥ — by the demigods; tāta — O Vidura; bhagavantau — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; abhiṣṭutau — having been praised; labdha — having obtained; avalokaiḥ — the glance (of mercy); yayatuḥ — departed; arcitau — having been worshiped; gandha-mādanam — to the Gandhamādana Hill.

Translation
[Maitreya said:] O Vidura, thus the demigods worshiped with prayers the Supreme Personality of Godhead appearing as the sage Nara-Nārāyaṇa. The Lord glanced upon them with mercy and then departed for Gandhamādana Hill.

Text 59
ताविमौ वै भगवतो हरेरंशाविहागतौ ।
भारव्ययाय च भुव: कृष्णौ यदुकुरूद्वहौ ॥ ५९ ॥
tāv imau vai bhagavato
harer aṁśāv ihāgatau
bhāra-vyayāya ca bhuvaḥ
kṛṣṇau yadu-kurūdvahau
Synonyms
tau — both; imau — these; vai — certainly; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hareḥ — of Hari; aṁśau — part and parcel expansion; iha — here (in this universe); āgatau — has appeared; bhāra-vyayāya — for mitigation of the burden; ca — and; bhuvaḥ — of the world; kṛṣṇau — the two Kṛṣṇas (Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna); yadu-kuru-udvahau — who are the best of the Yadu and Kuru dynasties respectively.

Translation
That Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi, who is a partial expansion of Kṛṣṇa, has now appeared in the dynasties of Yadu and Kuru, in the forms of Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna respectively, to mitigate the burden of the world.

Text 60
स्वाहाभिमानिनश्चाग्नेरात्मजांस्त्रीनजीजनत् ।
पावकं पवमानं च शुचिं च हुतभोजनम् ॥ ६० ॥
svāhābhimāninaś cāgner
ātmajāṁs trīn ajījanat
pāvakaṁ pavamānaṁ ca
śuciṁ ca huta-bhojanam
Synonyms
svāhā — Svāhā, the wife of Agni; abhimāninaḥ — the presiding deity of fire; ca — and; agneḥ — from Agni; ātmajān — sons; trīn — three; ajījanat — produced; pāvakam — Pāvaka; pavamānam ca — and Pavamāna; śucim ca — and Śuci; huta-bhojanam — eating the oblations of sacrifice.

Translation
The predominating deity of fire begot in his wife, Svāhā, three children, named Pāvaka, Pavamāna and Śuci, who exist by eating the oblations offered to the fire of sacrifice.

Text 61
तेभ्योऽग्नय: समभवन्चत्वारिंशच्च पञ्च च ।
त एवैकोनपञ्चाशत्साकं पितृपितामहै: ॥ ६१ ॥
tebhyo ’gnayaḥ samabhavan
catvāriṁśac ca pañca ca
ta evaikonapañcāśat
sākaṁ pitṛ-pitāmahaiḥ
Synonyms
tebhyaḥ — from them; agnayaḥ — fire-gods; samabhavan — were produced; catvāriṁśat — forty; ca — and; pañca — five; ca — and; te — they; eva — certainly; ekona-pañcāśat — forty-nine; sākam — along with; pitṛ-pitāmahaiḥ — with the fathers and grandfather.

Translation
From those three sons another forty-five descendants were generated, who are also fire-gods. The total number of fire-gods is therefore forty-nine, including the fathers and the grandfather.

Text 62
वैतानिके कर्मणि यन्नामभिर्ब्रह्मवादिभि: ।
आग्नेय्य इष्टयो यज्ञे निरूप्यन्तेऽग्नयस्तु ते ॥ ६२ ॥
vaitānike karmaṇi yan-
nāmabhir brahma-vādibhiḥ
āgneyya iṣṭayo yajñe
nirūpyante ’gnayas tu te
Synonyms
vaitānike — offering of oblations; karmaṇi — the activity; yat — of the fire-gods; nāmabhiḥ — by the names; brahma-vādibhiḥ — by impersonalist brāhmaṇas; āgneyyaḥ — for Agni; iṣṭayaḥ — sacrifices; yajñe — in the sacrifice; nirūpyante — are the objective; agnayaḥ — the forty-nine fire-gods; tu — but; te — those.

Translation
These forty-nine fire-gods are the beneficiaries of the oblations offered in the Vedic sacrificial fire by impersonalist brāhmaṇas.

Text 63
अग्निष्वात्ता बर्हिषद: सौम्या: पितर आज्यपा: ।
साग्नयोऽनग्नयस्तेषां पत्नी दाक्षायणी स्वधा ॥ ६३ ॥
agniṣvāttā barhiṣadaḥ
saumyāḥ pitara ājyapāḥ
sāgnayo ’nagnayas teṣāṁ
patnī dākṣāyaṇī svadhā
Synonyms
agniṣvāttāḥ — the Agniṣvāttas; barhiṣadaḥ — the Barhiṣadas; saumyāḥ — the Saumyas; pitaraḥ — the forefathers; ājyapāḥ — the Ājyapas; sa-agnayaḥ — those whose means is by fire; anagnayaḥ — those whose means is without fire; teṣām — of them; patnī — the wife; dākṣāyaṇī — the daughter of Dakṣa; svadhā — Svadhā.

Translation
The Agniṣvāttas, the Barhiṣadas, the Saumyas and the Ājyapas are the Pitās. They are either sāgnika or niragnika. The wife of all these Pitās is Svadhā, who is the daughter of King Dakṣa.

Text 64
तेभ्यो दधार कन्ये द्वे वयुनां धारिणीं स्वधा ।
उभे ते ब्रह्मवादिन्यौ ज्ञानविज्ञानपारगे ॥ ६४ ॥
tebhyo dadhāra kanye dve
vayunāṁ dhāriṇīṁ svadhā
ubhe te brahma-vādinyau
jñāna-vijñāna-pārage
Synonyms
tebhyaḥ — from them; dadhāra — produced; kanye — daughters; dve — two; vayunām — Vayunā; dhāriṇīm — Dhāriṇī; svadhā — Svadhā; ubhe — both of them; te — they; brahma-vādinyau — impersonalists; jñāna-vijñāna-pāra-ge — expert in both transcendental and Vedic knowledge.

Translation
Svadhā, who was offered to the Pitās, begot two daughters named Vayunā and Dhāriṇī, both of whom were impersonalists and were expert in transcendental and Vedic knowledge.

Text 65
भवस्य पत्नी तु सती भवं देवमनुव्रता ।
आत्मन: सद‍ृशं पुत्रं न लेभे गुणशीलत: ॥ ६५ ॥
bhavasya patnī tu satī
bhavaṁ devam anuvratā
ātmanaḥ sadṛśaṁ putraṁ
na lebhe guṇa-śīlataḥ
Synonyms
bhavasya — of Bhava (Lord Śiva); patnī — the wife; tu — but; satī — named Satī; bhavam — to Bhava; devam — a demigod; anuvratā — faithfully engaged in service; ātmanaḥ — of herself; sadṛśam — similar; putram — a son; na lebhe — did not obtain; guṇa-śīlataḥ — by good qualities and by character.

Translation
The sixteenth daughter, whose name was Satī, was the wife of Lord Śiva. She could not produce a child, although she always faithfully engaged in the service of her husband.

Text 66
पितर्यप्रतिरूपे स्वे भवायानागसे रुषा ।
अप्रौढैवात्मनात्मानमजहाद्योगसंयुता ॥ ६६ ॥
pitary apratirūpe sve
bhavāyānāgase ruṣā
aprauḍhaivātmanātmānam
ajahād yoga-saṁyutā
Synonyms
pitari — as a father; apratirūpe — unfavorable; sve — her own; bhavāya — unto Lord Śiva; anāgase — faultless; ruṣā — with anger; aprauḍhā — before attaining maturity; eva — even; ātmanā — by herself; ātmānam — the body; ajahāt — gave up; yoga-saṁyutā — by mystic yoga.

Translation
The reason is that Satī’s father, Dakṣa, used to rebuke Lord Śiva in spite of Śiva’s faultlessness. Consequently, before attaining a mature age, Satī gave up her body by dint of yogic mystic power.