Text 1
सूत उवाच
निशम्य कौषारविणोपवर्णितंध्रुवस्य वैकुण्ठपदाधिरोहणम् । प्ररूढभावो भगवत्यधोक्षजेप्रष्टुं पुनस्तं विदुर: प्रचक्रमे ॥ १ ॥
sūta uvāca
niśamya kauṣāraviṇopavarṇitaṁ
dhruvasya vaikuṇṭha-padādhirohaṇam
prarūḍha-bhāvo bhagavaty adhokṣaje
praṣṭuṁ punas taṁ viduraḥ pracakrame
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Sūta Gosvāmī said; niśamya — after hearing; kauṣāraviṇā — by the sage Maitreya; upavarṇitam — described; dhruvasya — of Mahārāja Dhruva; vaikuṇṭha-pada — to the abode of Viṣṇu; adhirohaṇam — ascent; prarūḍha — increased; bhāvaḥ — devotional emotion; bhagavati — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adhokṣaje — who is beyond the reach of direct perception; praṣṭum — to inquire; punaḥ — again; tam — unto Maitreya; viduraḥ — Vidura; pracakrame — attempted.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī, continuing to speak to all the ṛṣis, headed by Śaunaka, said: After hearing Maitreya Ṛṣi describe Dhruva Mahārāja’s ascent to Lord Viṣṇu’s abode, Vidura became very much enlightened in devotional emotion, and he inquired from Maitreya as follows.

Text 2
विदुर उवाच
के ते प्रचेतसो नाम कस्यापत्यानि
सुव्रत ।
कस्यान्ववाये प्रख्याता: कुत्र वा सत्रमासत ॥ २ ॥
vidura uvāca
ke te pracetaso nāma
kasyāpatyāni suvrata
kasyānvavāye prakhyātāḥ
kutra vā satram āsata
Synonyms
viduraḥ uvāca — Vidura inquired; ke — who were; te — they; pracetasaḥ — the Pracetās; nāma — of the name; kasya — whose; apatyāni — sons; su-vrata — O Maitreya, who have taken an auspicious vow; kasya — whose; anvavāye — in the family; prakhyātāḥ — famous; kutra — where; vā — also; satram — the sacrifice; āsata — was performed.

Translation
Vidura inquired from Maitreya: O greatly advanced devotee, who were the Pracetās? To which family did they belong? Whose sons were they, and where did they perform the great sacrifices?

Text 3
मन्ये महाभागवतं नारदं देवदर्शनम् ।
येन
प्रोक्त: क्रियायोग: परिचर्याविधिर्हरे: ॥ ३ ॥
manye mahā-bhāgavataṁ
nāradaṁ deva-darśanam
yena proktaḥ kriyā-yogaḥ
paricaryā-vidhir hareḥ
Synonyms
manye — I think; mahā-bhāgavatam — the greatest of all devotees; nāradam — the sage Nārada; deva — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; darśanam — who met; yena — by whom; proktaḥ — spoken; kriyā-yogaḥ — devotional service; paricaryā — for rendering service; vidhiḥ — the procedure; hareḥ — to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
Vidura continued: I know that the great sage Nārada is the greatest of all devotees. He has compiled the pāñcarātrika procedure of devotional service and has directly met the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 4
स्वधर्मशीलै: पुरुषैर्भगवान् यज्ञपूरुष: ।
इज्यमानो भक्तिमता नारदेनेरित: किल ॥ ४ ॥
sva-dharma-śīlaiḥ puruṣair
bhagavān yajña-pūruṣaḥ
ijyamāno bhaktimatā
nāradeneritaḥ kila
Synonyms
sva-dharma-śīlaiḥ — executing sacrificial duties; puruṣaiḥ — by the men; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yajña-pūruṣaḥ — the enjoyer of all sacrifices; ijyamānaḥ — being worshiped; bhaktimatā — by the devotee; nāradena — by Nārada; īritaḥ — described; kila — indeed.

Translation
While all the Pracetās were executing religious rituals and sacrificial ceremonies and thus worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead for His satisfaction, the great sage Nārada described the transcendental qualities of Dhruva Mahārāja.

Text 5
यास्ता देवर्षिणा तत्र वर्णिता भगवत्कथा: ।
मह्यं शुश्रूषवे ब्रह्मन् कार्त्स्‍न्येनाचष्टुमर्हसि ॥ ५ ॥
yās tā devarṣiṇā tatra
varṇitā bhagavat-kathāḥ
mahyaṁ śuśrūṣave brahman
kārtsnyenācaṣṭum arhasi
Synonyms
yāḥ — which; tāḥ — all those; devarṣiṇā — by the great sage Nārada; tatra — there; varṇitāḥ — narrated; bhagavat-kathāḥ — preachings pertaining to the activities of the Lord; mahyam — unto me; śuśrūṣave — very eager to hear; brahman — my dear brāhmaṇa; kārtsnyena — fully; ācaṣṭum arhasi — kindly explain.

Translation
My dear brāhmaṇa, how did Nārada Muni glorify the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and what pastimes were described in that meeting? I am very eager to hear of them. Kindly explain fully about that glorification of the Lord.

Text 6
मैत्रेय उवाच
ध्रुवस्य चोत्कल: पुत्र: पितरि प्रस्थिते वनम् ।
सार्वभौमश्रियं नैच्छदधिराजासनं पितु: ॥ ६ ॥
maitreya uvāca
dhruvasya cotkalaḥ putraḥ
pitari prasthite vanam
sārvabhauma-śriyaṁ naicchad
adhirājāsanaṁ pituḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya said; dhruvasya — of Dhruva Mahārāja; ca — also; utkalaḥ — Utkala; putraḥ — son; pitari — after the father; prasthite — departed; vanam — for the forest; sārva-bhauma — including all lands; śriyam — opulence; na aicchat — did not desire; adhirāja — royal; āsanam — throne; pituḥ — of the father.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya replied: My dear Vidura, when Mahārāja Dhruva departed for the forest, his son, Utkala, did not desire to accept the opulent throne of his father, which was meant for the ruler of all the lands of this planet.

Text 7
स जन्मनोपशान्तात्मा नि:सङ्ग: समदर्शन: ।
ददर्श लोके विततमात्मानं लोकमात्मनि ॥ ७ ॥
sa janmanopaśāntātmā
niḥsaṅgaḥ sama-darśanaḥ
dadarśa loke vitatam
ātmānaṁ lokam ātmani
Synonyms
saḥ — his son Utkala; janmanā — from the very beginning of his birth; upaśānta — very well satisfied; ātmā — soul; niḥsaṅgaḥ — without attachment; sama-darśanaḥ — equipoised; dadarśa — saw; loke — in the world; vitatam — spread; ātmānam — the Supersoul; lokam — all the world; ātmani — in the Supersoul.

Translation
From his very birth, Utkala was fully satisfied and unattached to the world. He was equipoised, for he could see everything resting in the Supersoul and the Supersoul present in everyone’s heart.

Texts 8-9
आत्मानं ब्रह्म निर्वाणं प्रत्यस्तमितविग्रहम् ।
अवबोधरसैकात्म्यमानन्दमनुसन्ततम् ॥ ८ ॥
अव्यवच्छिन्नयोगाग्निदग्धकर्ममलाशय: ।
स्वरूपमवरुन्धानो नात्मनोऽन्यं तदैक्षत ॥ ९ ॥
ātmānaṁ brahma-nirvāṇaṁ
pratyastamita-vigraham
avabodha-rasaikātmyam
ānandam anusantatam
avyavacchinna-yogāgni-
dagdha-karma-malāśayaḥ
svarūpam avarundhāno
nātmano ’nyaṁ tadaikṣata
Synonyms
ātmānam — self; brahma — spirit; nirvāṇam — extinction of material existence; pratyastamita — ceased; vigraham — separation; avabodha-rasa — by the mellow of knowledge; eka-ātmyam — oneness; ānandam — bliss; anusantatam — expanded; avyavacchinna — continuous; yoga — by practice of yoga; agni — by the fire; dagdha — burned; karma — fruitive desires; mala — dirty; āśayaḥ — in his mind; svarūpam — constitutional position; avarundhānaḥ — realizing; na — not; ātmanaḥ — than the Supreme Soul; anyam — anything else; tadā — then; aikṣata — saw.

Translation
By expansion of his knowledge of the Supreme Brahman, he had already attained liberation from the bondage of the body. This liberation is known as nirvāṇa. He was situated in transcendental bliss, and he continued always in that blissful existence, which expanded more and more. This was possible for him by continual practice of bhakti-yoga, which is compared to fire because it burns away all dirty, material things. He was always situated in his constitutional position of self-realization, and he could not see anything else but the Supreme Lord and himself engaged in discharging devotional service.

Text 10
जडान्धबधिरोन्मत्तमूकाकृतिरतन्मति: ।
लक्षित: पथि बालानां प्रशान्तार्चिरिवानल: ॥ १० ॥
jaḍāndha-badhironmatta-
mūkākṛtir atan-matiḥ
lakṣitaḥ pathi bālānāṁ
praśāntārcir ivānalaḥ
Synonyms
jaḍa — foolish; andha — blind; badhira — deaf; unmatta — mad; mūka — dumb; ākṛtiḥ — appearance; a-tat — not like that; matiḥ — his intelligence; lakṣitaḥ — he was seen; pathi — on the road; bālānām — by the less intelligent; praśānta — calmed; arciḥ — with flames; iva — like; analaḥ — fire.

Translation
Utkala appeared to the less intelligent persons on the road to be foolish, blind, dumb, deaf and mad, although actually he was not so. He remained like fire covered with ashes, without blazing flames.

Text 11
मत्वा तं जडमुन्मत्तं कुलवृद्धा: समन्त्रिण: ।
वत्सरं भूपतिं चक्रुर्यवीयांसं भ्रमे: सुतम् ॥ ११ ॥
matvā taṁ jaḍam unmattaṁ
kula-vṛddhāḥ samantriṇaḥ
vatsaraṁ bhūpatiṁ cakrur
yavīyāṁsaṁ bhrameḥ sutam
Synonyms
matvā — thinking; tam — Utkala; jaḍam — without intelligence; unmattam — mad; kula-vṛddhāḥ — the elderly members of the family; samantriṇaḥ — with the ministers; vatsaram — Vatsara; bhū-patim — ruler of the world; cakruḥ — they made; yavīyāṁsam — younger; bhrameḥ — of Bhrami; sutam — son.

Translation
For this reason the ministers and all the elderly members of the family thought Utkala to be without intelligence and, in fact, mad. Thus his younger brother, named Vatsara, the son of Bhrami, was elevated to the royal throne, and he became king of the world.

Text 12
स्वर्वीथिर्वत्सरस्येष्टा भार्यासूत षडात्मजान् ।
पुष्पार्णं तिग्मकेतुं च इषमूर्जं वसुं जयम् ॥ १२ ॥
svarvīthir vatsarasyeṣṭā
bhāryāsūta ṣaḍ-ātmajān
puṣpārṇaṁ tigmaketuṁ ca
iṣam ūrjaṁ vasuṁ jayam
Synonyms
svarvīthiḥ — Svarvīthi; vatsarasya — of King Vatsara; iṣṭā — very dear; bhāryā — wife; asūta — gave birth to; ṣaṭ — six; ātmajān — sons; puṣpārṇam — Puṣpārṇa; tigmaketum — Tigmaketu; ca — also; iṣam — Iṣa; ūrjam — Ūrja; vasum — Vasu; jayam — Jaya.

Translation
King Vatsara had a very dear wife whose name was Svarvīthi, and she gave birth to six sons, named Puṣpārṇa, Tigmaketu, Iṣa, Ūrja, Vasu and Jaya.

Text 13
पुष्पार्णस्य प्रभा भार्या दोषा च द्वे बभूवतु: ।
प्रातर्मध्यन्दिनं सायमिति ह्यासन् प्रभासुता: ॥ १३ ॥
puṣpārṇasya prabhā bhāryā
doṣā ca dve babhūvatuḥ
prātar madhyandinaṁ sāyam
iti hy āsan prabhā-sutāḥ
Synonyms
puṣpārṇasya — of Puṣpārṇa; prabhā — Prabhā; bhāryā — wife; doṣā — Doṣā; ca — also; dve — two; babhūvatuḥ — were; prātaḥ — Prātar; madhyandinam — Madhyandinam; sāyam — Sāyam; iti — thus; hi — certainly; āsan — were; prabhā-sutāḥ — sons of Prabhā.

Translation
Puṣpārṇa had two wives, named Prabhā and Doṣā. Prabhā had three sons, named Prātar, Madhyandinam and Sāyam.

Text 14
प्रदोषो निशिथो व्युष्ट इति दोषासुतास्त्रय: ।
व्युष्ट: सुतं पुष्करिण्यां सर्वतेजसमादधे ॥ १४ ॥
pradoṣo niśitho vyuṣṭa
iti doṣā-sutās trayaḥ
vyuṣṭaḥ sutaṁ puṣkariṇyāṁ
sarvatejasam ādadhe
Synonyms
pradoṣaḥ — Pradoṣa; niśithaḥ — Niśitha; vyuṣṭaḥ — Vyuṣṭa; iti — thus; doṣā — of Doṣā; sutāḥ — sons; trayaḥ — three; vyuṣṭaḥ — Vyuṣṭa; sutam — son; puṣkariṇyām — in Puṣkariṇī; sarva-tejasam — named Sarvatejā (all-powerful); ādadhe — begot.

Translation
Doṣā had three sons — Pradoṣa, Niśitha and Vyuṣṭa. Vyuṣṭa’s wife was named Puṣkariṇī, and she gave birth to a very powerful son named Sarvatejā.

Texts 15-16
स चक्षु: सुतमाकूत्यां पत्‍न्यां मनुमवाप ह ।
मनोरसूत महिषी विरजान्नड्‌वला सुतान् ॥ १५ ॥
पुरुं कुत्सं त्रितं द्युम्नं सत्यवन्तमृतं व्रतम् ।
अग्निष्टोममतीरात्रं प्रद्युम्नं शिबिमुल्मुकम् ॥ १६ ॥
sa cakṣuḥ sutam ākūtyāṁ
patnyāṁ manum avāpa ha
manor asūta mahiṣī
virajān naḍvalā sutān
puruṁ kutsaṁ tritaṁ dyumnaṁ
satyavantam ṛtaṁ vratam
agniṣṭomam atīrātraṁ
pradyumnaṁ śibim ulmukam
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Sarvatejā); cakṣuḥ — named Cakṣuḥ; sutam — son; ākūtyām — in Ākūti; patnyām — wife; manum — Cākṣuṣa Manu; avāpa — obtained; ha — indeed; manoḥ — of Manu; asūta — gave birth to; mahiṣī — queen; virajān — without passion; naḍvalā — Naḍvalā; sutān — sons; purum — Puru; kutsam — Kutsa; tritam — Trita; dyumnam — Dyumna; satyavantam — Satyavān; ṛtam — Ṛta; vratam — Vrata; agniṣṭomam — Agniṣṭoma; atīrātram — Atīrātra; pradyumnam — Pradyumna; śibim — Śibi; ulmukam — Ulmuka.

Translation
Sarvatejā’s wife, Ākūti, gave birth to a son named Cākṣuṣa, who became the sixth Manu at the end of the Manu millennium. Naḍvalā, the wife of Cākṣuṣa Manu, gave birth to the following faultless sons: Puru, Kutsa, Trita, Dyumna, Satyavān, Ṛta, Vrata, Agniṣṭoma, Atīrātra, Pradyumna, Śibi and Ulmuka.

Text 17
उल्मुकोऽजनयत्पुत्रान्पुष्करिण्यां षडुत्तमान् ।
अङ्गं सुमनसं ख्यातिं क्रतुमङ्गिरसं गयम् ॥ १७ ॥
ulmuko ’janayat putrān
puṣkariṇyāṁ ṣaḍ uttamān
aṅgaṁ sumanasaṁ khyātiṁ
kratum aṅgirasaṁ gayam
Synonyms
ulmukaḥ — Ulmuka; ajanayat — begot; putrān — sons; puṣkariṇyām — in Puṣkariṇī, his wife; ṣaṭ — six; uttamān — very good; aṅgam — Aṅga; sumanasam — Sumanā; khyātim — Khyāti; kratum — Kratu; aṅgirasam — Aṅgirā; gayam — Gaya.

Translation
Of the twelve sons, Ulmuka begot six sons in his wife Puṣkariṇī. They were all very good sons, and their names were Aṅga, Sumanā, Khyāti, Kratu, Aṅgirā and Gaya.

Text 18
सुनीथाङ्गस्य या पत्नी सुषुवे वेनमुल्बणम् ।
यद्दौ:शील्यात्स राजर्षिर्निर्विण्णो निरगात्पुरात् ॥ १८ ॥
sunīthāṅgasya yā patnī
suṣuve venam ulbaṇam
yad-dauḥśīlyāt sa rājarṣir
nirviṇṇo niragāt purāt
Synonyms
sunīthā — Sunīthā; aṅgasya — of Aṅga; yā — she who; patnī — the wife; suṣuve — gave birth to; venam — Vena; ulbaṇam — very crooked; yat — whose; dauḥśīlyāt — on account of bad character; saḥ — he; rāja-ṛṣiḥ — the saintly King Aṅga; nirviṇṇaḥ — very disappointed; niragāt — went out; purāt — from home.

Translation
The wife of Aṅga, Sunīthā, gave birth to a son named Vena, who was very crooked. The saintly King Aṅga was very disappointed with Vena’s bad character, and he left home and kingdom and went out to the forest.

Texts 19-20
यमङ्ग शेपु: कुपिता वाग्वज्रा मुनय: किल ।
गतासोस्तस्य भूयस्ते ममन्थुर्दक्षिणं करम् ॥ १९ ॥
अराजके तदा लोके दस्युभि: पीडिता: प्रजा: ।
जातो नारायणांशेन पृथुराद्य: क्षितीश्वर: ॥ २० ॥
yam aṅga śepuḥ kupitā
vāg-vajrā munayaḥ kila
gatāsos tasya bhūyas te
mamanthur dakṣiṇaṁ karam
arājake tadā loke
dasyubhiḥ pīḍitāḥ prajāḥ
jāto nārāyaṇāṁśena
pṛthur ādyaḥ kṣitīśvaraḥ
Synonyms
yam — him (Vena) whom; aṅga — my dear Vidura; śepuḥ — they cursed; kupitāḥ — being angry; vāk-vajrāḥ — whose words are as strong as a thunderbolt; munayaḥ — great sages; kila — indeed; gata-asoḥ tasya — after he died; bhūyaḥ — moreover; te — they; mamanthuḥ — churned; dakṣiṇam — right; karam — hand; arājake — being without a king; tadā — then; loke — the world; dasyubhiḥ — by rogues and thieves; pīḍitāḥ — suffering; prajāḥ — all the citizens; jātaḥ — advented; nārāyaṇa — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aṁśena — by a partial representation; pṛthuḥ — Pṛthu; ādyaḥ — original; kṣiti-īśvaraḥ — ruler of the world.

Translation
My dear Vidura, when great sages curse, their words are as invincible as a thunderbolt. Thus when they cursed King Vena out of anger, he died. After his death, since there was no king, all the rogues and thieves flourished, the kingdom became unregulated, and all the citizens suffered greatly. On seeing this, the great sages took the right hand of Vena as a churning rod, and as a result of their churning, Lord Viṣṇu in His partial representation made His advent as King Pṛthu, the original emperor of the world.

Text 21
विदुर उवाच
तस्य शीलनिधे: साधोर्ब्रह्मण्यस्य महात्मन: ।
राज्ञ: कथमभूद्दुष्टा प्रजा यद्विमना ययौ ॥ २१ ॥
vidura uvāca
tasya śīla-nidheḥ sādhor
brahmaṇyasya mahātmanaḥ
rājñaḥ katham abhūd duṣṭā
prajā yad vimanā yayau
Synonyms
viduraḥ uvāca — Vidura said; tasya — of him (Aṅga); śīla-nidheḥ — reservoir of good characteristics; sādhoḥ — saintly person; brahmaṇyasya — lover of brahminical culture; mahātmanaḥ — great soul; rājñaḥ — of the king; katham — how; abhūt — it was; duṣṭā — bad; prajā — son; yat — by which; vimanāḥ — being indifferent; yayau — he left.

Translation
Vidura inquired from the sage Maitreya: My dear brāhmaṇa, King Aṅga was very gentle. He had high character and was a saintly personality and lover of brahminical culture. How is it that such a great soul got a bad son like Vena, because of whom he became indifferent to his kingdom and left it?

Text 22
किं वांहो वेन उद्दिश्य ब्रह्मदण्डमयूयुजन् ।
दण्डव्रतधरे राज्ञि मुनयो धर्मकोविदा: ॥ २२ ॥
kiṁ vāṁho vena uddiśya
brahma-daṇḍam ayūyujan
daṇḍa-vrata-dhare rājñi
munayo dharma-kovidāḥ
Synonyms
kim — why; vā — also; aṁhaḥ — sinful activities; vene — unto Vena; uddiśya — seeing; brahma-daṇḍam — the curse of a brāhmaṇa; ayūyujan — they desired to award; daṇḍa-vrata-dhare — who carries the rod of punishment; rājñi — unto the king; munayaḥ — the great sages; dharma-kovidāḥ — completely conversant with religious principles.

Translation
Vidura also inquired: How is it that the great sages, who were completely conversant with religious principles, desired to curse King Vena, who himself carried the rod of punishment, and thus awarded him the greatest punishment [brahma-śāpa]?

Text 23
नावध्येय: प्रजापाल: प्रजाभिरघवानपि ।
यदसौ लोकपालानां बिभर्त्योज: स्वतेजसा ॥ २३ ॥
nāvadhyeyaḥ prajā-pālaḥ
prajābhir aghavān api
yad asau loka-pālānāṁ
bibharty ojaḥ sva-tejasā
Synonyms
na — never; avadhyeyaḥ — to be insulted; prajā-pālaḥ — the king; prajābhiḥ — by the citizens; aghavān — ever sinful; api — even though; yat — because; asau — he; loka-pālānām — of many kings; bibharti — maintains; ojaḥ — prowess; sva-tejasā — by personal influence.

Translation
It is the duty of all citizens in a state never to insult the king, even though he sometimes appears to have done something very sinful. Because of his prowess, the king is always more influential than all other ruling chiefs.

Text 24
एतदाख्याहि मे ब्रह्मन् सुनीथात्मजचेष्टितम् ।
श्रद्दधानाय भक्ताय त्वं परावरवित्तम: ॥ २४ ॥
etad ākhyāhi me brahman
sunīthātmaja-ceṣṭitam
śraddadhānāya bhaktāya
tvaṁ parāvara-vittamaḥ
Synonyms
etat — all these; ākhyāhi — please describe; me — unto me; brahman — O great brāhmaṇa; sunīthā-ātmaja — of the son of Sunīthā, Vena; ceṣṭitam — activities; śraddadhānāya — faithful; bhaktāya — unto your devotee; tvam — you; para-avara — with past and future; vit-tamaḥ — well conversant.

Translation
Vidura requested Maitreya: My dear brāhmaṇa, you are well conversant with all subjects, both past and future. Therefore I wish to hear from you all the activities of King Vena. I am your faithful devotee, so please explain this.

Text 25
मैत्रेय उवाच
अङ्गोऽश्वमेधं राजर्षिराजहार महाक्रतुम् ।
नाजग्मुर्देवतास्तस्मिन्नाहूता ब्रह्मवादिभि: ॥ २५ ॥
maitreya uvāca
aṅgo ’śvamedhaṁ rājarṣir
ājahāra mahā-kratum
nājagmur devatās tasminn
āhūtā brahma-vādibhiḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya answered; aṅgaḥ — King Aṅga; aśvamedham — aśvamedha sacrifice; rāja-ṛṣiḥ — the saintly king; ājahāra — executed; mahā-kratum — great sacrifice; na — not; ājagmuḥ — came; devatāḥ — the demigods; tasmin — in that sacrifice; āhūtāḥ — being invited; brahma-vādibhiḥ — by the brāhmaṇas expert in executing sacrifices.

Translation
Śrī Maitreya replied: My dear Vidura, once the great King Aṅga arranged to perform the great sacrifice known as aśvamedha. All the expert brāhmaṇas present knew how to invite the demigods, but in spite of their efforts, no demigods participated or appeared in that sacrifice.

Text 26
तमूचुर्विस्मितास्तत्र यजमानमथर्त्विज: ।
हवींषि हूयमानानि न ते गृह्णन्ति देवता: ॥ २६ ॥
tam ūcur vismitās tatra
yajamānam athartvijaḥ
havīṁṣi hūyamānāni
na te gṛhṇanti devatāḥ
Synonyms
tam — unto King Aṅga; ūcuḥ — said; vismitāḥ — in wonder; tatra — there; yajamānam — to the institutor of the sacrifice; atha — then; ṛtvijaḥ — the priests; havīṁṣi — offerings of clarified butter; hūyamānāni — being offered; na — not; te — they; gṛhṇanti — accept; devatāḥ — the demigods.

Translation
The priests engaged in the sacrifice then informed King Aṅga: O King, we are properly offering the clarified butter in the sacrifice, but despite all our efforts the demigods do not accept it.

Text 27
राजन् हवींष्यदुष्टानि श्रद्धयासादितानि ते ।
छन्दांस्ययातयामानि योजितानि धृतव्रतै: ॥ २७ ॥
rājan havīṁṣy aduṣṭāni
śraddhayāsāditāni te
chandāṁsy ayāta-yāmāni
yojitāni dhṛta-vrataiḥ
Synonyms
rājan — O King; havīṁṣi — sacrificial offerings; aduṣṭāni — not polluted; śraddhayā — with great faith and care; āsāditāni — collected; te — your; chandāṁsi — the mantras; ayāta-yāmāni — not deficient; yojitāni — properly executed; dhṛta-vrataiḥ — by qualified brāhmaṇas.

Translation
O King, we know that the paraphernalia to perform the sacrifice is well collected by you with great faith and care and is not polluted. Our chanting of the Vedic hymns is also not deficient in any way, for all the brāhmaṇas and priests present here are expert and are executing the performances properly.

Text 28
न विदामेह देवानां हेलनं वयमण्वपि ।
यन्न गृह्णन्ति भागान् स्वान् ये देवा: कर्मसाक्षिण: ॥ २८ ॥
na vidāmeha devānāṁ
helanaṁ vayam aṇv api
yan na gṛhṇanti bhāgān svān
ye devāḥ karma-sākṣiṇaḥ
Synonyms
na — not; vidāma — can find; iha — in this connection; devānām — of the demigods; helanam — insult, neglect; vayam — we; aṇu — minute; api — even; yat — because of which; na — not; gṛhṇanti — accept; bhāgān — shares; svān — own; ye — who; devāḥ — the demigods; karma-sākṣiṇaḥ — witnesses for the sacrifice.

Translation
Dear King, we do not find any reason that the demigods should feel insulted or neglected in any way, but still the demigods who are witnesses for the sacrifice do not accept their shares. We do not know why this is so.

Text 29
मैत्रेय उवाच
अङ्गो द्विजवच: श्रुत्वा यजमान: सुदुर्मना: ।
तत्प्रष्टुं व्यसृजद्वाचं सदस्यांस्तदनुज्ञया ॥ २९ ॥
maitreya uvāca
aṅgo dvija-vacaḥ śrutvā
yajamānaḥ sudurmanāḥ
tat praṣṭuṁ vyasṛjad vācaṁ
sadasyāṁs tad-anujñayā
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya answered; aṅgaḥ — King Aṅga; dvija-vacaḥ — the brāhmaṇas’ words; śrutvā — after hearing; yajamānaḥ — the performer of the sacrifice; sudurmanāḥ — very much aggrieved in mind; tat — about that; praṣṭum — in order to inquire; vyasṛjat vācam — he spoke; sadasyān — to the priests; tat — their; anujñayā — taking permission.

Translation
Maitreya explained that King Aṅga, after hearing the statements of the priests, was greatly aggrieved. At that time he took permission from the priests to break his silence and inquired from all the priests who were present in the sacrificial arena.

Text 30
नागच्छन्त्याहुता देवा न गृह्णन्ति ग्रहानिह ।
सदसस्पतयो ब्रूत किमवद्यं मया कृतम् ॥ ३० ॥
nāgacchanty āhutā devā
na gṛhṇanti grahān iha
sadasas-patayo brūta
kim avadyaṁ mayā kṛtam
Synonyms
na — not; āgacchanti — are coming; āhutāḥ — being invited; devāḥ — the demigods; na — not; gṛhṇanti — are accepting; grahān — shares; iha — in the sacrifice; sadasaḥ-patayaḥ — my dear priests; brūta — kindly tell me; kim — what; avadyam — offense; mayā — by me; kṛtam — was committed.

Translation
King Aṅga addressed the priestly order: My dear priests, kindly tell me what offense I have committed. Although invited, the demigods are neither taking part in the sacrifice nor accepting their shares.

Text 31
सदसस्पतय ऊचु:
नरदेवेह भवतो नाघं तावन् मनाक्स्थितम् ।
अस्त्येकं प्राक्तनमघं यदिहेद‍ृक् त्वमप्रज: ॥ ३१ ॥
sadasas-pataya ūcuḥ
nara-deveha bhavato
nāghaṁ tāvan manāk sthitam
asty ekaṁ prāktanam aghaṁ
yad ihedṛk tvam aprajaḥ
Synonyms
sadasaḥ-patayaḥ ūcuḥ — the head priests said; nara-deva — O King; iha — in this life; bhavataḥ — of you; na — not; agham — sinful activity; tāvat manāk — even very slight; sthitam — situated; asti — there is; ekam — one; prāktanam — in the previous birth; agham — sinful activity; yat — by which; iha — in this life; īdṛk — like this; tvam — you; aprajaḥ — without any son.

Translation
The head priests said: O King, in this life we do not find any sinful activity, even within your mind, so you are not in the least offensive. But we can see that in your previous life you performed sinful activities due to which, in spite of your having all qualifications, you have no son.

Text 32
तथा साधय भद्रं ते आत्मानं सुप्रजं नृप ।
इष्टस्ते पुत्रकामस्य पुत्रं दास्यति यज्ञभुक् ॥ ३२ ॥
tathā sādhaya bhadraṁ te
ātmānaṁ suprajaṁ nṛpa
iṣṭas te putra-kāmasya
putraṁ dāsyati yajña-bhuk
Synonyms
tathā — therefore; sādhaya — execute the sacrifice to get; bhadram — good fortune; te — to you; ātmānam — your own; su-prajam — good son; nṛpa — O King; iṣṭaḥ — being worshiped; te — by you; putra-kāmasya — desiring to have a son; putram — a son; dāsyati — He will deliver; yajña-bhuk — the Lord, the enjoyer of the sacrifice.

Translation
O King, we wish all good fortune for you. You have no son, but if you pray at once to the Supreme Lord and ask for a son, and if you execute the sacrifice for that purpose, the enjoyer of the sacrifice, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, will fulfill your desire.

Text 33
तथा स्वभागधेयानि ग्रहीष्यन्ति दिवौकस: ।
यद्यज्ञपुरुष: साक्षादपत्याय हरिर्वृत: ॥ ३३ ॥
tathā sva-bhāgadheyāni
grahīṣyanti divaukasaḥ
yad yajña-puruṣaḥ sākṣād
apatyāya harir vṛtaḥ
Synonyms
tathā — thereupon; sva-bhāga-dheyāni — their shares in the sacrifice; grahīṣyanti — will accept; diva-okasaḥ — all the demigods; yat — because; yajña-puruṣaḥ — the enjoyer of all sacrifices; sākṣāt — directly; apatyāya — for the purpose of a son; hariḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vṛtaḥ — is invited.

Translation
When Hari, the supreme enjoyer of all sacrifices, is invited to fulfill your desire for a son, all the demigods will come with Him and take their shares in the sacrifice.

Text 34
तांस्तान् कामान् हरिर्दद्याद्यान् यान् कामयते जन: ।
आराधितो यथैवैष तथा पुंसां फलोदय: ॥ ३४ ॥
tāṁs tān kāmān harir dadyād
yān yān kāmayate janaḥ
ārādhito yathaivaiṣa
tathā puṁsāṁ phalodayaḥ
Synonyms
tān tān — those; kāmān — desired objects; hariḥ — the Lord; dadyāt — will award; yān yān — whatsoever; kāmayate — desires; janaḥ — the person; ārādhitaḥ — being worshiped; yathā — as; eva — certainly; eṣaḥ — the Lord; tathā — similarly; puṁsām — of men; phala-udayaḥ — the result.

Translation
The performer of the sacrifices [under karma-kāṇḍa activities] achieves the fulfillment of the desire for which he worships the Lord.

Text 35
इति व्यवसिता विप्रास्तस्य राज्ञ: प्रजातये ।
पुरोडाशं निरवपन् शिपिविष्टाय विष्णवे ॥ ३५ ॥
iti vyavasitā viprās
tasya rājñaḥ prajātaye
puroḍāśaṁ niravapan
śipi-viṣṭāya viṣṇave
Synonyms
iti — thus; vyavasitāḥ — having decided; viprāḥ — the brāhmaṇas; tasya — his; rājñaḥ — of the king; prajātaye — for the purpose of getting a son; puroḍāśam — the paraphernalia of sacrifice; niravapan — offered; śipi-viṣṭāya — to the Lord, who is situated in the sacrificial fire; viṣṇave — to Lord Viṣṇu.

Translation
Thus for the sake of a son for King Aṅga, they decided to offer oblations to Lord Viṣṇu, who is situated in the hearts of all living entities.

Text 36
तस्मात्पुरुष उत्तस्थौ हेममाल्यमलाम्बर: ।
हिरण्मयेन पात्रेण सिद्धमादाय पायसम् ॥ ३६ ॥
tasmāt puruṣa uttasthau
hema-māly amalāmbaraḥ
hiraṇmayena pātreṇa
siddham ādāya pāyasam
Synonyms
tasmāt — from that fire; puruṣaḥ — a person; uttasthau — appeared; hema-mālī — with a golden garland; amala-ambaraḥ — in white garments; hiraṇmayena — golden; pātreṇa — with a pot; siddham — cooked; ādāya — carrying; pāyasam — rice boiled in milk.

Translation
As soon as the oblation was offered in the fire, a person appeared from the fire altar wearing a golden garland and a white dress. He was carrying a golden pot filled with rice boiled in milk.

Text 37
स विप्रानुमतो राजा गृहीत्वाञ्जलिनौदनम् ।
अवघ्राय मुदा युक्त: प्रादात्पत्‍न्या उदारधी: ॥ ३७ ॥
sa viprānumato rājā
gṛhītvāñjalinaudanam
avaghrāya mudā yuktaḥ
prādāt patnyā udāra-dhīḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he; vipra — of the brāhmaṇas; anumataḥ — taking permission; rājā — the King; gṛhītvā — taking; añjalinā — in his joined palms; odanam — rice boiled in milk; avaghrāya — after smelling; mudā — with great delight; yuktaḥ — fixed; prādāt — offered; patnyai — to his wife; udāra-dhīḥ — liberal-minded.

Translation
The King was very liberal, and after taking permission from the priests, he took the preparation in his joined palms, and after smelling it he offered a portion to his wife.

Text 38
सा तत्पुंसवनं राज्ञी प्राश्य वै पत्युरादधे ।
गर्भं काल उपावृत्ते कुमारं सुषुवेऽप्रजा ॥ ३८ ॥
sā tat puṁ-savanaṁ rājñī
prāśya vai patyur ādadhe
garbhaṁ kāla upāvṛtte
kumāraṁ suṣuve ’prajā
Synonyms
sā — she; tat — that food; pum-savanam — which produces a male child; rājñī — the Queen; prāśya — eating; vai — indeed; patyuḥ — from the husband; ādadhe — conceived; garbham — pregnancy; kāle — when the due time; upāvṛtte — appeared; kumāram — a son; suṣuve — gave birth to; aprajā — having no son.

Translation
Although the Queen had no son, after eating that food, which had the power to produce a male child, she became pregnant by her husband, and in due course of time she gave birth to a son.

Text 39
स बाल एव पुरुषो मातामहमनुव्रत: ।
अधर्मांशोद्भवं मृत्युं तेनाभवदधार्मिक: ॥ ३९ ॥
sa bāla eva puruṣo
mātāmaham anuvrataḥ
adharmāṁśodbhavaṁ mṛtyuṁ
tenābhavad adhārmikaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — that; bālaḥ — child; eva — certainly; puruṣaḥ — male; mātā-maham — maternal grandfather; anuvrataḥ — a follower of; adharma — of irreligion; aṁśa — from a portion; udbhavam — who appeared; mṛtyum — death; tena — by this; abhavat — he became; adhārmikaḥ — irreligious.

Translation
That boy was born partially in the dynasty of irreligion. His grandfather was death personified, and the boy grew up as his follower; he became a greatly irreligious person.

Text 40
स शरासनमुद्यम्य मृगयुर्वनगोचर: ।
हन्त्यसाधुर्मृगान् दीनान् वेनोऽसावित्यरौज्जन: ॥ ४० ॥
sa śarāsanam udyamya
mṛgayur vana-gocaraḥ
hanty asādhur mṛgān dīnān
veno ’sāv ity arauj janaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — that boy of the name Vena; śarāsanam — his bow; udyamya — taking up; mṛgayuḥ — the hunter; vana-gocaraḥ — going into the forest; hanti — used to kill; asādhuḥ — being very cruel; mṛgān — deer; dīnān — poor; venaḥ — Vena; asau — there he is; iti — thus; araut — would cry; janaḥ — all the people.

Translation
After fixing his bow and arrow, the cruel boy used to go to the forest and unnecessarily kill innocent deer, and as soon as he came all the people would cry, “Here comes cruel Vena! Here comes cruel Vena!”

Text 41
आक्रीडे क्रीडतो बालान् वयस्यानतिदारुण: ।
प्रसह्य निरनुक्रोश: पशुमारममारयत् ॥ ४१ ॥
ākrīḍe krīḍato bālān
vayasyān atidāruṇaḥ
prasahya niranukrośaḥ
paśu-māram amārayat
Synonyms
ākrīḍe — in the playground; krīḍataḥ — while playing; bālān — boys; vayasyān — of his age; ati-dāruṇaḥ — very cruel; prasahya — by force; niranukrośaḥ — merciless; paśu-māram — as if slaughtering animals; amārayat — killed.

Translation
The boy was so cruel that while playing with young boys of his age he would kill them very mercilessly, as if they were animals meant for slaughter.

Text 42
तं विचक्ष्य खलं पुत्रं शासनैर्विविधैर्नृप: ।
यदा न शासितुं कल्पो भृशमासीत्सुदुर्मना: ॥ ४२ ॥
taṁ vicakṣya khalaṁ putraṁ
śāsanair vividhair nṛpaḥ
yadā na śāsituṁ kalpo
bhṛśam āsīt sudurmanāḥ
Synonyms
tam — him; vicakṣya — observing; khalam — cruel; putram — son; śāsanaiḥ — by punishments; vividhaiḥ — different kinds of; nṛpaḥ — the King; yadā — when; na — not; śāsitum — to bring under control; kalpaḥ — was able; bhṛśam — greatly; āsīt — became; su-durmanāḥ — aggrieved.

Translation
After seeing the cruel and merciless behavior of his son, Vena, King Aṅga punished him in different ways to reform him, but was unable to bring him to the path of gentleness. He thus became greatly aggrieved.

Text 43
प्रायेणाभ्यर्चितो देवो येऽप्रजा गृहमेधिन: ।
कदपत्यभृतं दु:खं ये न विन्दन्ति दुर्भरम् ॥ ४३ ॥
prāyeṇābhyarcito devo
ye ’prajā gṛha-medhinaḥ
kad-apatya-bhṛtaṁ duḥkhaṁ
ye na vindanti durbharam
Synonyms
prāyeṇa — probably; abhyarcitaḥ — was worshiped; devaḥ — the Lord; ye — they who; aprajāḥ — without a son; gṛha-medhinaḥ — persons living at home; kad-apatya — by a bad son; bhṛtam — caused; duḥkham — unhappiness; ye — they who; na — not; vindanti — suffer; durbharam — unbearable.

Translation
The King thought to himself: Persons who have no son are certainly fortunate. They must have worshiped the Lord in their previous lives so that they would not have to suffer the unbearable unhappiness caused by a bad son.

Text 44
यत: पापीयसी कीर्तिरधर्मश्च महान्नृणाम् ।
यतो विरोध: सर्वेषां यत आधिरनन्तक: ॥ ४४ ॥
yataḥ pāpīyasī kīrtir
adharmaś ca mahān nṛṇām
yato virodhaḥ sarveṣāṁ
yata ādhir anantakaḥ
Synonyms
yataḥ — on account of a bad son; pāpīyasī — sinful; kīrtiḥ — reputation; adharmaḥ — irreligion; ca — also; mahān — great; nṛṇām — of men; yataḥ — from which; virodhaḥ — quarrel; sarveṣām — of all people; yataḥ — from which; ādhiḥ — anxiety; anantakaḥ — endless.

Translation
A sinful son causes a person’s reputation to vanish. His irreligious activities at home cause irreligion and quarrel among everyone, and this creates only endless anxiety.

Text 45
कस्तं प्रजापदेशं वै मोहबन्धनमात्मन: ।
पण्डितो बहु मन्येत यदर्था: क्लेशदा गृहा: ॥ ४५ ॥
kas taṁ prajāpadeśaṁ vai
moha-bandhanam ātmanaḥ
paṇḍito bahu manyeta
yad-arthāḥ kleśadā gṛhāḥ
Synonyms
kaḥ — who; tam — him; prajā-apadeśam — son in name only; vai — certainly; moha — of illusion; bandhanam — bondage; ātmanaḥ — for the soul; paṇḍitaḥ — intelligent man; bahu manyeta — would value; yat-arthāḥ — because of whom; kleśa-dāḥ — painful; gṛhāḥ — home.

Translation
Who, if he is considerate and intelligent, would desire such a worthless son? Such a son is nothing but a bond of illusion for the living entity, and he makes one’s home miserable.

Text 46
कदपत्यं वरं मन्ये सदपत्याच्छुचां पदात् ।
निर्विद्येत गृहान्मर्त्यो यत्‍क्‍लेशनिवहा गृहा: ॥ ४६ ॥
kad-apatyaṁ varaṁ manye
sad-apatyāc chucāṁ padāt
nirvidyeta gṛhān martyo
yat-kleśa-nivahā gṛhāḥ
Synonyms
kad-apatyam — bad son; varam — better; manye — I think; sat-apatyāt — than a good son; śucām — of grief; padāt — the source; nirvidyeta — becomes detached; gṛhāt — from home; martyaḥ — a mortal man; yat — because of whom; kleśa-nivahāḥ — hellish; gṛhāḥ — home.

Translation
Then the King thought: A bad son is better than a good son because a good son creates an attachment for home, whereas a bad son does not. A bad son creates a hellish home from which an intelligent man naturally becomes very easily detached.

Text 47
एवं स निर्विण्णमना नृपो गृहा-
न्निशीथ उत्थाय महोदयोदयात् ।
अलब्धनिद्रोऽनुपलक्षितो नृभि-
र्हित्वा गतो वेनसुवं प्रसुप्ताम् ॥ ४७ ॥
evaṁ sa nirviṇṇa-manā nṛpo gṛhān
niśītha utthāya mahodayodayāt
alabdha-nidro ’nupalakṣito nṛbhir
hitvā gato vena-suvaṁ prasuptām
Synonyms
evam — thus; saḥ — he; nirviṇṇa-manāḥ — being indifferent in mind; nṛpaḥ — King Aṅga; gṛhāt — from home; niśīthe — in the dead of night; utthāya — getting up; mahā-udaya-udayāt — opulent by the blessings of great souls; alabdha-nidraḥ — being without sleep; anupalakṣitaḥ — without being seen; nṛbhiḥ — by people in general; hitvā — giving up; gataḥ — went off; vena-suvam — the mother of Vena; prasuptām — sleeping deeply.

Translation
Thinking like that, King Aṅga could not sleep at night. He became completely indifferent to household life. Once, therefore, in the dead of night, he got up from bed and left Vena’s mother [his wife], who was sleeping deeply. He gave up all attraction for his greatly opulent kingdom, and, unseen by anyone, he very silently gave up his home and opulence and proceeded towards the forest.

Text 48
विज्ञाय निर्विद्य गतं पतिं प्रजा:
पुरोहितामात्यसुहृद्गणादय: ।
विचिक्युरुर्व्यामतिशोककातरा
यथा निगूढं पुरुषं कुयोगिन: ॥ ४८ ॥
vijñāya nirvidya gataṁ patiṁ prajāḥ
purohitāmātya-suhṛd-gaṇādayaḥ
vicikyur urvyām atiśoka-kātarā
yathā nigūḍhaṁ puruṣaṁ kuyoginaḥ
Synonyms
vijñāya — after understanding; nirvidya — being indifferent; gatam — had left; patim — the King; prajāḥ — all the citizens; purohita — priests; amātya — ministers; suhṛt — friends; gaṇa-ādayaḥ — and people in general; vicikyuḥ — searched; urvyām — on the earth; ati-śoka-kātarāḥ — being greatly aggrieved; yathā — just as; nigūḍham — concealed; puruṣam — the Supersoul; ku-yoginaḥ — inexperienced mystics.

Translation
When it was understood that the King had indifferently left home, all the citizens, priests, ministers, friends, and people in general were greatly aggrieved. They began to search for him all over the world, just as a less experienced mystic searches out the Supersoul within himself.

Text 49
अलक्षयन्त: पदवीं प्रजापते-
र्हतोद्यमा: प्रत्युपसृत्य ते पुरीम् ।
ऋषीन् समेतानभिवन्द्य साश्रवो
न्यवेदयन् पौरव भर्तृविप्लवम् ॥ ४९ ॥
alakṣayantaḥ padavīṁ prajāpater
hatodyamāḥ pratyupasṛtya te purīm
ṛṣīn sametān abhivandya sāśravo
nyavedayan paurava bhartṛ-viplavam
Synonyms
alakṣayantaḥ — not finding; padavīm — any trace; prajāpateḥ — of King Aṅga; hata-udyamāḥ — having become disappointed; pratyupasṛtya — after returning; te — those citizens; purīm — to the city; ṛṣīn — the great sages; sametān — assembled; abhivandya — after making respectful obeisances; sa-aśravaḥ — with tears in their eyes; nyavedayan — informed; paurava — O Vidura; bhartṛ — of the King; viplavam — the absence.

Translation
When the citizens could not find any trace of the King after searching for him everywhere, they were very disappointed, and they returned to the city, where all the great sages of the country assembled because of the King’s absence. With tears in their eyes the citizens offered respectful obeisances and informed the sages in full detail that they were unable to find the King anywhere.