Text 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
भृग्वादयस्ते मुनयो लोकानां क्षेमदर्शिन: ।
गोप्तर्यसति वै नृणां पश्यन्त: पशुसाम्यताम् ॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvāca
bhṛgv-ādayas te munayo
lokānāṁ kṣema-darśinaḥ
goptary asati vai nṝṇāṁ
paśyantaḥ paśu-sāmyatām
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya continued; bhṛgu-ādayaḥ — headed by Bhṛgu; te — all of them; munayaḥ — the great sages; lokānām — of the people; kṣema-darśinaḥ — who always aspire for the welfare; goptari — the King; asati — being absent; vai — certainly; nṝṇām — of all the citizens; paśyantaḥ — having understood; paśu-sāmyatām — existence on the level of the animals.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya continued: O great hero Vidura, the great sages, headed by Bhṛgu, were always thinking of the welfare of the people in general. When they saw that in the absence of King Aṅga there was no one to protect the interests of the people, they understood that without a ruler the people would become independent and nonregulated.

Text 2
वीरमातरमाहूय सुनीथां ब्रह्मवादिन: ।
प्रकृत्यसम्मतं वेनमभ्यषिञ्चन् पतिं भुव: ॥ २ ॥
vīra-mātaram āhūya
sunīthāṁ brahma-vādinaḥ
prakṛty-asammataṁ venam
abhyaṣiñcan patiṁ bhuvaḥ
Synonyms
vīra — of Vena; mātaram — mother; āhūya — calling; sunīthām — of the name Sunīthā; brahma-vādinaḥ — the great sages learned in the Vedas; prakṛti — by the ministers; asammatam — not approved of; venam — Vena; abhyaṣiñcan — enthroned; patim — the master; bhuvaḥ — of the world.

Translation
The great sages then called for the Queen Mother, Sunīthā, and with her permission they installed Vena on the throne as master of the world. All the ministers, however, disagreed with this.

Text 3
श्रुत्वा नृपासनगतं वेनमत्युग्रशासनम् ।
निलिल्युर्दस्यव: सद्य: सर्पत्रस्ता इवाखव: ॥ ३ ॥
śrutvā nṛpāsana-gataṁ
venam atyugra-śāsanam
nililyur dasyavaḥ sadyaḥ
sarpa-trastā ivākhavaḥ
Synonyms
śrutvā — after hearing; nṛpa — of the King; āsana-gatam — ascended to the throne; venam — Vena; ati — very; ugra — severe; śāsanam — punisher; nililyuḥ — hid themselves; dasyavaḥ — all the thieves; sadyaḥ — immediately; sarpa — from snakes; trastāḥ — being afraid; iva — like; ākhavaḥ — rats.

Translation
It was already known that Vena was very severe and cruel; therefore, as soon as all the thieves and rogues in the state heard of his ascendance to the royal throne, they became very much afraid of him. Indeed, they hid themselves here and there as rats hide themselves from snakes.

Text 4
स आरूढनृपस्थान उन्नद्धोऽष्टविभूतिभि: ।
अवमेने महाभागान् स्तब्ध: सम्भावित: स्वत: ॥ ४ ॥
sa ārūḍha-nṛpa-sthāna
unnaddho ’ṣṭa-vibhūtibhiḥ
avamene mahā-bhāgān
stabdhaḥ sambhāvitaḥ svataḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — King Vena; ārūḍha — ascended to; nṛpa-sthānaḥ — the seat of the king; unnaddhaḥ — very proud; aṣṭa — eight; vibhūtibhiḥ — by opulences; avamene — began to insult; mahā-bhāgān — great personalities; stabdhaḥ — inconsiderate; sambhāvitaḥ — considered great; svataḥ — by himself.

Translation
When the King ascended to the throne, he became all-powerful with eight kinds of opulences. Consequently he became too proud. By virtue of his false prestige, he considered himself to be greater than anyone. Thus he began to insult great personalities.

Text 5
एवं मदान्ध उत्सिक्तो निरङ्कुश इव द्विप: ।
पर्यटन् रथमास्थाय कम्पयन्निव रोदसी ॥ ५ ॥
evaṁ madāndha utsikto
niraṅkuśa iva dvipaḥ
paryaṭan ratham āsthāya
kampayann iva rodasī
Synonyms
evam — thus; mada-andhaḥ — being blind with power; utsiktaḥ — proud; niraṅkuśaḥ — uncontrolled; iva — like; dvipaḥ — an elephant; paryaṭan — traveling; ratham — a chariot; āsthāya — having mounted; kampayan — causing to tremble; iva — indeed; rodasī — the sky and earth.

Translation
When he became overly blind due to his opulences, King Vena mounted a chariot and, like an uncontrolled elephant, began to travel through the kingdom, causing the sky and earth to tremble wherever he went.

Text 6
न यष्टव्यं न दातव्यं न होतव्यं द्विजा: क्‍वचित् ।
इति न्यवारयद्धर्मं भेरीघोषेण सर्वश: ॥ ६ ॥
na yaṣṭavyaṁ na dātavyaṁ
na hotavyaṁ dvijāḥ kvacit
iti nyavārayad dharmaṁ
bherī-ghoṣeṇa sarvaśaḥ
Synonyms
na — not; yaṣṭavyam — any sacrifices can be performed; na — not; dātavyam — any charity can be given; na — not; hotavyam — any clarified butter can be offered; dvijāḥ — O twice-born; kvacit — at any time; iti — thus; nyavārayat — he stopped; dharmam — the procedures of religious principles; bherī — of kettledrums; ghoṣeṇa — with the sound; sarvaśaḥ — everywhere.

Translation
All the twice-born [brāhmaṇas] were forbidden henceforward to perform any sacrifice, and they were also forbidden to give charity or offer clarified butter. Thus King Vena sounded kettledrums throughout the countryside. In other words, he stopped all kinds of religious rituals.

Text 7
वेनस्यावेक्ष्य मुनयो दुर्वृत्तस्य विचेष्टितम् ।
विमृश्य लोकव्यसनं कृपयोचु: स्म सत्रिण: ॥ ७ ॥
venasyāvekṣya munayo
durvṛttasya viceṣṭitam
vimṛśya loka-vyasanaṁ
kṛpayocuḥ sma satriṇaḥ
Synonyms
venasya — of King Vena; āvekṣya — after observing; munayaḥ — all the great sages; durvṛttasya — of the great rogue; viceṣṭitam — activities; vimṛśya — considering; loka-vyasanam — danger to the people in general; kṛpayā — out of compassion; ūcuḥ — talked; sma — in the past; satriṇaḥ — the performers of sacrifices.

Translation
Therefore all the great sages assembled together and, after observing cruel Vena’s atrocities, concluded that a great danger and catastrophe was approaching the people of the world. Thus out of compassion they began to talk amongst themselves, for they themselves were the performers of the sacrifices.

Text 8
अहो उभयत: प्राप्तं लोकस्य व्यसनं महत् ।
दारुण्युभयतो दीप्ते इव तस्करपालयो: ॥ ८ ॥
aho ubhayataḥ prāptaṁ
lokasya vyasanaṁ mahat
dāruṇy ubhayato dīpte
iva taskara-pālayoḥ
Synonyms
aho — alas; ubhayataḥ — from both directions; prāptam — received; lokasya — of the people in general; vyasanam — danger; mahat — great; dāruṇi — a log; ubhayataḥ — from both sides; dīpte — burning; iva — like; taskara — from thieves and rogues; pālayoḥ — and from the king.

Translation
When the great sages consulted one another, they saw that the people were in a dangerous position from both directions. When a fire blazes on both ends of a log, the ants in the middle are in a very dangerous situation. Similarly, at that time the people in general were in a dangerous position due to an irresponsible king on one side and thieves and rogues on the other.

Text 9
अराजकभयादेष कृतो राजातदर्हण: ।
ततोऽप्यासीद्भयं त्वद्य कथं स्यात्स्वस्ति देहिनाम् ॥ ९ ॥
arājaka-bhayād eṣa
kṛto rājātad-arhaṇaḥ
tato ’py āsīd bhayaṁ tv adya
kathaṁ syāt svasti dehinām
Synonyms
arājaka — being without a king; bhayāt — out of fear; eṣaḥ — this Vena; kṛtaḥ — was made; rājā — the king; a-tat-arhaṇaḥ — though not qualified for it; tataḥ — from him; api — also; āsīt — there was; bhayam — danger; tu — then; adya — now; katham — how; syāt — can there be; svasti — happiness; dehinām — of the people in general.

Translation
Thinking to save the state from irregularity, the sages began to consider that it was due to a political crisis that they made Vena king although he was not qualified. But alas, now the people were being disturbed by the king himself. Under such circumstances, how could the people be happy?

Text 10
अहेरिव पय:पोष: पोषकस्याप्यनर्थभृत् ।
वेन: प्रकृत्यैव खल: सुनीथागर्भसम्भव: ॥ १० ॥
aher iva payaḥ-poṣaḥ
poṣakasyāpy anartha-bhṛt
venaḥ prakṛtyaiva khalaḥ
sunīthā-garbha-sambhavaḥ
Synonyms
aheḥ — of a snake; iva — like; payaḥ — with milk; poṣaḥ — the maintaining; poṣakasya — of the maintainer; api — even; anartha — against the interest; bhṛt — becomes; venaḥ — King Vena; prakṛtyā — by nature; eva — certainly; khalaḥ — mischievous; sunīthā — of Sunīthā, Vena’s mother; garbha — the womb; sambhavaḥ — born of.

Translation
The sages began to think within themselves: Because he was born from the womb of Sunīthā, King Vena is by nature very mischievous. Supporting this mischievous king is exactly like maintaining a snake with milk. Now he has become a source of all difficulties.

Text 11
निरूपित: प्रजापाल: स जिघांसति वै प्रजा: ।
तथापि सान्‍त्वयेमामुं नास्मांस्तत्पातकं स्पृशेत् ॥ ११ ॥
nirūpitaḥ prajā-pālaḥ
sa jighāṁsati vai prajāḥ
tathāpi sāntvayemāmuṁ
nāsmāṁs tat-pātakaṁ spṛśet
Synonyms
nirūpitaḥ — appointed; prajā-pālaḥ — the king; saḥ — he; jighāṁsati — desires to harm; vai — certainly; prajāḥ — the citizens; tathā api — nevertheless; sāntvayema — we should pacify; amum — him; na — not; asmān — us; tat — his; pātakam — sinful result; spṛśet — may touch.

Translation
We appointed this Vena king of the state in order to give protection to the citizens, but now he has become the enemy of the citizens. Despite all these discrepancies, we should at once try to pacify him. By doing so, we may not be touched by the sinful results caused by him.

Text 12
तद्विद्वद्‌भिरसद्‍वृत्तो वेनोऽस्माभि: कृतो नृप: ।
सान्त्वितो यदि नो वाचं न ग्रहीष्यत्यधर्मकृत् ।
लोकधिक्कारसन्दग्धं दहिष्याम: स्वतेजसा ॥ १२ ॥
tad-vidvadbhir asad-vṛtto
veno ’smābhiḥ kṛto nṛpaḥ
sāntvito yadi no vācaṁ
na grahīṣyaty adharma-kṛt
loka-dhikkāra-sandagdhaṁ
dahiṣyāmaḥ sva-tejasā
Synonyms
tat — his mischievous nature; vidvadbhiḥ — aware of; asat-vṛttaḥ — impious; venaḥ — Vena; asmābhiḥ — by us; kṛtaḥ — was made; nṛpaḥ — king; sāntvitaḥ — (in spite of) being pacified; yadi — if; naḥ — our; vācam — words; na — not; grahīṣyati — he will accept; adharma-kṛt — the most mischievous; loka-dhik-kāra — by public condemnation; sandagdham — burned; dahiṣyāmaḥ — we shall burn; sva-tejasā — by our prowess.

Translation
The saintly sages continued thinking: Of course, we were completely aware of his mischievous nature, yet we nevertheless enthroned Vena. If we cannot persuade King Vena to accept our advice, he will be condemned by the public, and we will join them. Thus by our prowess we shall burn him to ashes.

Text 13
एवमध्यवसायैनं मुनयो गूढमन्यव: ।
उपव्रज्याब्रुवन् वेनं सान्‍त्वयित्वा च सामभि: ॥ १३ ॥
evam adhyavasāyainaṁ
munayo gūḍha-manyavaḥ
upavrajyābruvan venaṁ
sāntvayitvā ca sāmabhiḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; adhyavasāya — having decided; enam — him; munayaḥ — the great sages; gūḍha-manyavaḥ — concealing their anger; upavrajya — having approached; abruvan — spoke; venam — to King Vena; sāntvayitvā — after pacifying; ca — also; sāmabhiḥ — with sweet words.

Translation
The great sages, having thus decided, approached King Vena. Concealing their real anger, they pacified him with sweet words and then spoke as follows.

Text 14
मुनय ऊचु:
नृपवर्य निबोधैतद्यत्ते विज्ञापयाम भो: ।
आयु:श्रीबलकीर्तीनां तव तात विवर्धनम् ॥ १४ ॥
munaya ūcuḥ
nṛpa-varya nibodhaitad
yat te vijñāpayāma bhoḥ
āyuḥ-śrī-bala-kīrtīnāṁ
tava tāta vivardhanam
Synonyms
munayaḥ ūcuḥ — the great sages said; nṛpa-varya — O best of the kings; nibodha — kindly try to understand; etat — this; yat — which; te — to you; vijñāpayāma — we shall instruct; bhoḥ — O King; āyuḥ — duration of life; śrī — opulences; bala — strength; kīrtīnām — good reputation; tava — your; tāta — dear son; vivardhanam — which will increase.

Translation
The great sages said: Dear King, we have come to give you good advice. Kindly hear us with great attention. By doing so, your duration of life and your opulence, strength and reputation will increase.

Text 15
धर्म आचरित: पुंसां वाङ्‍मन:कायबुद्धिभि: ।
लोकान् विशोकान् वतरत्यथानन्त्यमसङ्गिनाम् ॥ १५ ॥
dharma ācaritaḥ puṁsāṁ
vāṅ-manaḥ-kāya-buddhibhiḥ
lokān viśokān vitaraty
athānantyam asaṅginām
Synonyms
dharmaḥ — religious principles; ācaritaḥ — executed; puṁsām — to persons; vāk — by words; manaḥ — mind; kāya — body; buddhibhiḥ — and by intelligence; lokān — the planets; viśokān — without misery; vitarati — bestow; atha — certainly; ānantyam — unlimited happiness, liberation; asaṅginām — to those free from material influence.

Translation
Those who live according to religious principles and who follow them by words, mind, body and intelligence are elevated to the heavenly kingdom, which is devoid of all miseries. Being thus rid of the material influence, they achieve unlimited happiness in life.

Text 16
स ते मा विनशेद्वीर प्रजानां क्षेमलक्षण: ।
यस्मिन् विनष्टे नृपतिरैश्वर्यादवरोहति ॥ १६ ॥
sa te mā vinaśed vīra
prajānāṁ kṣema-lakṣaṇaḥ
yasmin vinaṣṭe nṛpatir
aiśvaryād avarohati
Synonyms
saḥ — that spiritual life; te — by you; mā — do not; vinaśet — let it be spoiled; vīra — O hero; prajānām — of the people; kṣema-lakṣaṇaḥ — the cause of prosperity; yasmin — which; vinaṣṭe — being spoiled; nṛpatiḥ — the king; aiśvaryāt — from opulence; avarohati — falls down.

Translation
The sages continued: O great hero, for this reason you should not be the cause of spoiling the spiritual life of the general populace. If their spiritual life is spoiled because of your activities, you will certainly fall down from your opulent and royal position.

Text 17
राजन्नसाध्वमात्येभ्यश्चोरादिभ्य: प्रजा नृप: ।
रक्षन्यथा बलिं गृह्णन्निह प्रेत्य च मोदते ॥ १७ ॥
rājann asādhv-amātyebhyaś
corādibhyaḥ prajā nṛpaḥ
rakṣan yathā baliṁ gṛhṇann
iha pretya ca modate
Synonyms
rājan — O King; asādhu — mischievous; amātyebhyaḥ — from ministers; cora-ādibhyaḥ — from thieves and rogues; prajāḥ — the citizens; nṛpaḥ — the king; rakṣan — protecting; yathā — accordingly as; balim — taxes; gṛhṇan — accepting; iha — in this world; pretya — after death; ca — also; modate — enjoys.

Translation
The saintly persons continued: When the king protects the citizens from the disturbances of mischievous ministers as well as from thieves and rogues, he can, by virtue of such pious activities, accept taxes given by his subjects. Thus a pious king can certainly enjoy himself in this world as well as in the life after death.

Text 18
यस्य राष्ट्रे पुरे चैव भगवान् यज्ञपूरुष: ।
इज्यते स्वेन धर्मेण जनैर्वर्णाश्रमान्वितै: ॥ १८ ॥
yasya rāṣṭre pure caiva
bhagavān yajña-pūruṣaḥ
ijyate svena dharmeṇa
janair varṇāśramānvitaiḥ
Synonyms
yasya — whose; rāṣṭre — in the state or kingdom; pure — in the cities; ca — also; eva — certainly; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yajña-pūruṣaḥ — who is the enjoyer of all sacrifices; ijyate — is worshiped; svena — their own; dharmeṇa — by occupation; janaiḥ — by the people; varṇa-āśrama — the system of eight social orders; anvitaiḥ — who follow.

Translation
The king is supposed to be pious in whose state and cities the general populace strictly observes the system of eight social orders of varṇa and āśrama, and where all citizens engage in worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead by their particular occupations.

Text 19
तस्य राज्ञो महाभाग भगवान् भूतभावन: ।
परितुष्यति विश्वात्मा तिष्ठतो निजशासने ॥ १९ ॥
tasya rājño mahā-bhāga
bhagavān bhūta-bhāvanaḥ
parituṣyati viśvātmā
tiṣṭhato nija-śāsane
Synonyms
tasya — with him; rājñaḥ — the king; mahā-bhāga — O noble one; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhūta-bhāvanaḥ — who is the original cause of the cosmic manifestation; parituṣyati — becomes satisfied; viśva-ātmā — the Supersoul of the entire universe; tiṣṭhataḥ — being situated; nija-śāsane — in his own governing situation.

Translation
O noble one, if the king sees that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the original cause of the cosmic manifestation and the Supersoul within everyone, is worshiped, the Lord will be satisfied.

Text 20
तस्मिंस्तुष्टे किमप्राप्यं जगतामीश्वरेश्वरे ।
लोका: सपाला ह्येतस्मै हरन्ति बलिमाद‍ृता: ॥ २० ॥
tasmiṁs tuṣṭe kim aprāpyaṁ
jagatām īśvareśvare
lokāḥ sapālā hy etasmai
haranti balim ādṛtāḥ
Synonyms
tasmin — when He; tuṣṭe — is satisfied; kim — what; aprāpyam — impossible to achieve; jagatām — of the universe; īśvara-īśvare — the controller of the controllers; lokāḥ — the inhabitants of the planets; sapālāḥ — with their presiding deities; hi — for this reason; etasmai — unto Him; haranti — offer; balim — paraphernalia for worship; ādṛtāḥ — with great pleasure.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is worshiped by the great demigods who are controllers of universal affairs. When He is satisfied, nothing is impossible to achieve. For this reason all the demigods, presiding deities of different planets, as well as the inhabitants of their planets, take great pleasure in offering all kinds of paraphernalia for His worship.

Text 21
तं सर्वलोकामरयज्ञसङ्ग्रहं
त्रयीमयं द्रव्यमयं तपोमयम् ।
यज्ञैर्विचित्रैर्यजतो भवाय ते
राजन् स्वदेशाननुरोद्धुमर्हसि ॥ २१ ॥
taṁ sarva-lokāmara-yajña-saṅgrahaṁ
trayīmayaṁ dravyamayaṁ tapomayam
yajñair vicitrair yajato bhavāya te
rājan sva-deśān anuroddhum arhasi
Synonyms
tam — Him; sarva-loka — in all planets; amara — with the predominating deities; yajña — sacrifices; saṅgraham — who accepts; trayī-mayam — the sum total of the three Vedas; dravya-mayam — the owner of all paraphernalia; tapaḥ-mayam — the goal of all austerity; yajñaiḥ — by sacrifices; vicitraiḥ — various; yajataḥ — worshiping; bhavāya — for elevation; te — your; rājan — O King; sva-deśān — your countrymen; anuroddhum — to direct; arhasi — you ought.

Translation
Dear King, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, along with the predominating deities, is the enjoyer of the results of all sacrifices in all planets. The Supreme Lord is the sum total of the three Vedas, the owner of everything, and the ultimate goal of all austerity. Therefore your countrymen should engage in performing various sacrifices for your elevation. Indeed, you should always direct them towards the offering of sacrifices.

Text 22
यज्ञेन युष्मद्विषये द्विजातिभि-
र्वितायमानेन सुरा: कला हरे: ।
स्विष्टा: सुतुष्टा: प्रदिशन्ति वाञ्छितं
तद्धेलनं नार्हसि वीर चेष्टितुम् ॥ २२ ॥
yajñena yuṣmad-viṣaye dvijātibhir
vitāyamānena surāḥ kalā hareḥ
sviṣṭāḥ sutuṣṭāḥ pradiśanti vāñchitaṁ
tad-dhelanaṁ nārhasi vīra ceṣṭitum
Synonyms
yajñena — by sacrifice; yuṣmat — your; viṣaye — in the kingdom; dvijātibhiḥ — by the brāhmaṇas; vitāyamānena — being performed; surāḥ — all the demigods; kalāḥ — expansions; hareḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; su-iṣṭāḥ — being properly worshiped; su-tuṣṭāḥ — very much satisfied; pradiśanti — will give; vāñchitam — desired result; tat-helanam — disrespect to them; na — not; arhasi — you ought; vīra — O hero; ceṣṭitum — to do.

Translation
When all the brāhmaṇas engage in performing sacrifices in your kingdom, all the demigods, who are plenary expansions of the Lord, will be very much satisfied by their activities and will give you your desired result. Therefore, O hero, do not stop the sacrificial performances. If you stop them, you will disrespect the demigods.

Text 23
वेन उवाच
बालिशा बत यूयं वा अधर्मे धर्ममानिन: ।
ये वृत्तिदं पतिं हित्वा जारं पतिमुपासते ॥ २३ ॥
vena uvāca
bāliśā bata yūyaṁ vā
adharme dharma-māninaḥ
ye vṛttidaṁ patiṁ hitvā
jāraṁ patim upāsate
Synonyms
venaḥ — King Vena; uvāca — replied; bāliśāḥ — childish; bata — oh; yūyam — all of you; vā — indeed; adharme — in irreligious principles; dharma-māninaḥ — accepting as religious; ye — all of you who; vṛttidam — providing maintenance; patim — husband; hitvā — giving up; jāram — paramour; patim — husband; upāsate — worship.

Translation
King Vena replied: You are not at all experienced. It is very much regrettable that you are maintaining something which is not religious and are accepting it as religious. Indeed, I think you are giving up your real husband, who maintains you, and are searching after some paramour to worship.

Text 24
अवजानन्त्यमी मूढा नृपरूपिणमीश्वरम् ।
नानुविन्दन्ति ते भद्रमिह लोके परत्र च ॥ २४ ॥
avajānanty amī mūḍhā
nṛpa-rūpiṇam īśvaram
nānuvindanti te bhadram
iha loke paratra ca
Synonyms
avajānanti — disrespect; amī — those (who); mūḍhāḥ — being ignorant; nṛpa-rūpiṇam — in the form of the king; īśvaram — the Personality of Godhead; na — not; anuvindanti — experience; te — they; bhadram — happiness; iha — in this; loke — world; paratra — after death; ca — also.

Translation
Those who, out of gross ignorance, do not worship the king, who is actually the Supreme Personality of Godhead, experience happiness neither in this world nor in the world after death.

Text 25
को यज्ञपुरुषो नाम यत्र वो भक्तिरीद‍ृशी ।
भर्तृस्‍नेहविदूराणां यथा जारे कुयोषिताम् ॥ २५ ॥
ko yajña-puruṣo nāma
yatra vo bhaktir īdṛśī
bhartṛ-sneha-vidūrāṇāṁ
yathā jāre kuyoṣitām
Synonyms
kaḥ — who (is); yajña-puruṣaḥ — the enjoyer of all sacrifices; nāma — by name; yatra — unto whom; vaḥ — your; bhaktiḥ — devotional service; īdṛśī — so great; bhartṛ — for the husband; sneha — affection; vidūrāṇām — bereft of; yathā — like; jāre — unto the paramour; ku-yoṣitām — of unchaste women.

Translation
You are so much devoted to the demigods, but who are they? Indeed, your affection for these demigods is exactly like the affection of an unchaste woman who neglects her married life and gives all attention to her paramour.

Texts 26-27
विष्णुर्विरिञ्चो गिरिश इन्द्रो वायुर्यमो रवि: ।
पर्जन्यो धनद: सोम: क्षितिरग्निरपाम्पति: ॥ २६ ॥
एते चान्ये च विबुधा: प्रभवो वरशापयो: ।
देहे भवन्ति नृपते: सर्वदेवमयो नृप: ॥ २७ ॥
viṣṇur viriñco giriśa
indro vāyur yamo raviḥ
parjanyo dhanadaḥ somaḥ
kṣitir agnir apāmpatiḥ
ete cānye ca vibudhāḥ
prabhavo vara-śāpayoḥ
dehe bhavanti nṛpateḥ
sarva-devamayo nṛpaḥ
Synonyms
viṣṇuḥ — Lord Viṣṇu; viriñcaḥ — Lord Brahmā; giriśaḥ — Lord Śiva; indraḥ — Lord Indra; vāyuḥ — Vāyu, the director of the air; yamaḥ — Yama, the superintendent of death; raviḥ — the sun-god; parjanyaḥ — the director of rainfall; dhana-daḥ — Kuvera, the treasurer; somaḥ — the moon-god; kṣitiḥ — the predominating deity of the earth; agniḥ — the fire-god; apām-patiḥ — Varuṇa, the lord of waters; ete — all these; ca — and; anye — others; ca — also; vibudhāḥ — demigods; prabhavaḥ — competent; vara-śāpayoḥ — in both benediction and curse; dehe — in the body; bhavanti — abide; nṛpateḥ — of the king; sarva-devamayaḥ — comprising all demigods; nṛpaḥ — the king.

Translation
Lord Viṣṇu; Lord Brahmā; Lord Śiva; Lord Indra; Vāyu, the master of air; Yama, the superintendent of death; the sun-god; the director of rainfall; Kuvera, the treasurer; the moon-god; the predominating deity of the earth; Agni, the fire-god; Varuṇa, the lord of waters; and all others who are great and competent to bestow benedictions or to curse — all abide in the body of the king. For this reason the king is known as the reservoir of all demigods, who are simply parts and parcels of the king’s body.

Text 28
तस्मान्मां कर्मभिर्विप्रा यजध्वं गतमत्सरा: ।
बलिं च मह्यं हरत मत्तोऽन्य: कोऽग्रभुक्पुमान् ॥ २८ ॥
tasmān māṁ karmabhir viprā
yajadhvaṁ gata-matsarāḥ
baliṁ ca mahyaṁ harata
matto ’nyaḥ ko ’gra-bhuk pumān
Synonyms
tasmāt — for this reason; mām — me; karmabhiḥ — by ritualistic activities; viprāḥ — O brāhmaṇas; yajadhvam — worship; gata — without; matsarāḥ — being envious; balim — paraphernalia for worship; ca — also; mahyam — unto me; harata — bring; mattaḥ — than me; anyaḥ — other; kaḥ — who (is); agra-bhuk — the enjoyer of the first oblations; pumān — personality.

Translation
King Vena continued: For this reason, O brāhmaṇas, you should abandon your envy of me, and by your ritualistic activities you should worship me and offer me all paraphernalia. If you are intelligent, you should know that there is no personality superior to me who can accept the first oblations of all sacrifices.

Text 29
मैत्रेय उवाच
इत्थं विपर्ययमति: पापीयानुत्पथं गत: ।
अनुनीयमानस्तद्याच्ञां न चक्रे भ्रष्टमङ्गल: ॥ २९ ॥
maitreya uvāca
itthaṁ viparyaya-matiḥ
pāpīyān utpathaṁ gataḥ
anunīyamānas tad-yācñāṁ
na cakre bhraṣṭa-maṅgalaḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; ittham — thus; viparyaya-matiḥ — one who has developed perverse intelligence; pāpīyān — most sinful; utpatham — from the right path; gataḥ — having gone; anunīyamānaḥ — being offered all respect; tat-yācñām — the request of the sages; na — not; cakre — accepted; bhraṣṭa — bereft of; maṅgalaḥ — all good fortune.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya continued: Thus the King, who became unintelligent due to his sinful life and deviation from the right path, became actually bereft of all good fortune. He could not accept the requests of the great sages, which the sages put before him with great respect, and therefore he was condemned.

Text 30
इति तेऽसत्कृतास्तेन द्विजा: पण्डितमानिना ।
भग्नायां भव्ययाच्ञायां तस्मै विदुर चुक्रुधु: ॥ ३० ॥
iti te ’sat-kṛtās tena
dvijāḥ paṇḍita-māninā
bhagnāyāṁ bhavya-yācñāyāṁ
tasmai vidura cukrudhuḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus; te — all the great sages; asat-kṛtāḥ — being insulted; tena — by the King; dvijāḥ — the brāhmaṇas; paṇḍita-māninā — thinking himself to be very learned; bhagnāyām — being broken; bhavya — auspicious; yācñāyām — their request; tasmai — at him; vidura — O Vidura; cukrudhuḥ — became very angry.

Translation
My dear Vidura, all good fortune unto you. The foolish King, who thought himself very learned, thus insulted the great sages, and the sages, being brokenhearted by the King’s words, became very angry at him.

Text 31
हन्यतां हन्यतामेष पाप: प्रकृतिदारुण: ।
जीवञ्जगदसावाशु कुरुते भस्मसाद् ध्रुवम् ॥ ३१ ॥
hanyatāṁ hanyatām eṣa
pāpaḥ prakṛti-dāruṇaḥ
jīvañ jagad asāv āśu
kurute bhasmasād dhruvam
Synonyms
hanyatām — kill him; hanyatām — kill him; eṣaḥ — this king; pāpaḥ — representative of sin; prakṛti — by nature; dāruṇaḥ — most dreadful; jīvan — while living; jagat — the whole world; asau — he; āśu — very soon; kurute — will make; bhasmasāt — into ashes; dhruvam — certainly.

Translation
All the great saintly sages immediately cried: Kill him! Kill him! He is the most dreadful, sinful person. If he lives, he will certainly turn the whole world into ashes in no time.

Text 32
नायमर्हत्यसद्‍वृत्तो नरदेववरासनम् ।
योऽधियज्ञपतिं विष्णुं विनिन्दत्यनपत्रप: ॥ ३२ ॥
nāyam arhaty asad-vṛtto
naradeva-varāsanam
yo ’dhiyajña-patiṁ viṣṇuṁ
vinindaty anapatrapaḥ
Synonyms
na — never; ayam — this man; arhati — deserves; asat-vṛttaḥ — full of impious activities; nara-deva — of the worldly king or worldly god; vara-āsanam — the exalted throne; yaḥ — he who; adhiyajña-patim — the master of all sacrifices; viṣṇum — Lord Viṣṇu; vinindati — insults; anapatrapaḥ — shameless.

Translation
The saintly sages continued: This impious, impudent man does not deserve to sit on the throne at all. He is so shameless that he even dared insult the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu.

Text 33
को वैनं परिचक्षीत वेनमेकमृतेऽशुभम् ।
प्राप्त ईद‍ृशमैश्वर्यं यदनुग्रहभाजन: ॥ ३३ ॥
ko vainaṁ paricakṣīta
venam ekam ṛte ’śubham
prāpta īdṛśam aiśvaryaṁ
yad-anugraha-bhājanaḥ
Synonyms
kaḥ — who; vā — indeed; enam — the Lord; paricakṣīta — would blaspheme; venam — King Vena; ekam — alone; ṛte — but for; aśubham — inauspicious; prāptaḥ — having obtained; īdṛśam — like this; aiśvaryam — opulence; yat — whose; anugraha — mercy; bhājanaḥ — receiving.

Translation
But for King Vena, who is simply inauspicious, who would blaspheme the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by whose mercy one is awarded all kinds of fortune and opulence?

Text 34
इत्थं व्यवसिता हन्तुमृषयो रूढमन्यव: ।
निजघ्नुर्हुङ्कृतैर्वेनं हतमच्युतनिन्दया ॥ ३४ ॥
itthaṁ vyavasitā hantum
ṛṣayo rūḍha-manyavaḥ
nijaghnur huṅkṛtair venaṁ
hatam acyuta-nindayā
Synonyms
ittham — thus; vyavasitāḥ — decided; hantum — to kill; ṛṣayaḥ — the sages; rūḍha — manifested; manyavaḥ — their anger; nijaghnuḥ — they killed; hum-kṛtaiḥ — by angry words or by sounds of hum; venam — King Vena; hatam — dead; acyuta — against the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nindayā — by blasphemy.

Translation
The great sages, thus manifesting their covert anger, immediately decided to kill the King. King Vena was already as good as dead due to his blasphemy against the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus without using any weapons, the sages killed King Vena simply by high-sounding words.

Text 35
ऋषिभि: स्वाश्रमपदं गते पुत्रकलेवरम् ।
सुनीथा पालयामास विद्यायोगेन शोचती ॥ ३५ ॥
ṛṣibhiḥ svāśrama-padaṁ
gate putra-kalevaram
sunīthā pālayām āsa
vidyā-yogena śocatī
Synonyms
ṛṣibhiḥ — by the sages; sva-āśrama-padam — to their own respective hermitages; gate — having returned; putra — of her son; kalevaram — the body; sunīthā — Sunīthā, the mother of King Vena; pālayām āsa — preserved; vidyā-yogena — by mantra and ingredients; śocatī — while lamenting.

Translation
After all the sages returned to their respective hermitages, the mother of King Vena, Sunīthā, became very much aggrieved because of her son’s death. She decided to preserve the dead body of her son by the application of certain ingredients and by chanting mantras [mantra-yogena].

Text 36
एकदा मुनयस्ते तु सरस्वत्सलिलाप्लुता: ।
हुत्वाग्नीन् सत्कथाश्चक्रुरुपविष्टा: सरित्तटे ॥ ३६ ॥
ekadā munayas te tu
sarasvat-salilāplutāḥ
hutvāgnīn sat-kathāś cakrur
upaviṣṭāḥ sarit-taṭe
Synonyms
ekadā — once upon a time; munayaḥ — all those great saintly persons; te — they; tu — then; sarasvat — of the river Sarasvatī; salila — in the water; āplutāḥ — bathed; hutvā — offering oblations; agnīn — into the fires; sat-kathāḥ — discussions about transcendental subject matters; cakruḥ — began to do; upaviṣṭāḥ — sitting; sarit-taṭe — by the side of the river.

Translation
Once upon a time, the same saintly persons, after taking their bath in the river Sarasvatī, began to perform their daily duties by offering oblations into the sacrificial fires. After this, sitting on the bank of the river, they began to talk about the transcendental person and His pastimes.

Text 37
वीक्ष्योत्थितांस्तदोत्पातानाहुर्लोकभयङ्करान् ।
अप्यभद्रमनाथाया दस्युभ्यो न भवेद्भुव: ॥ ३७ ॥
vīkṣyotthitāṁs tadotpātān
āhur loka-bhayaṅkarān
apy abhadram anāthāyā
dasyubhyo na bhaved bhuvaḥ
Synonyms
vīkṣya — having seen; utthitān — developed; tadā — then; utpātān — disturbances; āhuḥ — they began to say; loka — in society; bhayam-karān — causing panic; api — whether; abhadram — misfortune; anāthāyāḥ — having no ruler; dasyubhyaḥ — from thieves and rogues; na — not; bhavet — may happen; bhuvaḥ — of the world.

Translation
In those days there were various disturbances in the country that were creating a panic in society. Therefore all the sages began to talk amongst themselves: Since the King is dead and there is no protector in the world, misfortune may befall the people in general on account of rogues and thieves.

Text 38
एवं मृशन्त ऋषयो धावतां सर्वतोदिशम् ।
पांसु: समुत्थितो भूरिश्चोराणामभिलुम्पताम् ॥ ३८ ॥
evaṁ mṛśanta ṛṣayo
dhāvatāṁ sarvato-diśam
pāṁsuḥ samutthito bhūriś
corāṇām abhilumpatām
Synonyms
evam — thus; mṛśantaḥ — while considering; ṛṣayaḥ — the great saintly persons; dhāvatām — running; sarvataḥ-diśam — from all directions; pāṁsuḥ — dust; samutthitaḥ — arose; bhūriḥ — much; corāṇām — from thieves and rogues; abhilumpatām — engaged in plundering.

Translation
When the great sages were carrying on their discussion in this way, they saw a dust storm arising from all directions. This storm was caused by the running of thieves and rogues, who were engaged in plundering the citizens.

Texts 39-40
तदुपद्रवमाज्ञाय लोकस्य वसु लुम्पताम् ।
भर्तर्युपरते तस्मिन्नन्योन्यं च जिघांसताम् ॥ ३९ ॥
चोरप्रायं जनपदं हीनसत्त्वमराजकम् ।
लोकान्नावारयञ्छक्ता अपि तद्दोषदर्शिन: ॥ ४० ॥
tad upadravam ājñāya
lokasya vasu lumpatām
bhartary uparate tasminn
anyonyaṁ ca jighāṁ-satām
cora-prāyaṁ jana-padaṁ
hīna-sattvam arājakam
lokān nāvārayañ chaktā
api tad-doṣa-darśinaḥ
Synonyms
tat — at that time; upadravam — the disturbance; ājñāya — understanding; lokasya — of the people in general; vasu — riches; lumpatām — by those who were plundering; bhartari — the protector; uparate — being dead; tasmin — King Vena; anyonyam — one another; ca — also; jighāṁ satām — desiring to kill; cora-prāyam — full of thieves; jana-padam — the state; hīna — bereft of; sattvam — regulation; arājakam — without a king; lokān — the thieves and rogues; na — not; avārayan — they subdued; śaktāḥ — able to do so; api — although; tat-doṣa — the fault of that; darśinaḥ — considering.

Translation
Upon seeing the dust storm, the saintly persons could understand that there were a great deal of irregularities due to the death of King Vena. Without government, the state was devoid of law and order, and consequently there was a great uprising of murderous thieves and rogues, who were plundering the riches of the people in general. Although the great sages could subdue the disturbance by their powers — just as they could kill the King — they considered it improper on their part to do so. Thus they did not attempt to stop the disturbance.

Text 41
ब्राह्मण: समद‍ृक् शान्तो दीनानां समुपेक्षक: ।
स्रवते ब्रह्म तस्यापि भिन्नभाण्डात्पयो यथा ॥ ४१ ॥
brāhmaṇaḥ sama-dṛk śānto
dīnānāṁ samupekṣakaḥ
sravate brahma tasyāpi
bhinna-bhāṇḍāt payo yathā
Synonyms
brāhmaṇaḥ — a brāhmaṇa; sama-dṛk — equipoised; śāntaḥ — peaceful; dīnānām — the poor; samupekṣakaḥ — grossly neglecting; sravate — diminishes; brahma — spiritual power; tasya — his; api — certainly; bhinna-bhāṇḍāt — from a cracked pot; payaḥ — water; yathā — just as.

Translation
The great sages began to think that although a brāhmaṇa is peaceful and impartial because he is equal to everyone, it is still not his duty to neglect poor humans. By such neglect, a brāhmaṇa’s spiritual power diminishes, just as water kept in a cracked pot leaks out.

Text 42
नाङ्गस्य वंशो राजर्षेरेष संस्थातुमर्हति ।
अमोघवीर्या हि नृपा वंशेऽस्मिन् केशवाश्रया: ॥ ४२ ॥
nāṅgasya vaṁśo rājarṣer
eṣa saṁsthātum arhati
amogha-vīryā hi nṛpā
vaṁśe ’smin keśavāśrayāḥ
Synonyms
na — not; aṅgasya — of King Aṅga; vaṁśaḥ — family line; rāja-ṛṣeḥ — of the saintly King; eṣaḥ — this; saṁsthātum — to be stopped; arhati — ought; amogha — without sin, powerful; vīryāḥ — their semen; hi — because; nṛpāḥ — kings; vaṁśe — in the family; asmin — this; keśava — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; āśrayāḥ — under the shelter.

Translation
The sages decided that the descendants of the family of the saintly King Aṅga should not be stopped, for in this family the semen was very powerful and the children were prone to become devotees of the Lord.

Text 43
विनिश्चित्यैवमृषयो विपन्नस्य महीपते: ।
ममन्थुरूरुं तरसा तत्रासीद्बाहुको नर: ॥ ४३ ॥
viniścityaivam ṛṣayo
vipannasya mahīpateḥ
mamanthur ūruṁ tarasā
tatrāsīd bāhuko naraḥ
Synonyms
viniścitya — deciding; evam — thus; ṛṣayaḥ — the great sages; vipannasya — dead; mahī-pateḥ — of the King; mamanthuḥ — churned; ūrum — the thighs; tarasā — with specific power; tatra — thereupon; āsīt — was born; bāhukaḥ — of the name Bāhuka (dwarf); naraḥ — a person.

Translation
After making a decision, the saintly persons and sages churned the thighs of the dead body of King Vena with great force and according to a specific method. As a result of this churning, a dwarflike person was born from King Vena’s body.

Text 44
काककृष्णोऽतिह्रस्वाङ्गो ह्रस्वबाहुर्महाहनु: ।
ह्रस्वपान्निम्ननासाग्रो रक्ताक्षस्ताम्रमूर्धज: ॥ ४४ ॥
kāka-kṛṣṇo ’tihrasvāṅgo
hrasva-bāhur mahā-hanuḥ
hrasva-pān nimna-nāsāgro
raktākṣas tāmra-mūrdhajaḥ
Synonyms
kāka-kṛṣṇaḥ — as black as a crow; ati-hrasva — very short; aṅgaḥ — his limbs; hrasva — short; bāhuḥ — his arms; mahā — big; hanuḥ — his jaws; hrasva — short; pāt — his legs; nimna — flat; nāsa-agraḥ — the tip of his nose; rakta — reddish; akṣaḥ — his eyes; tāmra — copperlike; mūrdha-jaḥ — his hair.

Translation
This person born from King Vena’s thighs was named Bāhuka, and his complexion was as black as a crow’s. All the limbs of his body were very short, his arms and legs were short, and his jaws were large. His nose was flat, his eyes were reddish, and his hair copper-colored.

Text 45
तं तु तेऽवनतं दीनं किं करोमीति वादिनम् ।
निषीदेत्यब्रुवंस्तात स निषादस्ततोऽभवत् ॥ ४५ ॥
taṁ tu te ’vanataṁ dīnaṁ
kiṁ karomīti vādinam
niṣīdety abruvaṁs tāta
sa niṣādas tato ’bhavat
Synonyms
tam — unto him; tu — then; te — the sages; avanatam — bowed down; dīnam — meek; kim — what; karomi — shall I do; iti — thus; vādinam — inquiring; niṣīda — just sit down; iti — thus; abruvan — they replied; tāta — my dear Vidura; saḥ — he; niṣādaḥ — of the name Niṣāda; tataḥ — thereafter; abhavat — became.

Translation
He was very submissive and meek, and immediately after his birth he bowed down and inquired, “Sirs, what shall I do?” The great sages replied, “Please sit down [niṣīda].” Thus Niṣāda, the father of the Naiṣāda race, was born.

Text 46
तस्य वंश्यास्तु नैषादा गिरिकाननगोचरा: ।
येनाहरज्जायमानो वेनकल्मषमुल्बणम् ॥ ४६ ॥
tasya vaṁśyās tu naiṣādā
giri-kānana-gocarāḥ
yenāharaj jāyamāno
vena-kalmaṣam ulbaṇam
Synonyms
tasya — his (Niṣāda’s); vaṁśyāḥ — descendants; tu — then; naiṣādāḥ — called Naiṣādas; giri-kānana — the hills and forests; gocarāḥ — inhabiting; yena — because; aharat — he took upon himself; jāyamānaḥ — being born; vena — of King Vena; kalmaṣam — all kinds of sin; ulbaṇam — very fearful.

Translation
After his [Niṣāda’s] birth, he immediately took charge of all the resultant actions of King Vena’s sinful activities. As such, this Naiṣāda class are always engaged in sinful activities like stealing, plundering and hunting. Consequently they are only allowed to live in the hills and forests.