Text 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
एवं स भगवान् वैन्य: ख्यापितो गुणकर्मभि: । छन्दयामास तान् कामै: प्रतिपूज्याभिनन्द्य च ॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvāca
evaṁ sa bhagavān vainyaḥ
khyāpito guṇa-karmabhiḥ
chandayām āsa tān kāmaiḥ
pratipūjyābhinandya ca
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya continued to speak; evam — thus; saḥ — he; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; vainyaḥ — in the form of the son of King Vena; khyāpitaḥ — being glorified; guṇa-karmabhiḥ — by qualities and factual activities; chandayām āsa — pacified; tān — those reciters; kāmaiḥ — by various presentations; pratipūjya — offering all respects; abhinandya — offering prayers; ca — also.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya continued: In this way the reciters who were glorifying Mahārāja Pṛthu readily described his qualities and chivalrous activities. At the end, Mahārāja Pṛthu offered them various presentations with all due respect and worshiped them adequately.

Text 2
ब्राह्मणप्रमुखान् वर्णान् भृत्यामात्यपुरोधस: । पौराञ्जानपदान् श्रेणी: प्रकृती: समपूजयत् ॥ २ ॥
brāhmaṇa-pramukhān varṇān
bhṛtyāmātya-purodhasaḥ
paurāñ jāna-padān śreṇīḥ
prakṛtīḥ samapūjayat
Synonyms
brāhmaṇa-pramukhān — unto the leaders of the brāhmaṇa community; varṇān — to the other castes; bhṛtya — servants; amātya — ministers; purodhasaḥ — to the priests; paurān — to the citizens; jāna-padān — to his countrymen; śreṇīḥ — to different communities; prakṛtīḥ — to the admirers; samapūjayat — he gave proper respects.

Translation
King Pṛthu thus satisfied and offered all respect to all the leaders of the brāhmaṇas and other castes, to his servants, to his ministers and to the priests, citizens, general countrymen, people from other communities, admirers and others, and thus they all became happy.

Text 3
विदुर उवाच
कस्माद्दधार गोरूपं धरित्री बहुरूपिणी । यां दुदोह पृथुस्तत्र को वत्सो दोहनं च किम् ॥ ३ ॥
vidura uvāca
kasmād dadhāra go-rūpaṁ
dharitrī bahu-rūpiṇī
yāṁ dudoha pṛthus tatra
ko vatso dohanaṁ ca kim
Synonyms
viduraḥ uvāca — Vidura inquired; kasmāt — why; dadhāra — took; go-rūpam — the shape of a cow; dharitrī — the earth; bahu-rūpiṇī — who has many other forms; yām — whom; dudoha — milked; pṛthuḥ — King Pṛthu; tatra — there; kaḥ — who; vatsaḥ — the calf; dohanam — the milking pot; ca — also; kim — what.

Translation
Vidura inquired from the great sage Maitreya: My dear brāhmaṇa, since mother earth can appear in different shapes, why did she take the shape of a cow? And when King Pṛthu milked her, who became the calf, and what was the milking pot?

Text 4
प्रकृत्या विषमा देवी कृता तेन समा कथम् । तस्य मेध्यं हयं देव: कस्य हेतोरपाहरत् ॥ ४ ॥
prakṛtyā viṣamā devī
kṛtā tena samā katham
tasya medhyaṁ hayaṁ devaḥ
kasya hetor apāharat
Synonyms
prakṛtyā — by nature; viṣamā — not level; devī — the earth; kṛtā — was made; tena — by him; samā — level; katham — how; tasya — his; medhyam — meant for offering in the sacrifice; hayam — horse; devaḥ — the demigod Indra; kasya — for what; hetoḥ — reason; apāharat — stole.

Translation
The surface of the earth is by nature low in some places and high in others. How did King Pṛthu level the surface of the earth, and why did the King of heaven, Indra, steal the horse meant for the sacrifice?

Text 5
सनत्कुमाराद्भगवतो ब्रह्मन् ब्रह्मविदुत्तमात् । लब्ध्वा ज्ञानं सविज्ञानं राजर्षि: कां गतिं गत: ॥ ५ ॥
sanat-kumārād bhagavato
brahman brahma-vid-uttamāt
labdhvā jñānaṁ sa-vijñānaṁ
rājarṣiḥ kāṁ gatiṁ gataḥ
Synonyms
sanat-kumārāt — from Sanat-kumāra; bhagavataḥ — the most powerful; brahman — my dear brāhmaṇa; brahma-vit-uttamāt — well versed in the Vedic knowledge; labdhvā — after achieving; jñānam — knowledge; sa-vijñānam — for practical application; rāja-ṛṣiḥ — the great saintly King; kām — which; gatim — destination; gataḥ — achieved.

Translation
The great saintly King, Mahārāja Pṛthu, received knowledge from Sanat-kumāra, who was the greatest Vedic scholar. After receiving knowledge to be applied practically in his life, how did the saintly King attain his desired destination?

Texts 6-7
यच्चान्यदपि कृष्णस्य भवान् भगवत: प्रभो: । श्रव: सुश्रवस: पुण्यं पूर्वदेहकथाश्रयम् ॥ ६ ॥ भक्ताय मेऽनुरक्ताय तव चाधोक्षजस्य च । वक्तुमर्हसि योऽदुह्यद्वैन्यरूपेण गामिमाम् ॥ ७ ॥
yac cānyad api kṛṣṇasya
bhavān bhagavataḥ prabhoḥ
śravaḥ suśravasaḥ puṇyaṁ
pūrva-deha-kathāśrayam
bhaktāya me ’nuraktāya
tava cādhokṣajasya ca
vaktum arhasi yo ’duhyad
vainya-rūpeṇa gām imām
Synonyms
yat — which; ca — and; anyat — other; api — certainly; kṛṣṇasya — of Kṛṣṇa; bhavān — your good self; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prabhoḥ — powerful; śravaḥ — glorious activities; su-śravasaḥ — who is very pleasing to hear about; puṇyam — pious; pūrva-deha — of His previous incarnation; kathā-āśrayam — connected with the narration; bhaktāya — unto the devotee; me — to me; anuraktāya — very much attentive; tava — of you; ca — and; adhokṣajasya — of the Lord, who is known as Adhokṣaja; ca — also; vaktum arhasi — please narrate; yaḥ — one who; aduhyat — milked; vainya-rūpeṇa — in the form of the son of King Vena; gām — cow, earth; imām — this.

Translation
Pṛthu Mahārāja was a powerful incarnation of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s potencies; consequently any narration concerning his activities is surely very pleasing to hear, and it produces all good fortune. As far as I am concerned, I am always your devotee as well as a devotee of the Lord, who is known as Adhokṣaja. Please therefore narrate all the stories of King Pṛthu, who, in the form of the son of King Vena, milked the cow-shaped earth.

Text 8
सूत उवाच
चोदितो विदुरेणैवं वासुदेवकथां प्रति । प्रशस्य तं प्रीतमना मैत्रेय: प्रत्यभाषत ॥ ८ ॥
sūta uvāca
codito vidureṇaivaṁ
vāsudeva-kathāṁ prati
praśasya taṁ prīta-manā
maitreyaḥ pratyabhāṣata
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Sūta Gosvāmī said; coditaḥ — inspired; vidureṇa — by Vidura; evam — thus; vāsudeva — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; kathām — narration; prati — about; praśasya — praising; tam — him; prīta-manāḥ — being very pleased; maitreyaḥ — the saint Maitreya; pratyabhāṣata — replied.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī continued: When Vidura became inspired to hear of the activities of Lord Kṛṣṇa in His various incarnations, Maitreya, also being inspired and being very pleased with Vidura, began to praise him. Then Maitreya spoke as follows.

Text 9
मैत्रेय उवाच
यदाभिषिक्त: पृथुरङ्ग विप्रै-रामन्त्रितो जनतायाश्च पाल: । प्रजा निरन्ने क्षितिपृष्ठ एत्यक्षुत्क्षामदेहा: पतिमभ्यवोचन् ॥ ९ ॥
maitreya uvāca
yadābhiṣiktaḥ pṛthur aṅga viprair
āmantrito janatāyāś ca pālaḥ
prajā niranne kṣiti-pṛṣṭha etya
kṣut-kṣāma-dehāḥ patim abhyavocan
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya said; yadā — when; abhiṣiktaḥ — was enthroned; pṛthuḥ — King Pṛthu; aṅga — my dear Vidura; vipraiḥ — by the brāhmaṇas; āmantritaḥ — was declared; janatāyāḥ — of the people; ca — also; pālaḥ — the protector; prajāḥ — the citizens; niranne — being without food grains; kṣiti-pṛṣṭhe — the surface of the globe; etya — coming near; kṣut — by hunger; kṣāma — skinny; dehāḥ — their bodies; patim — to the protector; abhyavocan — they said.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, at the time King Pṛthu was enthroned by the great sages and brāhmaṇas and declared to be the protector of the citizens, there was a scarcity of food grains. The citizens actually became skinny due to starvation. Therefore they came before the King and informed him of their real situation.

Texts 10-11
वयं राजञ्जाठरेणाभितप्तायथाग्निना कोटरस्थेन वृक्षा: । त्वामद्य याता: शरणं शरण्यंय: साधितो वृत्तिकर: पतिर्न: ॥ १० ॥ तन्नो भवानीहतु रातवेऽन्नंक्षुधार्दितानां नरदेवदेव । यावन्न नङ्‍क्ष्यामह उज्झितोर्जावार्तापतिस्त्वं किल लोकपाल: ॥ ११ ॥
vayaṁ rājañ jāṭhareṇābhitaptā
yathāgninā koṭara-sthena vṛkṣāḥ
tvām adya yātāḥ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ
yaḥ sādhito vṛtti-karaḥ patir naḥ
tan no bhavān īhatu rātave ’nnaṁ
kṣudhārditānāṁ naradeva-deva
yāvan na naṅkṣyāmaha ujjhitorjā
vārtā-patis tvaṁ kila loka-pālaḥ
Synonyms
vayam — we; rājan — O King; jāṭhareṇa — by the fire of hunger; abhitaptāḥ — very much aggrieved; yathā — just as; agninā — by the fire; koṭara-sthena — in the hollow of a tree; vṛkṣāḥ — trees; tvām — unto you; adya — today; yātāḥ — we have come; śaraṇam — shelter; śaraṇyam — worth taking shelter of; yaḥ — who; sādhitaḥ — appointed; vṛtti-karaḥ — one who gives employment; patiḥ — master; naḥ — our; tat — therefore; naḥ — to us; bhavān — Your Majesty; īhatu — please try; rātave — to give; annam — food grains; kṣudhā — with hunger; arditānām — suffering; nara-deva-deva — O supreme master of all kings; yāvat na — lest; naṅkṣyāmahe — we will perish; ujjhita — being bereft of; ūrjāḥ — food grains; vārtā — of occupational engagements; patiḥ — bestower; tvam — you; kila — indeed; loka-pālaḥ — the protector of the citizens.

Translation
Dear King, just as a tree with a fire burning in the hollow of the trunk gradually dries up, we are drying up due to the fire of hunger in our stomachs. You are the protector of surrendered souls, and you have been appointed to give employment to us. Therefore we have all come to you for protection. You are not only a king, but the incarnation of God as well. Indeed, you are the king of all kings. You can give us all kinds of occupational engagements, for you are the master of our livelihood. Therefore, O king of all kings, please arrange to satisfy our hunger by the proper distribution of food grains. Please take care of us, lest we soon die for want of food.

Text 12
मैत्रेय उवाच
पृथु: प्रजानां करुणं निशम्य परिदेवितम् । दीर्घं दध्यौ कुरुश्रेष्ठ निमित्तं सोऽन्वपद्यत ॥ १२ ॥
maitreya uvāca
pṛthuḥ prajānāṁ karuṇaṁ
niśamya paridevitam
dīrghaṁ dadhyau kuruśreṣṭha
nimittaṁ so ’nvapadyata
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great saint Maitreya said; pṛthuḥ — King Pṛthu; prajānām — of the citizens; karuṇam — pitiable condition; niśamya — hearing; paridevitam — lamentation; dīrgham — for a long time; dadhyau — contemplated; kuru-śreṣṭha — O Vidura; nimittam — the cause; saḥ — he; anvapadyata — found out.

Translation
After hearing this lamentation and seeing the pitiable condition of the citizens, King Pṛthu contemplated this matter for a long time to see if he could find out the underlying causes.

Text 13
इति व्यवसितो बुद्ध्या प्रगृहीतशरासन: । सन्दधे विशिखं भूमे: क्रुद्धस्त्रिपुरहा यथा ॥ १३ ॥
iti vyavasito buddhyā
pragṛhīta-śarāsanaḥ
sandadhe viśikhaṁ bhūmeḥ
kruddhas tripura-hā yathā
Synonyms
iti — thus; vyavasitaḥ — having arrived at the conclusion; buddhyā — by intelligence; pragṛhīta — having taken up; śarāsanaḥ — the bow; sandadhe — fixed; viśikham — an arrow; bhūmeḥ — at the earth; kruddhaḥ — angry; tri-pura-hā — Lord Śiva; yathā — like.

Translation
Having arrived at a conclusion, the King took up his bow and arrow and aimed them at the earth, exactly like Lord Śiva, who destroys the whole world out of anger.

Text 14
प्रवेपमाना धरणी निशाम्योदायुधं च तम् । गौ: सत्यपाद्रवद्भीता मृगीव मृगयुद्रुता ॥ १४ ॥
pravepamānā dharaṇī
niśāmyodāyudhaṁ ca tam
gauḥ saty apādravad bhītā
mṛgīva mṛgayu-drutā
Synonyms
pravepamānā — trembling; dharaṇī — the earth; niśāmya — seeing; udāyudham — having taken his bow and arrow; ca — also; tam — the King; gauḥ — a cow; satī — becoming; apādravat — began to flee; bhītā — very much afraid; mṛgī iva — like a deer; mṛgayu — by a hunter; drutā — being followed.

Translation
When the earth saw that King Pṛthu was taking his bow and arrow to kill her, she became very much afraid and began to tremble. She then began to flee, exactly like a deer, which runs very swiftly when followed by a hunter. Being afraid of King Pṛthu, she took the shape of a cow and began to run.

Text 15
तामन्वधावत्तद्वैन्य: कुपितोऽत्यरुणेक्षण: । शरं धनुषि सन्धाय यत्र यत्र पलायते ॥ १५ ॥
tām anvadhāvat tad vainyaḥ
kupito ’tyaruṇekṣaṇaḥ
śaraṁ dhanuṣi sandhāya
yatra yatra palāyate
Synonyms
tām — the cow-shaped earth; anvadhāvat — he chased; tat — then; vainyaḥ — the son of King Vena; kupitaḥ — being very much angry; ati-aruṇa — very red; īkṣaṇaḥ — his eyes; śaram — an arrow; dhanuṣi — on the bow; sandhāya — placing; yatra yatra — wherever; palāyate — she flees.

Translation
Seeing this, Mahārāja Pṛthu became very angry, and his eyes became as red as the early-morning sun. Placing an arrow on his bow, he chased the cow-shaped earth wherever she would run.

Text 16
सा दिशो विदिशो देवी रोदसी चान्तरं तयो: । धावन्ती तत्र तत्रैनं ददर्शानूद्यतायुधम् ॥ १६ ॥
sā diśo vidiśo devī
rodasī cāntaraṁ tayoḥ
dhāvantī tatra tatrainaṁ
dadarśānūdyatāyudham
Synonyms
sā — the cow-shaped earth; diśaḥ — in the four directions; vidiśaḥ — randomly in other directions; devī — the goddess; rodasī — towards heaven and earth; ca — also; antaram — between; tayoḥ — them; dhāvantī — fleeing; tatra tatra — here and there; enam — the King; dadarśa — she saw; anu — behind; udyata — taken up; āyudham — his weapons.

Translation
The cow-shaped earth ran here and there in outer space between the heavenly planets and the earth, and wherever she ran, the King chased her with his bow and arrows.

Text 17
लोके नाविन्दत त्राणं वैन्यान्मृत्योरिव प्रजा: । त्रस्ता तदा निववृते हृदयेन विदूयता ॥ १७ ॥
loke nāvindata trāṇaṁ
vainyān mṛtyor iva prajāḥ
trastā tadā nivavṛte
hṛdayena vidūyatā
Synonyms
loke — within the three worlds; na — not; avindata — could obtain; trāṇam — release; vainyāt — from the hand of the son of King Vena; mṛtyoḥ — from death; iva — like; prajāḥ — men; trastā — being very much afraid; tadā — at that time; nivavṛte — turned back; hṛdayena — within her heart; vidūyatā — very much aggrieved.

Translation
Just as a man cannot escape the cruel hands of death, the cow-shaped earth could not escape the hands of the son of Vena. At length the earth, fearful, her heart aggrieved, turned back in helplessness.

Text 18
उवाच च महाभागं धर्मज्ञापन्नवत्सल । त्राहि मामपि भूतानां पालनेऽवस्थितो भवान् ॥ १८ ॥
uvāca ca mahā-bhāgaṁ
dharma-jñāpanna-vatsala
trāhi mām api bhūtānāṁ
pālane ’vasthito bhavān
Synonyms
uvāca — she said; ca — and; mahā-bhāgam — unto the great, fortunate King; dharma-jña — O knower of the principles of religion; āpanna-vatsala — O shelter of the surrendered; trāhi — save; mām — me; api — indeed; bhūtānām — of living entities; pālane — in protection; avasthitaḥ — situated; bhavān — Your Majesty.

Translation
Addressing the great, opulent King Pṛthu as the knower of religious principles and shelter of the surrendered, she said: Please save me. You are the protector of all living entities. Now you are situated as the King of this planet.

Text 19
स त्वं जिघांससे कस्माद्दीनामकृतकिल्बिषाम् । अहनिष्यत्कथं योषां धर्मज्ञ इति यो मत: ॥ १९ ॥
sa tvaṁ jighāṁsase kasmād
dīnām akṛta-kilbiṣām
ahaniṣyat kathaṁ yoṣāṁ
dharma-jña iti yo mataḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — that very person; tvam — you; jighāṁsase — want to kill; kasmāt — why; dīnām — poor; akṛta — without having done; kilbiṣām — any sinful activities; ahaniṣyat — would kill; katham — how; yoṣām — a woman; dharma-jñaḥ — the knower of religious principles; iti — thus; yaḥ — one who; mataḥ — is considered.

Translation
The cow-shaped earth continued to appeal to the King: I am very poor and have not committed any sinful activities. I do not know why you want to kill me. Since you are supposed to be the knower of all religious principles, why are you so envious of me, and why are you so anxious to kill a woman?

Text 20
प्रहरन्ति न वै स्त्रीषु कृताग:स्वपि जन्तव: । किमुत त्वद्विधा राजन् करुणा दीनवत्सला: ॥ २० ॥
praharanti na vai strīṣu
kṛtāgaḥsv api jantavaḥ
kim uta tvad-vidhā rājan
karuṇā dīna-vatsalāḥ
Synonyms
praharanti — strike; na — never; vai — certainly; strīṣu — women; kṛta-āgaḥsu — having committed sinful activities; api — although; jantavaḥ — human beings; kim uta — then what to speak of; tvat-vidhāḥ — personalities like you; rājan — O King; karuṇāḥ — merciful; dīna-vatsalāḥ — affectionate to the poor.

Translation
Even if a woman does commit some sinful activity, no one should place his hand upon her. And what to speak of you, dear King, who are so merciful. You are a protector, and you are affectionate to the poor.

Text 21
मां विपाट्याजरां नावं यत्र विश्वं प्रतिष्ठितम् । आत्मानं च प्रजाश्चेमा: कथमम्भसि धास्यसि ॥ २१ ॥
māṁ vipāṭyājarāṁ nāvaṁ
yatra viśvaṁ pratiṣṭhitam
ātmānaṁ ca prajāś cemāḥ
katham ambhasi dhāsyasi
Synonyms
mām — me; vipāṭya — breaking to pieces; ajarām — very strong; nāvam — boat; yatra — where; viśvam — all worldly paraphernalia; pratiṣṭhitam — standing; ātmānam — yourself; ca — and; prajāḥ — your subjects; ca — also; imāḥ — all these; katham — how; ambhasi — in the water; dhāsyasi — you will hold.

Translation
The cow-shaped earth continued: My dear King, I am just like a strong boat, and all the paraphernalia of the world is standing upon me. If you break me to pieces, how can you protect yourself and your subjects from drowning?

Text 22
पृथुरुवाच
वसुधे त्वां वधिष्यामि मच्छासनपराङ्‍मुखीम् । भागं बर्हिषि या वृङ्क्ते न तनोति च नो वसु ॥ २२ ॥
pṛthur uvāca
vasudhe tvāṁ vadhiṣyāmi
mac-chāsana-parāṅ-mukhīm
bhāgaṁ barhiṣi yā vṛṅkte
na tanoti ca no vasu
Synonyms
pṛthuḥ uvāca — King Pṛthu replied; vasu-dhe — my dear earthly planet; tvām — you; vadhiṣyāmi — I shall kill; mat — my; śāsana — rulings; parāk-mukhīm — disobedient to; bhāgam — your share; barhiṣi — in the yajña; yā — who; vṛṅkte — accepts; na — not; tanoti — does deliver; ca — and; naḥ — to us; vasu — produce.

Translation
King Pṛthu replied to the earthly planet: My dear earth, you have disobeyed my orders and rulings. In the form of a demigod you accepted your share of the yajñas we performed, but in return you have not produced sufficient food grains. For this reason I must kill you.

Text 23
यवसं जग्ध्यनुदिनं नैव दोग्ध्यौधसं पय: । तस्यामेवं हि दुष्टायां दण्डो नात्र न शस्यते ॥ २३ ॥
yavasaṁ jagdhy anudinaṁ
naiva dogdhy audhasaṁ payaḥ
tasyām evaṁ hi duṣṭāyāṁ
daṇḍo nātra na śasyate
Synonyms
yavasam — green grass; jagdhi — you eat; anudinam — daily; na — never; eva — certainly; dogdhi — you yield; audhasam — in the milk bag; payaḥ — milk; tasyām — when a cow; evam — thus; hi — certainly; duṣṭāyām — being offensive; daṇḍaḥ — punishment; na — not; atra — here; na — not; śasyate — is advisable.

Translation
Although you are eating green grass every day, you are not filling your milk bag so we can utilize your milk. Since you are willfully committing offenses, it cannot be said that you are not punishable due to your assuming the form of a cow.

Text 24
त्वं खल्वोषधिबीजानि प्राक् सृष्टानि स्वयम्भुवा । न मुञ्चस्यात्मरुद्धानि मामवज्ञाय मन्दधी: ॥ २४ ॥
tvaṁ khalv oṣadhi-bījāni
prāk sṛṣṭāni svayambhuvā
na muñcasy ātma-ruddhāni
mām avajñāya manda-dhīḥ
Synonyms
tvam — you; khalu — certainly; oṣadhi — of herbs, plants and grains; bījāni — the seeds; prāk — formerly; sṛṣṭāni — created; svayambhuvā — by Lord Brahmā; na — do not; muñcasi — deliver; ātma-ruddhāni — hidden within yourself; mām — me; avajñāya — disobeying; manda-dhīḥ — less intelligent.

Translation
You have so lost your intelligence that, despite my orders, you do not deliver the seeds of herbs and grains formerly created by Brahmā and now hidden within yourself.

Text 25
अमूषां क्षुत्परीतानामार्तानां परिदेवितम् । शमयिष्यामि मद्बाणैर्भिन्नायास्तव मेदसा ॥ २५ ॥
amūṣāṁ kṣut-parītānām
ārtānāṁ paridevitam
śamayiṣyāmi mad-bāṇair
bhinnāyās tava medasā
Synonyms
amūṣām — of all of them; kṣut-parītānām — suffering from hunger; ārtānām — of the distressed; paridevitam — the lamentation; śamayiṣyāmi — I shall pacify; mat-bāṇaiḥ — by my arrows; bhinnāyāḥ — being cut to pieces; tava — of you; medasā — by the flesh.

Translation
Now, with the help of my arrows, I shall cut you to pieces and with your flesh satisfy the hunger-stricken citizens, who are now crying for want of grains. Thus I shall satisfy the crying citizens of my kingdom.

Text 26
पुमान् योषिदुत क्लीब आत्मसम्भावनोऽधम: । भूतेषु निरनुक्रोशो नृपाणां तद्वधोऽवध: ॥ २६ ॥
pumān yoṣid uta klība
ātma-sambhāvano ’dhamaḥ
bhūteṣu niranukrośo
nṛpāṇāṁ tad-vadho ’vadhaḥ
Synonyms
pumān — a man; yoṣit — a woman; uta — also; klībaḥ — a eunuch; ātma-sambhāvanaḥ — interested in self-maintenance; adhamaḥ — lowest of humankind; bhūteṣu — to other living entities; niranukrośaḥ — without compassion; nṛpāṇām — for the kings; tat — of him; vadhaḥ — killing; avadhaḥ — not killing.

Translation
Any cruel person — be he a man, woman or impotent eunuch — who is only interested in his personal maintenance and has no compassion for other living entities may be killed by the king. Such killing can never be considered actual killing.

Text 27
त्वां स्तब्धां दुर्मदां नीत्वा मायागां तिलश: शरै: ।
आत्मयोगबलेनेमा धारयिष्याम्यहं प्रजा: ॥ २७ ॥
tvāṁ stabdhāṁ durmadāṁ nītvā
māyā-gāṁ tilaśaḥ śaraiḥ
ātma-yoga-balenemā
dhārayiṣyāmy ahaṁ prajāḥ
Synonyms
tvām — you; stabdhām — very much puffed up; durmadām — mad; nītvā — bringing into such a condition; māyā-gām — false cow; tilaśaḥ — into small particles like grains; śaraiḥ — by my arrows; ātma — personal; yoga-balena — by mystic power; imāḥ — all these; dhārayiṣyāmi — shall uphold; aham — I; prajāḥ — all the citizens, or all the living entities.

Translation
You are very much puffed up with pride and have become almost insane. Presently you have assumed the form of a cow by your mystic powers. Nonetheless I shall cut you into small pieces like grain, and I will uphold the entire population by my personal mystic powers.

Text 28
एवं मन्युमयीं मूर्तिं कृतान्तमिव बिभ्रतम् ।
प्रणता प्राञ्जलि: प्राह मही सञ्जातवेपथु: ॥ २८ ॥
evaṁ manyumayīṁ mūrtiṁ
kṛtāntam iva bibhratam
praṇatā prāñjaliḥ prāha
mahī sañjāta-vepathuḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; manyu-mayīm — very much angry; mūrtim — form; kṛta-antam — death personified, Yamarāja; iva — like; bibhratam — possessing; praṇatā — surrendered; prāñjaliḥ — with folded hands; prāha — said; mahī — the planet earth; sañjāta — arisen; vepathuḥ — trembling in her body.

Translation
At this time Pṛthu Mahārāja became exactly like Yamarāja, and his whole body appeared very angry. In other words, he was anger personified. After hearing him, the planet earth began to tremble. She surrendered, and with folded hands began to speak as follows.

Text 29
धरोवाच
नम: परस्मै पुरुषाय मायया
विन्यस्तनानातनवे गुणात्मने ।
नम: स्वरूपानुभवेन निर्धुत
द्रव्यक्रियाकारकविभ्रमोर्मये ॥ २९ ॥
dharovāca
namaḥ parasmai puruṣāya māyayā
vinyasta-nānā-tanave guṇātmane
namaḥ svarūpānubhavena nirdhuta-
dravya-kriyā-kāraka-vibhramormaye
Synonyms
dharā — the planet earth; uvāca — said; namaḥ — I offer my obeisances; parasmai — unto the Transcendence; puruṣāya — unto the person; māyayā — by the material energy; vinyasta — expanded; nānā — various; tanave — whose forms; guṇa-ātmane — unto the source of the three modes of material nature; namaḥ — I offer my obeisances; svarūpa — of the real form; anubhavena — by understanding; nirdhuta — not affected by; dravya — matter; kriyā — action; kāraka — doer; vibhrama — bewilderment; ūrmaye — the waves of material existence.

Translation
The planet earth spoke: My dear Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, You are transcendental in Your position, and by Your material energy You have expanded Yourself in various forms and species of life through the interaction of the three modes of material nature. Unlike some other masters, You always remain in Your transcendental position and are not affected by the material creation, which is subject to different material interactions. Consequently You are not bewildered by material activities.

Text 30
येनाहमात्मायतनं विनिर्मिता
धात्रा यतोऽयं गुणसर्गसङ्ग्रह: ।
स एव मां हन्तुमुदायुध: स्वरा-
डुपस्थितोऽन्यं शरणं कमाश्रये ॥ ३० ॥
yenāham ātmāyatanaṁ vinirmitā
dhātrā yato ’yaṁ guṇa-sarga-saṅgrahaḥ
sa eva māṁ hantum udāyudhaḥ svarāḍ
upasthito ’nyaṁ śaraṇaṁ kam āśraye
Synonyms
yena — by whom; aham — I; ātma-āyatanam — resting place of all living entities; vinirmitā — was created; dhātrā — by the Supreme Lord; yataḥ — on account of whom; ayam — this; guṇa-sarga-saṅgrahaḥ — combination of different material elements; saḥ — He; eva — certainly; mām — me; hantum — to kill; udāyudhaḥ — prepared with weapons; svarāṭ — completely independent; upasthitaḥ — now present before me; anyam — other; śaraṇam — shelter; kam — unto whom; āśraye — I shall resort to.

Translation
The planet earth continued: My dear Lord, You are the complete conductor of the material creation. You have created this cosmic manifestation and the three material qualities, and therefore You have created me, the planet earth, the resting place of all living entities. Yet You are always fully independent, my Lord. Now that You are present before me and ready to kill me with Your weapons, let me know where I should go to take shelter, and tell me who can give me protection.

Text 31
य एतदादावसृजच्चराचरं
स्वमाययात्माश्रययावितर्क्यया ।
तयैव सोऽयं किल गोप्तुमुद्यत:
कथं नु मां धर्मपरो जिघांसति ॥ ३१ ॥
ya etad ādāv asṛjac carācaraṁ
sva-māyayātmāśrayayāvitarkyayā
tayaiva so ’yaṁ kila goptum udyataḥ
kathaṁ nu māṁ dharma-paro jighāṁsati
Synonyms
yaḥ — one who; etat — these; ādau — in the beginning of creation; asṛjat — created; cara-acaram — moving and nonmoving living entities; sva-māyayā — by His own potency; ātma-āśrayayā — sheltered under His own protection; avitarkyayā — inconceivable; tayā — by that same māyā; eva — certainly; saḥ — he; ayam — this King; kila — certainly; goptum udyataḥ — prepared to give protection; katham — how; nu — then; mām — me; dharma-paraḥ — one who is strictly following religious principles; jighāṁsati — desires to kill.

Translation
In the beginning of creation You created all these moving and nonmoving living entities by Your inconceivable energy. Through this very same energy You are now prepared to protect the living entities. Indeed, You are the supreme protector of religious principles. Why are You so anxious to kill me, even though I am in the form of a cow?

Text 32
नूनं बतेशस्य समीहितं जनै-
स्तन्मायया दुर्जययाकृतात्मभि: ।
न लक्ष्यते यस्त्वकरोदकारयद्
योऽनेक एक: परतश्च ईश्वर: ॥ ३२ ॥
nūnaṁ bateśasya samīhitaṁ janais
tan-māyayā durjayayākṛtātmabhiḥ
na lakṣyate yas tv akarod akārayad
yo ’neka ekaḥ parataś ca īśvaraḥ
Synonyms
nūnam — surely; bata — certainly; īśasya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; samīhitam — activities, plan; janaiḥ — by people; tat-māyayā — by His potency; durjayayā — which is unconquerable; akṛta-ātmabhiḥ — who are not sufficiently experienced; na — never; lakṣyate — are seen; yaḥ — he who; tu — then; akarot — created; akārayat — caused to create; yaḥ — one who; anekaḥ — many; ekaḥ — one; parataḥ — by His inconceivable potencies; ca — and; īśvaraḥ — controller.

Translation
My dear Lord, although You are one, by Your inconceivable potencies You have expanded Yourself in many forms. Through the agency of Brahmā, You have created this universe. You are therefore directly the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Those who are not sufficiently experienced cannot understand Your transcendental activities because these persons are covered by Your illusory energy.

Text 33
सर्गादि योऽस्यानुरुणद्धि शक्तिभि-
र्द्रव्यक्रियाकारकचेतनात्मभि: ।
तस्मै समुन्नद्धनिरुद्धशक्तये
नम: परस्मै पुरुषाय वेधसे ॥ ३३ ॥
sargādi yo ’syānuruṇaddhi śaktibhir
dravya-kriyā-kāraka-cetanātmabhiḥ
tasmai samunnaddha-niruddha-śaktaye
namaḥ parasmai puruṣāya vedhase
Synonyms
sarga-ādi — creation, maintenance and dissolution; yaḥ — one who; asya — of this material world; anuruṇaddhi — causes; śaktibhiḥ — by His own potencies; dravya — physical elements; kriyā — senses; kāraka — controlling demigods; cetanā — intelligence; ātmabhiḥ — consisting of false ego; tasmai — unto Him; samunnaddha — manifest; niruddha — potential; śaktaye — one who possesses these energies; namaḥ — obeisances; parasmai — unto the transcendental; puruṣāya — Supreme Personality of Godhead; vedhase — unto the cause of all causes.

Translation
My dear Lord, by Your own potencies You are the original cause of the material elements, the performing instruments (the senses), the workers of the senses (the controlling demigods), the intelligence and the ego, as well as everything else. By Your energy You manifest this entire cosmic creation, maintain it and dissolve it. Through Your energy alone everything is sometimes manifest and sometimes not manifest. You are therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the cause of all causes. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

Text 34
स वै भवानात्मविनिर्मितं जगद्
भूतेन्द्रियान्त:करणात्मकं विभो ।
संस्थापयिष्यन्नज मां रसातला-
दभ्युज्जहाराम्भस आदिसूकर: ॥ ३४ ॥
sa vai bhavān ātma-vinirmitaṁ jagad
bhūtendriyāntaḥ-karaṇātmakaṁ vibho
saṁsthāpayiṣyann aja māṁ rasātalād
abhyujjahārāmbhasa ādi-sūkaraḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — He; vai — certainly; bhavān — Yourself; ātma — by Yourself; vinirmitam — manufactured; jagat — this world; bhūta — the physical elements; indriya — senses; antaḥ-karaṇa — mind, heart; ātmakam — consisting of; vibho — O Lord; saṁsthāpayiṣyan — maintaining; aja — O unborn; mām — me; rasātalāt — from the Plutonic region; abhyujjahāra — took out; ambhasaḥ — from the water; ādi — original; sūkaraḥ — the boar.

Translation
My dear Lord, You are always unborn. Once, in the form of the original boar, You rescued me from the waters in the bottom of the universe. Through Your own energy You created all the physical elements, the senses and the heart, for the maintenance of the world.

Text 35
अपामुपस्थे मयि नाव्यवस्थिता:
प्रजा भवानद्य रिरक्षिषु: किल ।
स वीरमूर्ति: समभूद्धराधरो
यो मां पयस्युग्रशरो जिघांससि ॥ ३५ ॥
apām upasthe mayi nāvy avasthitāḥ
prajā bhavān adya rirakṣiṣuḥ kila
sa vīra-mūrtiḥ samabhūd dharā-dharo
yo māṁ payasy ugra-śaro jighāṁsasi
Synonyms
apām — of the water; upasthe — situated on the surface; mayi — in me; nāvi — in a boat; avasthitāḥ — standing; prajāḥ — living entities; bhavān — Yourself; adya — now; rirakṣiṣuḥ — desiring to protect; kila — indeed; saḥ — He; vīra-mūrtiḥ — in the form of a great hero; samabhūt — became; dharā-dharaḥ — the protector of the planet earth; yaḥ — one who; mām — me; payasi — for the sake of milk; ugra-śaraḥ — with sharpened arrows; jighāṁsasi — You desire to kill.

Translation
My dear Lord, in this way You once protected me by rescuing me from the water, and consequently Your name has been famous as Dharādhara — He who holds the planet earth. Yet at the present moment, in the form of a great hero, You are about to kill me with sharpened arrows. I am, however, just like a boat on the water, keeping everything afloat.

Text 36
नूनं जनैरीहितमीश्वराणा-
मस्मद्विधैस्तद्गुणसर्गमायया ।
न ज्ञायते मोहितचित्तवर्त्मभि-
स्तेभ्यो नमो वीरयशस्करेभ्य: ॥ ३६ ॥
nūnaṁ janair īhitam īśvarāṇām
asmad-vidhais tad-guṇa-sarga-māyayā
na jñāyate mohita-citta-vartmabhis
tebhyo namo vīra-yaśas-karebhyaḥ
Synonyms
nūnam — surely; janaiḥ — by the people in general; īhitam — activities; īśvarāṇām — of the controllers; asmat-vidhaiḥ — like me; tat — of the Personality of Godhead; guṇa — of the modes of material nature; sarga — which brings forth creation; māyayā — by Your energy; na — never; jñāyate — are understood; mohita — bewildered; citta — whose minds; vartmabhiḥ — way; tebhyaḥ — unto them; namaḥ — obeisances; vīra-yaśaḥ-karebhyaḥ — who bring renown to heroes themselves.

Translation
My dear Lord, I am also the creation of one of Your energies, composed of the three modes of material nature. Consequently I am bewildered by Your activities. Even the activities of Your devotees cannot be understood, and what to speak of Your pastimes. Thus everything appears to us to be contradictory and wonderful.