Text 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
इत्थं पृथुमभिष्टूय रुषा प्रस्फुरिताधरम् ।
पुनराहावनिर्भीता संस्तभ्यात्मानमात्मना ॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvāca
itthaṁ pṛthum abhiṣṭūya
ruṣā prasphuritādharam
punar āhāvanir bhītā
saṁstabhyātmānam ātmanā
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great saint Maitreya continued to speak; ittham — thus; pṛthum — unto King Pṛthu; abhiṣṭūya — after offering prayers; ruṣā — in anger; prasphurita — trembling; adharam — his lips; punaḥ — again; āha — she said; avaniḥ — the planet earth; bhītā — in fear; saṁstabhya — after settling; ātmānam — the mind; ātmanā — by the intelligence.

Translation
The great saint Maitreya continued to address Vidura: My dear Vidura, at that time, after the planet earth finished her prayers, King Pṛthu was still not pacified, and his lips trembled in great anger. Although the planet earth was frightened, she made up her mind and began to speak as follows in order to convince the King.

Text 2
सन्नियच्छाभिभो मन्युं निबोध श्रावितं च मे ।
सर्वत: सारमादत्ते यथा मधुकरो बुध: ॥ २ ॥
sanniyacchābhibho manyuṁ
nibodha śrāvitaṁ ca me
sarvataḥ sāram ādatte
yathā madhu-karo budhaḥ
Synonyms
sanniyaccha — please pacify; abhibho — O King; manyum — anger; nibodha — try to understand; śrāvitam — what is said; ca — also; me — by me; sarvataḥ — from everywhere; sāram — the essence; ādatte — takes; yathā — as; madhu-karaḥ — the bumblebee; budhaḥ — an intelligent person.

Translation
My dear Lord, please pacify your anger completely and hear patiently whatever I submit before you. Please turn your kind attention to this. I may be very poor, but a learned man takes the essence of knowledge from all places, just as a bumblebee collects honey from each and every flower.

Text 3
अस्मिँल्लोकेऽथवामुष्मिन्मुनिभिस्तत्त्वदर्शिभि: ।
द‍ृष्टा योगा: प्रयुक्ताश्च पुंसां श्रेय:प्रसिद्धये ॥ ३ ॥
asmil loke ’thavāmuṣmin
munibhis tattva-darśibhiḥ
dṛṣṭā yogāḥ prayuktāś ca
puṁsāṁ śreyaḥ-prasiddhaye
Synonyms
asmin — in this; loke — duration of life; atha vā — or; amuṣmin — in the next life; munibhiḥ — by the great sages; tattva — the truth; darśibhiḥ — by those who have seen it; dṛṣṭāḥ — prescribed; yogāḥ — methods; prayuktāḥ — applied; ca — also; puṁsām — of the people in general; śreyaḥ — benefit; prasiddhaye — in the matter of obtaining.

Translation
To benefit all human society, not only in this life but in the next, the great seers and sages have prescribed various methods conducive to the prosperity of the people in general.

Text 4
तानातिष्ठति य: सम्यगुपायान् पूर्वदर्शितान् ।
अवर: श्रद्धयोपेत उपेयान् विन्दतेऽञ्जसा ॥ ४ ॥
tān ātiṣṭhati yaḥ samyag
upāyān pūrva-darśitān
avaraḥ śraddhayopeta
upeyān vindate ’ñjasā
Synonyms
tān — those; ātiṣṭhati — follows; yaḥ — anyone who; samyak — completely; upāyān — principles; pūrva — formerly; darśitān — instructed; avaraḥ — inexperienced; śraddhayā — with faith; upetaḥ — being situated; upeyān — the fruits of activities; vindate — enjoys; añjasā — very easily.

Translation
One who follows the principles and instructions enjoined by the great sages of the past can utilize these instructions for practical purposes. Such a person can very easily enjoy life and pleasures.

Text 5
ताननाद‍ृत्य योऽविद्वानर्थानारभते स्वयम् ।
तस्य व्यभिचरन्त्यर्था आरब्धाश्च पुन: पुन: ॥ ५ ॥
tān anādṛtya yo ’vidvān
arthān ārabhate svayam
tasya vyabhicaranty arthā
ārabdhāś ca punaḥ punaḥ
Synonyms
tān — those; anādṛtya — neglecting; yaḥ — anyone who; avidvān — rascal; arthān — schemes; ārabhate — begins; svayam — personally; tasya — his; vyabhicaranti — do not become successful; arthāḥ — purposes; ārabdhāḥ — attempted; ca — and; punaḥ punaḥ — again and again.

Translation
A foolish person who manufactures his own ways and means through mental speculation and does not recognize the authority of the sages who lay down unimpeachable directions is simply unsuccessful again and again in his attempts.

Text 6
पुरा सृष्टा ह्योषधयो ब्रह्मणा या विशाम्पते ।
भुज्यमाना मया द‍ृष्टा असद्‌भिरधृतव्रतै: ॥ ६ ॥
purā sṛṣṭā hy oṣadhayo
brahmaṇā yā viśāmpate
bhujyamānā mayā dṛṣṭā
asadbhir adhṛta-vrataiḥ
Synonyms
purā — in the past; sṛṣṭāḥ — created; hi — certainly; oṣadhayaḥ — herbs and food grains; brahmaṇā — by Lord Brahmā; yāḥ — all those which; viśām-pate — O King; bhujyamānāḥ — being enjoyed; mayā — by me; dṛṣṭāḥ — seen; asadbhiḥ — by nondevotees; adhṛta-vrataiḥ — devoid of all spiritual activities.

Translation
My dear King, the seeds, roots, herbs and grains, which were created by Lord Brahmā in the past, are now being used by nondevotees, who are devoid of all spiritual understanding.

Text 7
अपालितानाद‍ृता च भवद्‌भिर्लोकपालकै: ।
चोरीभूतेऽथ लोकेऽहं यज्ञार्थेऽग्रसमोषधी: ॥ ७ ॥
apālitānādṛtā ca
bhavadbhir loka-pālakaiḥ
corī-bhūte ’tha loke ’haṁ
yajñārthe ’grasam oṣadhīḥ
Synonyms
apālitā — without being taken care of; anādṛtā — being neglected; ca — also; bhavadbhiḥ — like your good self; loka-pālakaiḥ — by the governors or kings; corī-bhūte — being beset by thieves; atha — therefore; loke — this world; aham — I; yajña-arthe — for the purpose of performing sacrifices; agrasam — have hidden; oṣadhīḥ — all the herbs and grains.

Translation
My dear King, not only are grains and herbs being used by nondevotees, but, as far as I am concerned, I am not being properly maintained. Indeed, I am being neglected by kings who are not punishing these rascals who have turned into thieves by using grains for sense gratification. Consequently I have hidden all these seeds, which were meant for the performance of sacrifice.

Text 8
नूनं ता वीरुध: क्षीणा मयि कालेन भूयसा ।
तत्र योगेन द‍ृष्टेन भवानादातुमर्हति ॥ ८ ॥
nūnaṁ tā vīrudhaḥ kṣīṇā
mayi kālena bhūyasā
tatra yogena dṛṣṭena
bhavān ādātum arhati
Synonyms
nūnam — therefore; tāḥ — those; vīrudhaḥ — herbs and grains; kṣīṇāḥ — deteriorated; mayi — within me; kālena — in course of time; bhūyasā — very much; tatra — therefore; yogena — by proper means; dṛṣṭena — acknowledged; bhavān — Your Majesty; ādātum — to take; arhati — ought.

Translation
Due to being stocked for a very long time, all the grain seeds within me have certainly deteriorated. Therefore you should immediately arrange to take these seeds out by the standard process, which is recommended by the ācāryas or śāstras.

Texts 9-10
वत्सं कल्पय मे वीर येनाहं वत्सला तव ।
धोक्ष्ये क्षीरमयान्कामाननुरूपं च दोहनम् ॥ ९ ॥
दोग्धारं च महाबाहो भूतानां भूतभावन ।
अन्नमीप्सितमूर्जस्वद्भगवान् वाञ्छते यदि ॥ १० ॥
vatsaṁ kalpaya me vīra
yenāhaṁ vatsalā tava
dhokṣye kṣīramayān kāmān
anurūpaṁ ca dohanam
dogdhāraṁ ca mahā-bāho
bhūtānāṁ bhūta-bhāvana
annam īpsitam ūrjasvad
bhagavān vāñchate yadi
Synonyms
vatsam — a calf; kalpaya — arrange; me — for me; vīra — O hero; yena — by which; aham — I; vatsalā — affectionate; tava — your; dhokṣye — shall fulfill; kṣīra-mayān — in the form of milk; kāmān — desired necessities; anurūpam — according to different living entities; ca — also; dohanam — milking pot; dogdhāram — milkman; ca — also; mahā-bāho — O mighty-armed one; bhūtānām — of all living entities; bhūta-bhāvana — O protector of the living entities; annam — food grains; īpsitam — desired; ūrjaḥ-vat — nourishing; bhagavān — your worshipable self; vāñchate — desires; yadi — if.

Translation
O great hero, protector of living entities, if you desire to relieve the living entities by supplying them sufficient grain, and if you desire to nourish them by taking milk from me, you should make arrangements to bring a calf suitable for this purpose and a pot in which the milk can be kept, as well as a milkman to do the work. Since I will be very much affectionate towards my calf, your desire to take milk from me will be fulfilled.

Text 11
समां च कुरु मां राजन्देववृष्टं यथा पय: ।
अपर्तावपि भद्रं ते उपावर्तेत मे विभो ॥ ११ ॥
samāṁ ca kuru māṁ rājan
deva-vṛṣṭaṁ yathā payaḥ
apartāv api bhadraṁ te
upāvarteta me vibho
Synonyms
samām — equally level; ca — also; kuru — make; mām — me; rājan — O King; deva-vṛṣṭam — fallen as rain by the mercy of King Indra; yathā — so that; payaḥ — water; apa-ṛtau — when the rainy season has ceased; api — even; bhadram — auspiciousness; te — unto you; upāvarteta — it can remain; me — on me; vibho — O Lord.

Translation
My dear King, may I inform you that you have to make the entire surface of the globe level. This will help me, even when the rainy season has ceased. Rainfall comes by the mercy of King Indra. Rainfall will remain on the surface of the globe, always keeping the earth moistened, and thus it will be auspicious for all kinds of production.

Text 12
इति प्रियं हितं वाक्यं भुव आदाय भूपति: ।
वत्सं कृत्वा मनुं पाणावदुहत्सकलौषधी: ॥ १२ ॥
iti priyaṁ hitaṁ vākyaṁ
bhuva ādāya bhūpatiḥ
vatsaṁ kṛtvā manuṁ pāṇāv
aduhat sakalauṣadhīḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus; priyam — pleasing; hitam — beneficial; vākyam — words; bhuvaḥ — of the earth; ādāya — taking into consideration; bhū-patiḥ — the King; vatsam — calf; kṛtvā — making; manum — Svāyambhuva Manu; pāṇau — in his hands; aduhat — milked; sakala — all; oṣadhīḥ — herbs and grains.

Translation
After hearing the auspicious and pleasing words of the planet earth, the King accepted them. He then transformed Svāyambhuva Manu into a calf and milked all the herbs and grains from the earth in the form of a cow, keeping them in his cupped hands.

Text 13
तथापरे च सर्वत्र सारमाददते बुधा: ।
ततोऽन्ये च यथाकामं दुदुहु: पृथुभाविताम् ॥ १३ ॥
tathāpare ca sarvatra
sāram ādadate budhāḥ
tato ’nye ca yathā-kāmaṁ
duduhuḥ pṛthu-bhāvitām
Synonyms
tathā — so; apare — others; ca — also; sarvatra — everywhere; sāram — the essence; ādadate — took; budhāḥ — the intelligent class of men; tataḥ — thereafter; anye — others; ca — also; yathā-kāmam — as much as they desired; duduhuḥ — milked; pṛthu-bhāvitām — the planet earth, controlled by Pṛthu Mahārāja.

Translation
Others, who were as intelligent as King Pṛthu, also took the essence out of the earthly planet. Indeed, everyone took this opportunity to follow in the footsteps of King Pṛthu and get whatever he desired from the planet earth.

Text 14
ऋषयो दुदुहुर्देवीमिन्द्रियेष्वथ सत्तम ।
वत्सं बृहस्पतिं कृत्वा पयश्छन्दोमयं शुचि ॥ १४ ॥
ṛṣayo duduhur devīm
indriyeṣv atha sattama
vatsaṁ bṛhaspatiṁ kṛtvā
payaś chandomayaṁ śuci
Synonyms
ṛṣayaḥ — the great sages; duduhuḥ — milked; devīm — the earth; indriyeṣu — in the senses; atha — then; sattama — O Vidura; vatsam — the calf; bṛhaspatim — the sage Bṛhaspati; kṛtvā — making; payaḥ — milk; chandaḥ-mayam — in the form of the Vedic hymns; śuci — pure.

Translation
All the great sages transformed Bṛhaspati into a calf, and making the senses into a pot, they milked all kinds of Vedic knowledge to purify words, mind and hearing.

Text 15
कृत्वा वत्सं सुरगणा इन्द्रं सोममदूदुहन् ।
हिरण्मयेन पात्रेण वीर्यमोजो बलं पय: ॥ १५ ॥
kṛtvā vatsaṁ sura-gaṇā
indraṁ somam adūduhan
hiraṇmayena pātreṇa
vīryam ojo balaṁ payaḥ
Synonyms
kṛtvā — making; vatsam — calf; sura-gaṇāḥ — the demigods; indram — Indra, King of heaven; somam — nectar; adūduhan — they milked out; hiraṇmayena — golden; pātreṇa — with a pot; vīryam — mental power; ojaḥ — strength of the senses; balam — strength of the body; payaḥ — milk.

Translation
All the demigods made Indra, the King of heaven, into a calf, and from the earth they milked the beverage soma, which is nectar. Thus they became very powerful in mental speculation and bodily and sensual strength.

Text 16
दैतेया दानवा वत्सं प्रह्लादमसुरर्षभम् ।
विधायादूदुहन् क्षीरमय:पात्रे सुरासवम् ॥ १६ ॥
daiteyā dānavā vatsaṁ
prahlādam asurarṣabham
vidhāyādūduhan kṣīram
ayaḥ-pātre surāsavam
Synonyms
daiteyāḥ — the sons of Diti; dānavāḥ — demons; vatsam — the calf; prahlādam — Prahlāda Mahārāja; asura — demon; ṛṣabham — the chief; vidhāya — making; adūduhan — they milked out; kṣīram — milk; ayaḥ — iron; pātre — in a pot; surā — liquor; āsavam — fermented liquids like beer.

Translation
The sons of Diti and the demons transformed Prahlāda Mahārāja, who was born in an asura family, into a calf, and they extracted various kinds of liquor and beer, which they put into a pot made of iron.

Text 17
गन्धर्वाप्सरसोऽधुक्षन् पात्रे पद्ममये पय: ।
वत्सं विश्वावसुं कृत्वा गान्धर्वं मधु सौभगम् ॥ १७ ॥
gandharvāpsaraso ’dhukṣan
pātre padmamaye payaḥ
vatsaṁ viśvāvasuṁ kṛtvā
gāndharvaṁ madhu saubhagam
Synonyms
gandharva — inhabitants of the Gandharva planet; apsarasaḥ — the inhabitants of the Apsarā planet; adhukṣan — milked out; pātre — in a pot; padma-maye — made of a lotus; payaḥ — milk; vatsam — calf; viśvāvasum — of the name Viśvāvasu; kṛtvā — making; gāndharvam — songs; madhu — sweet; saubhagam — beauty.

Translation
The inhabitants of Gandharvaloka and Apsaroloka made Viśvāvasu into a calf, and they drew the milk into a lotus-flower pot. The milk took the shape of sweet musical art and beauty.

Text 18
वत्सेन पितरोऽर्यम्णा कव्यं क्षीरमधुक्षत ।
आमपात्रे महाभागा: श्रद्धया श्राद्धदेवता: ॥ १८ ॥
vatsena pitaro ’ryamṇā
kavyaṁ kṣīram adhukṣata
āma-pātre mahā-bhāgāḥ
śraddhayā śrāddha-devatāḥ
Synonyms
vatsena — by the calf; pitaraḥ — the inhabitants of Pitṛloka; aryamṇā — by the god of Pitṛloka, Aryamā; kavyam — offerings of food to ancestors; kṣīram — milk; adhukṣata — took out; āma-pātre — into an unbaked earthen pot; mahā-bhāgāḥ — the greatly fortunate; śraddhayā — with great faith; śrāddha-devatāḥ — the demigods presiding over śrāddha ceremonies in honor of deceased relatives.

Translation
The fortunate inhabitants of Pitṛloka, who preside over the funeral ceremonies, made Aryamā into a calf. With great faith they milked kavya, food offered to the ancestors, into an unbaked earthen pot.

Text 19
प्रकल्प्य वत्सं कपिलं सिद्धा: सङ्कल्पनामयीम् ।
सिद्धिं नभसि विद्यां च ये च विद्याधरादय: ॥ १९ ॥
prakalpya vatsaṁ kapilaṁ
siddhāḥ saṅkalpanāmayīm
siddhiṁ nabhasi vidyāṁ ca
ye ca vidyādharādayaḥ
Synonyms
prakalpya — appointing; vatsam — calf; kapilam — the great sage Kapila; siddhāḥ — the inhabitants of Siddhaloka; saṅkalpanā-mayīm — proceeding from will; siddhim — yogic perfection; nabhasi — in the sky; vidyām — knowledge; ca — also; ye — those who; ca — also; vidyādhara-ādayaḥ — the inhabitants of Vidyādhara-loka, and so on.

Translation
After this, the inhabitants of Siddhaloka, as well as the inhabitants of Vidyādhara-loka, transformed the great sage Kapila into a calf, and making the whole sky into a pot, they milked out specific yogic mystic powers, beginning with aṇimā. Indeed, the inhabitants of Vidyādhara-loka acquired the art of flying in the sky.

Text 20
अन्ये च मायिनो मायामन्तर्धानाद्भुतात्मनाम् ।
मयं प्रकल्प्य वत्सं ते दुदुहुर्धारणामयीम् ॥ २० ॥
anye ca māyino māyām
antardhānādbhutātmanām
mayaṁ prakalpya vatsaṁ te
duduhur dhāraṇāmayīm
Synonyms
anye — others; ca — also; māyinaḥ — mystic magicians; māyām — mystic powers; antardhāna — disappearing; adbhuta — wonderful; ātmanām — of the body; mayam — the demon named Maya; prakalpya — making; vatsam — the calf; te — they; duduhuḥ — milked out; dhāraṇāmayīm — proceeding from will.

Translation
Others also, the inhabitants of planets known as Kimpuruṣa-loka, made the demon Maya into a calf, and they milked out mystic powers by which one can disappear immediately from another’s vision and appear again in a different form.

Text 21
यक्षरक्षांसि भूतानि पिशाचा: पिशिताशना: ।
भूतेशवत्सा दुदुहु: कपाले क्षतजासवम् ॥ २१ ॥
yakṣa-rakṣāṁsi bhūtāni
piśācāḥ piśitāśanāḥ
bhūteśa-vatsā duduhuḥ
kapāle kṣatajāsavam
Synonyms
yakṣa — the Yakṣas (the descendants of Kuvera); rakṣāṁsi — the Rākṣasas (meat-eaters); bhūtāni — ghosts; piśācāḥ — witches; piśita-aśanāḥ — who are all habituated to eating flesh; bhūteśa — Lord Śiva’s incarnation Rudra; vatsāḥ — whose calf; duduhuḥ — milked out; kapāle — in a pot of skulls; kṣata-ja — blood; āsavam — a fermented beverage.

Translation
Then the Yakṣas, Rākṣasas, ghosts and witches, who are habituated to eating flesh, transformed Lord Śiva’s incarnation Rudra [Bhūtanātha] into a calf and milked out beverages made of blood and put them in a pot made of skulls.

Text 22
तथाहयो दन्दशूका: सर्पा नागाश्च तक्षकम् ।
विधाय वत्सं दुदुहुर्बिलपात्रे विषं पय: ॥ २२ ॥
tathāhayo dandaśūkāḥ
sarpā nāgāś ca takṣakam
vidhāya vatsaṁ duduhur
bila-pātre viṣaṁ payaḥ
Synonyms
tathā — similarly; ahayaḥ — snakes without hoods; dandaśūkāḥ — scorpions; sarpāḥ — cobras; nāgāḥ — big snakes; ca — and; takṣakam — Takṣaka, chief of the snakes; vidhāya — making; vatsam — calf; duduhuḥ — milked out; bila-pātre — in the pot of snake holes; viṣam — poison; payaḥ — as milk.

Translation
Thereafter cobras and snakes without hoods, large snakes, scorpions and many other poisonous animals took poison out of the planet earth as their milk and kept this poison in snake holes. They made a calf out of Takṣaka.

Texts 23-24
पशवो यवसं क्षीरं वत्सं कृत्वा च गोवृषम् ।
अरण्यपात्रे चाधुक्षन्मृगेन्द्रेण च दंष्ट्रिण: ॥ २३ ॥
क्रव्यादा: प्राणिन: क्रव्यं दुदुहु: स्वे कलेवरे ।
सुपर्णवत्सा विहगाश्चरं चाचरमेव च ॥ २४ ॥
paśavo yavasaṁ kṣīraṁ
vatsaṁ kṛtvā ca go-vṛṣam
araṇya-pātre cādhukṣan
mṛgendreṇa ca daṁṣṭriṇaḥ
kravyādāḥ prāṇinaḥ kravyaṁ
duduhuḥ sve kalevare
suparṇa-vatsā vihagāś
caraṁ cācaram eva ca
Synonyms
paśavaḥ — cattle; yavasam — green grasses; kṣīram — milk; vatsam — the calf; kṛtvā — making; ca — also; go-vṛṣam — the bull carrier of Lord Śiva; araṇya-pātre — in the pot of the forest; ca — also; adhukṣan — milked out; mṛga-indreṇa — by the lion; ca — and; daṁṣṭriṇaḥ — animals with sharp teeth; kravya-adāḥ — animals who eat raw flesh; prāṇinaḥ — living entities; kravyam — flesh; duduhuḥ — took out; sve — own; kalevare — in the pot of their body; suparṇa — Garuḍa; vatsāḥ — whose calf; vihagāḥ — the birds; caram — moving living entities; ca — also; acaram — nonmoving living entities; eva — certainly; ca — also.

Translation
The four-legged animals like the cows made a calf out of the bull who carries Lord Śiva and made a milking pot out of the forest. Thus they got fresh green grasses to eat. Ferocious animals like tigers transformed a lion into a calf, and thus they were able to get flesh for milk. The birds made a calf out of Garuḍa and took milk from the planet earth in the form of moving insects and nonmoving plants and grasses.

Text 25
वटवत्सा वनस्पतय: पृथग्रसमयं पय: ।
गिरयो हिमवद्वत्सा नानाधातून् स्वसानुषु ॥ २५ ॥
vaṭa-vatsā vanaspatayaḥ
pṛthag rasamayaṁ payaḥ
girayo himavad-vatsā
nānā-dhātūn sva-sānuṣu
Synonyms
vaṭa-vatsāḥ — making the banyan tree a calf; vanaḥ-patayaḥ — the trees; pṛthak — different; rasa-mayam — in the form of juices; payaḥ — milk; girayaḥ — the hills and mountains; himavat-vatsāḥ — making the Himālayas the calf; nānā — various; dhātūn — minerals; sva — own; sānuṣu — on their peaks.

Translation
The trees made a calf out of the banyan tree, and thus they derived milk in the form of many delicious juices. The mountains transformed the Himālayas into a calf, and they milked a variety of minerals into a pot made of the peaks of hills.

Text 26
सर्वे स्वमुख्यवत्सेन स्वे स्वे पात्रे पृथक् पय: ।
सर्वकामदुघां पृथ्वीं दुदुहु: पृथुभाविताम् ॥ २६ ॥
sarve sva-mukhya-vatsena
sve sve pātre pṛthak payaḥ
sarva-kāma-dughāṁ pṛthvīṁ
duduhuḥ pṛthu-bhāvitām
Synonyms
sarve — all; sva-mukhya — by their own chiefs; vatsena — as the calf; sve sve — in their own; pātre — pots; pṛthak — different; payaḥ — milk; sarva-kāma — all desirables; dughām — supplying as milk; pṛthvīm — the planet earth; duduhuḥ — milked out; pṛthu-bhāvitām — controlled by King Pṛthu.

Translation
The planet earth supplied everyone his respective food. During the time of King Pṛthu, the earth was fully under the control of the King. Thus all the inhabitants of the earth could get their food supply by creating various types of calves and putting their particular types of milk in various pots.

Text 27
एवं पृथ्वादय: पृथ्वीमन्नादा: स्वन्नमात्मन: ।
दोहवत्सादिभेदेन क्षीरभेदं कुरूद्वह ॥ २७ ॥
evaṁ pṛthv-ādayaḥ pṛthvīm
annādāḥ svannam ātmanaḥ
doha-vatsādi-bhedena
kṣīra-bhedaṁ kurūdvaha
Synonyms
evam — thus; pṛthu-ādayaḥ — King Pṛthu and others; pṛthvīm — the earth; anna-adāḥ — all living entities desiring food; su-annam — their desired foodstuff; ātmanaḥ — for self-preservation; doha — for milking; vatsa-ādi — by calves, pots and milkers; bhedena — different; kṣīra — milk; bhedam — different; kuru-udvaha — O chief of the Kurus.

Translation
My dear Vidura, chief of the Kurus, in this way King Pṛthu and all the others who subsist on food created different types of calves and milked out their respective eatables. Thus they received their various foodstuffs, which were symbolized as milk.

Text 28
ततो महीपति: प्रीत: सर्वकामदुघां पृथु: ।
दुहितृत्वे चकारेमां प्रेम्णा दुहितृवत्सल: ॥ २८ ॥
tato mahīpatiḥ prītaḥ
sarva-kāma-dughāṁ pṛthuḥ
duhitṛtve cakāremāṁ
premṇā duhitṛ-vatsalaḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; mahī-patiḥ — the King; prītaḥ — being pleased; sarva-kāma — all desirables; dughām — producing as milk; pṛthuḥ — King Pṛthu; duhitṛtve — treating as his daughter; cakāra — did; imām — unto the planet earth; premṇā — out of affection; duhitṛ-vatsalaḥ — affectionate to his daughter.

Translation
Thereafter King Pṛthu was very satisfied with the planet earth, for she sufficiently supplied all food to various living entities. Thus he developed an affection for the planet earth, just as if she were his own daughter.

Text 29
चूर्णयन् स्वधनुष्कोट्या गिरिकूटानि राजराट् ।
भूमण्डलमिदं वैन्य: प्रायश्चक्रे समं विभु: ॥ २९ ॥
cūrṇayan sva-dhanuṣ-koṭyā
giri-kūṭāni rāja-rāṭ
bhū-maṇḍalam idaṁ vainyaḥ
prāyaś cakre samaṁ vibhuḥ
Synonyms
cūrṇayan — making into pieces; sva — his own; dhanuḥ-koṭyā — by the power of his bow; giri — of the hills; kūṭāni — the tops; rāja-rāṭ — the emperor; bhū-maṇḍalam — the whole earth; idam — this; vainyaḥ — the son of Vena; prāyaḥ — almost; cakre — made; samam — level; vibhuḥ — the powerful.

Translation
After this, the king of all kings, Mahārāja Pṛthu, leveled all rough places on the surface of the globe by breaking up the hills with the strength of his bow. By his grace the surface of the globe almost became flat.

Text 30
अथास्मिन् भगवान् वैन्य: प्रजानां वृत्तिद: पिता ।
निवासान् कल्पयां चक्रे तत्र तत्र यथार्हत: ॥ ३० ॥
athāsmin bhagavān vainyaḥ
prajānāṁ vṛttidaḥ pitā
nivāsān kalpayāṁ cakre
tatra tatra yathārhataḥ
Synonyms
atha — thus; asmin — on this planet earth; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; vainyaḥ — son of Vena; prajānām — of the citizens; vṛttidaḥ — who supplies employment; pitā — a father; nivāsān — residences; kalpayām — suitable; cakre — make; tatra tatra — here and there; yathā — as; arhataḥ — desirable, suitable.

Translation
To all the citizens of the state, King Pṛthu was as good as a father. Thus he was visibly engaged in giving them proper subsistence and proper employment for subsistence. After leveling the surface of the globe, he earmarked different places for residential quarters, inasmuch as they were desirable.

Text 31
ग्रामान् पुर: पत्तनानि दुर्गाणि विविधानि च ।
घोषान् व्रजान् सशिबिरानाकरान् खेटखर्वटान् ॥ ३१ ॥
grāmān puraḥ pattanāni
durgāṇi vividhāni ca
ghoṣān vrajān sa-śibirān
ākarān kheṭa-kharvaṭān
Synonyms
grāmān — villages; puraḥ — cities; pattanāni — settlements; durgāṇi — forts; vividhāni — of different varieties; ca — also; ghoṣān — habitations for the milkmen; vrajān — pens for cattle; sa-śibirān — with camps; ākarān — mines; kheṭa — agricultural towns; kharvaṭān — mountain villages.

Translation
In this way the King founded many types of villages, settlements and towns and built forts, residences for cowherdsmen, stables for the animals, places for the royal camps, mining places, agricultural towns and mountain villages.

Text 32
प्राक्पृथोरिह नैवैषा पुरग्रामादिकल्पना ।
यथासुखं वसन्ति स्म तत्र तत्राकुतोभया: ॥ ३२ ॥
prāk pṛthor iha naivaiṣā
pura-grāmādi-kalpanā
yathā-sukhaṁ vasanti sma
tatra tatrākutobhayāḥ
Synonyms
prāk — before; pṛthoḥ — King Pṛthu; iha — on this planet; na — never; eva — certainly; eṣā — this; pura — of towns; grāma-ādi — of villages, etc.; kalpanā — planned arrangement; yathā — as; sukham — convenient; vasanti sma — lived; tatra tatra — here and there; akutaḥ-bhayāḥ — without hesitation.

Translation
Before the reign of King Pṛthu there was no planned arrangement for different cities, villages, pasturing grounds, etc. Everything was scattered, and everyone constructed his residential quarters according to his own convenience. However, from the time of King Pṛthu, plans were made for towns and villages.