Text 1
विदुर उवाच
भवे शीलवतां श्रेष्ठे दक्षो दुहितृवत्सल: ।
विद्वेषमकरोत्कस्मादनाद‍ृत्यात्मजां सतीम् ॥ १ ॥
vidura uvāca
bhave śīlavatāṁ śreṣṭhe
dakṣo duhitṛ-vatsalaḥ
vidveṣam akarot kasmād
anādṛtyātmajāṁ satīm
Synonyms
viduraḥ uvāca — Vidura said; bhave — towards Lord Śiva; śīlavatām — among the gentle; śreṣṭhe — the best; dakṣaḥ — Dakṣa; duhitṛ-vatsalaḥ — being affectionate towards his daughter; vidveṣam — enmity; akarot — did exhibit; kasmāt — why; anādṛtya — neglecting; ātmajām — his own daughter; satīm — Satī.

Translation
Vidura inquired: Why was Dakṣa, who was so affectionate towards his daughter, envious of Lord Śiva, who is the best among the gentle? Why did he neglect his daughter Satī?

Text 2
कस्तं चराचरगुरुं निर्वैरं शान्तविग्रहम् ।
आत्मारामं कथं द्वेष्टि जगतो दैवतं महत् ॥ २ ॥
kas taṁ carācara-guruṁ
nirvairaṁ śānta-vigraham
ātmārāmaṁ kathaṁ dveṣṭi
jagato daivataṁ mahat
Synonyms
kaḥ — who (Dakṣa); tam — him (Lord Śiva); cara-acara — of the whole world (both animate and inanimate); gurum — the spiritual master; nirvairam — without enmity; śānta-vigraham — having a peaceful personality; ātma-ārāmam — satisfied in himself; katham — how; dveṣṭi — hates; jagataḥ — of the universe; daivatam — demigod; mahat — the great.

Translation
Lord Śiva, the spiritual master of the entire world, is free from enmity, is a peaceful personality, and is always satisfied in himself. He is the greatest among the demigods. How is it possible that Dakṣa could be inimical towards such an auspicious personality?

Text 3
एतदाख्याहि मे ब्रह्मन्जामातु: श्वशुरस्य च ।
विद्वेषस्तु यत: प्राणांस्तत्यजे दुस्त्यजान्सती ॥ ३ ॥
etad ākhyāhi me brahman
jāmātuḥ śvaśurasya ca
vidveṣas tu yataḥ prāṇāṁs
tatyaje dustyajān satī
Synonyms
etat — thus; ākhyāhi — please tell; me — to me; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; jāmātuḥ — of the son-in-law (Lord Śiva); śvaśurasya — of the father-in-law (Dakṣa); ca — and; vidveṣaḥ — quarrel; tu — as to; yataḥ — from what cause; prāṇān — her life; tatyaje — gave up; dustyajān — which is impossible to give up; satī — Satī.

Translation
My dear Maitreya, to part with one’s life is very difficult. Would you kindly explain to me how such a son-in-law and father-in-law could quarrel so bitterly that the great goddess Satī could give up her life?

Text 4
मैत्रेय उवाच
पुरा विश्वसृजां सत्रे समेता: परमर्षय: ।
तथामरगणा: सर्वे सानुगा मुनयोऽग्नय: ॥ ४ ॥
maitreya uvāca
purā viśva-sṛjāṁ satre
sametāḥ paramarṣayaḥ
tathāmara-gaṇāḥ sarve
sānugā munayo ’gnayaḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the sage Maitreya said; purā — formerly (at the time of Svāyambhuva Manu); viśva-sṛjām — of the creators of the universe; satre — at a sacrifice; sametāḥ — were assembled; parama-ṛṣayaḥ — the great sages; tathā — and also; amara-gaṇāḥ — the demigods; sarve — all; sa-anugāḥ — along with their followers; munayaḥ — the philosophers; agnayaḥ — the fire-gods.

Translation
The sage Maitreya said: In a former time, the leaders of the universal creation performed a great sacrifice in which all the great sages, philosophers, demigods and fire-gods assembled with their followers.

Text 5
तत्र प्रविष्टमृषयो दृष्ट्वार्कमिव रोचिषा ।
भ्राजमानं वितिमिरं कुर्वन्तं तन्महत्सद: ॥ ५ ॥
tatra praviṣṭam ṛṣayo
dṛṣṭvārkam iva rociṣā
bhrājamānaṁ vitimiraṁ
kurvantaṁ tan mahat sadaḥ
Synonyms
tatra — there; praviṣṭam — having entered; ṛṣayaḥ — the sages; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; arkam — the sun; iva — just like; rociṣā — with luster; bhrājamānam — shining; vitimiram — free from darkness; kurvantam — making; tat — that; mahat — great; sadaḥ — assembly.

Translation
When Dakṣa, the leader of the Prajāpatis, entered that assembly, his personal bodily luster as bright as the effulgence of the sun, the entire assembly was illuminated, and all the assembled personalities became insignificant in his presence.

Text 6
उदतिष्ठन्सदस्यास्ते स्वधिष्ण्येभ्य: सहाग्नय: ।
ऋते विरिञ्चां शर्वं च तद्भासाक्षिप्तचेतस: ॥ ६ ॥
udatiṣṭhan sadasyās te
sva-dhiṣṇyebhyaḥ sahāgnayaḥ
ṛte viriñcāṁ śarvaṁ ca
tad-bhāsākṣipta-cetasaḥ
Synonyms
udatiṣṭhan — stood up; sadasyāḥ — the members of the assembly; te — they; sva-dhiṣṇyebhyaḥ — from their own seats; saha-agnayaḥ — along with the fire-gods; ṛte — except for; viriñcām — Brahmā; śarvam — Śiva; ca — and; tat — his (Dakṣa’s); bhāsa — by the luster; ākṣipta — are influenced; cetasaḥ — those whose minds.

Translation
Influenced by his personal bodily luster, all the fire-gods and other participants in that great assembly, with the exceptions of Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, gave up their own sitting places and stood in respect for Dakṣa.

Text 7
सदसस्पतिभिर्दक्षो भगवान्साधु सत्कृत: ।
अजं लोकगुरुं नत्वा निषसाद तदाज्ञया ॥ ७ ॥
sadasas-patibhir dakṣo
bhagavān sādhu sat-kṛtaḥ
ajaṁ loka-guruṁ natvā
niṣasāda tad-ājñayā
Synonyms
sadasaḥ — of the assembly; patibhiḥ — by the leaders; dakṣaḥ — Dakṣa; bhagavān — the possessor of all opulences; sādhu — properly; sat-kṛtaḥ — was welcomed; ajam — to the unborn (Brahmā); loka-gurum — to the teacher of the universe; natvā — making obeisances; niṣasāda — sat down; tat-ājñayā — by his (Brahmā’s) order.

Translation
Dakṣa was adequately welcomed by the president of the great assembly, Lord Brahmā. After offering Lord Brahmā respect, Dakṣa, by the order of Brahmā, properly took his seat.

Text 8
प्राङ्‍‌निषण्णं मृडं दृष्ट्वा नामृष्यत्तदनाद‍ृत: ।
उवाच वामं चक्षुर्भ्यामभिवीक्ष्य दहन्निव ॥ ८ ॥
prāṅ-niṣaṇṇaṁ mṛḍaṁ dṛṣṭvā
nāmṛṣyat tad-anādṛtaḥ
uvāca vāmaṁ cakṣurbhyām
abhivīkṣya dahann iva
Synonyms
prāk — before; niṣaṇṇam — being seated; mṛḍam — Lord Śiva; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; na amṛṣyat — did not tolerate; tat — by him (Śiva); anādṛtaḥ — not being respected; uvāca — said; vāmam — dishonest; cakṣurbhyām — with both eyes; abhivīkṣya — looking at; dahan — burning; iva — as if.

Translation
Before taking his seat, however, Dakṣa was very much offended to see Lord Śiva sitting and not showing him any respect. At that time, Dakṣa became greatly angry, and, his eyes glowing, he began to speak very strongly against Lord Śiva.

Text 9
श्रूयतां ब्रह्मर्षयो मे सहदेवा: सहाग्नय: ।
साधूनां ब्रुवतो वृत्तं नाज्ञानान्न च मत्सरात् ॥ ९ ॥
śrūyatāṁ brahmarṣayo me
saha-devāḥ sahāgnayaḥ
sādhūnāṁ bruvato vṛttaṁ
nājñānān na ca matsarāt
Synonyms
śrūyatām — hear; brahma-ṛṣayaḥ — O sages among the brāhmaṇas; me — unto me; saha-devāḥ — O demigods; saha-agnayaḥ — O fire-gods; sādhūnām — of the gentle; bruvataḥ — speaking; vṛttam — the manners; na — not; ajñānāt — from ignorance; na ca — and not; matsarāt — from envy.

Translation
All sages, brāhmaṇas and fire-gods present, please hear me with attention, for I speak about the manners of gentle persons. I do not speak out of ignorance or envy.

Text 10
अयं तु लोकपालानां यशोघ्नो निरपत्रप: ।
सद्‌भिराचरित: पन्था येन स्तब्धेन दूषित: ॥ १० ॥
ayaṁ tu loka-pālānāṁ
yaśo-ghno nirapatrapaḥ
sadbhir ācaritaḥ panthā
yena stabdhena dūṣitaḥ
Synonyms
ayam — he (Śiva); tu — but; loka-pālānām — of the governors of the universe; yaśaḥ-ghnaḥ — spoiling the fame; nirapatrapaḥ — shameless; sadbhiḥ — by those of gentle manner; ācaritaḥ — followed; panthāḥ — the path; yena — by whom (Śiva); stabdhena — being devoid of proper actions; dūṣitaḥ — is polluted.

Translation
Śiva has spoiled the name and fame of the governors of the universe and has polluted the path of gentle manners. Because he is shameless, he does not know how to act.

Text 11
एष मे शिष्यतां प्राप्तो यन्मे दुहितुरग्रहीत् ।
पाणिं विप्राग्निमुखत: सावित्र्या इव साधुवत् ॥ ११ ॥
eṣa me śiṣyatāṁ prāpto
yan me duhitur agrahīt
pāṇiṁ viprāgni-mukhataḥ
sāvitryā iva sādhuvat
Synonyms
eṣaḥ — he (Śiva); me — my; śiṣyatām — subordinate position; prāptaḥ — accepted; yat — because; me duhituḥ — of my daughter; agrahīt — he took; pāṇim — the hand; vipra-agni — of brāhmaṇas and fire; mukhataḥ — in the presence; sāvitryāḥ — Gāyatrī; iva — like; sādhuvat — like an honest person.

Translation
He has already accepted himself as my subordinate by marrying my daughter in the presence of fire and brāhmaṇas. He has married my daughter, who is equal to Gāyatrī, and has pretended to be just like an honest person.

Text 12
गृहीत्वा मृगशावाक्ष्या: पाणिं मर्कटलोचन: ।
प्रत्युत्थानाभिवादार्हे वाचाप्यकृत नोचितम् ॥ १२ ॥
gṛhītvā mṛga-śāvākṣyāḥ
pāṇiṁ markaṭa-locanaḥ
pratyutthānābhivādārhe
vācāpy akṛta nocitam
Synonyms
gṛhītvā — taking; mṛga-śāva — like a deer cub; akṣyāḥ — of her who has eyes; pāṇim — the hand; markaṭa — of a monkey; locanaḥ — he who has the eyes; pratyutthāna — of rising from one’s seat; abhivāda — the honor; arhe — to me, who deserves; vācā — with sweet words; api — even; akṛta na — he did not do; ucitam — honor.

Translation
He has eyes like a monkey’s, yet he has married my daughter, whose eyes are just like those of a deer cub. Nevertheless he did not stand up to receive me, nor did he think it fit to welcome me with sweet words.

Text 13
लुप्तक्रियायाशुचये मानिने भिन्नसेतवे ।
अनिच्छन्नप्यदां बालां शूद्रायेवोशतीं गिरम् ॥ १३ ॥
lupta-kriyāyāśucaye
mānine bhinna-setave
anicchann apy adāṁ bālāṁ
śūdrāyevośatīṁ giram
Synonyms
lupta-kriyāya — not observing rules and regulations; aśucaye — impure; mānine — proud; bhinna-setave — having broken all rules of civility; anicchan — not desiring; api — although; adām — handed over; bālām — my daughter; śūdrāya — unto a śūdra; iva — as; uśatīm giram — the message of the Vedas.

Translation
I had no desire to give my daughter to this person, who has broken all rules of civility. Because of not observing the required rules and regulations, he is impure, but I was obliged to hand over my daughter to him just as one teaches the messages of the Vedas to a śūdra.

Texts 14-15
प्रेतावासेषु घोरेषु प्रेतैर्भूतगणैर्वृत: ।
अटत्युन्मत्तवन्नग्नो व्युप्तकेशो हसन् रुदन् ॥ १४ ॥
चिताभस्मकृतस्‍नान: प्रेतस्रङ्‌न्रस्थिभूषण: ।
शिवापदेशो ह्यशिवो मत्तो मत्तजनप्रिय: ।
पति: प्रमथनाथानां तमोमात्रात्मकात्मनाम् ॥ १५ ॥
pretāvāseṣu ghoreṣu
pretair bhūta-gaṇair vṛtaḥ
aṭaty unmattavan nagno
vyupta-keśo hasan rudan
citā-bhasma-kṛta-snānaḥ
preta-sraṅ-nrasthi-bhūṣaṇaḥ
śivāpadeśo hy aśivo
matto matta-jana-priyaḥ
patiḥ pramatha-nāthānāṁ
tamo-mātrātmakātmanām
Synonyms
preta-āvāseṣu — at the burning places of dead bodies; ghoreṣu — horrible; pretaiḥ — by the Pretas; bhūta-gaṇaiḥ — by the Bhūtas; vṛtaḥ — accompanied by; aṭati — he wanders; unmatta-vat — like a madman; nagnaḥ — naked; vyupta-keśaḥ — having scattered hair; hasan — laughing; rudan — crying; citā — of the funeral pyre; bhasma — with the ashes; kṛta-snānaḥ — taking bath; preta — of the skulls of dead bodies; srak — having a garland; nṛ-asthi-bhūṣaṇaḥ — ornamented with dead men’s bones; śiva-apadeśaḥ — who is śiva, or auspicious, only in name; hi — for; aśivaḥ — inauspicious; mattaḥ — crazy; matta-jana-priyaḥ — very dear to the crazy beings; patiḥ — the leader; pramatha-nāthānām — of the lords of the Pramathas; tamaḥ-mātra-ātmaka-ātmanām — of those grossly in the mode of ignorance.

Translation
He lives in filthy places like crematoriums, and his companions are the ghosts and demons. Naked like a madman, sometimes laughing and sometimes crying, he smears crematorium ashes all over his body. He does not bathe regularly, and he ornaments his body with a garland of skulls and bones. Therefore only in name is he śiva, or auspicious; actually, he is the most mad and inauspicious creature. Thus he is very dear to crazy beings in the gross mode of ignorance, and he is their leader.

Text 16
तस्मा उन्मादनाथाय नष्टशौचाय दुर्हृदे ।
दत्ता बत मया साध्वी चोदिते परमेष्ठिना ॥ १६ ॥
tasmā unmāda-nāthāya
naṣṭa-śaucāya durhṛde
dattā bata mayā sādhvī
codite parameṣṭhinā
Synonyms
tasmai — to him; unmāda-nāthāya — to the lord of ghosts; naṣṭa-śaucāya — being devoid of all cleanliness; durhṛde — heart filled with nasty things; dattā — was given; bata — alas; mayā — by me; sādhvī — Satī; codite — being requested; parameṣṭhinā — by the supreme teacher (Brahmā).

Translation
On the request of Lord Brahmā I handed over my chaste daughter to him, although he is devoid of all cleanliness and his heart is filled with nasty things.

Text 17
मैत्रेय उवाच
विनिन्द्यैवं स गिरिशमप्रतीपमवस्थितम् ।
दक्षोऽथाप उपस्पृश्य क्रुद्ध: शप्तुं प्रचक्रमे ॥ १७ ॥
maitreya uvāca
vinindyaivaṁ sa giriśam
apratīpam avasthitam
dakṣo ’thāpa upaspṛśya
kruddhaḥ śaptuṁ pracakrame
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; vinindya — abusing; evam — thus; saḥ — he (Dakṣa); giriśam — Śiva; apratīpam — without any hostility; avasthitam — remaining; dakṣaḥ — Dakṣa; atha — now; apaḥ — water; upaspṛśya — washing hands and mouth; kruddhaḥ — angry; śaptum — to curse; pracakrame — began to.

Translation
The sage Maitreya continued: Thus Dakṣa, seeing Lord Śiva sitting as if against him, washed his hands and mouth and cursed him in the following words.

Text 18
अयं तु देवयजन इन्द्रोपेन्द्रादिभिर्भव: ।
सह भागं न लभतां देवैर्देवगणाधम: ॥ १८ ॥
ayaṁ tu deva-yajana
indropendrādibhir bhavaḥ
saha bhāgaṁ na labhatāṁ
devair deva-gaṇādhamaḥ
Synonyms
ayam — that; tu — but; deva-yajane — in the sacrifice of the demigods; indra-upendra-ādibhiḥ — with Indra, Upendra and the others; bhavaḥ — Śiva; saha — along with; bhāgam — a portion; na — not; labhatām — should obtain; devaiḥ — with the demigods; deva-gaṇa-adhamaḥ — the lowest of all the demigods.

Translation
The demigods are eligible to share in the oblations of sacrifice, but Lord Śiva, who is the lowest of all the demigods, should not have a share.

Text 19
निषिध्यमान: स सदस्यमुख्यै-
र्दक्षो गिरित्राय विसृज्य शापम् ।
तस्माद्विनिष्क्रम्य विवृद्धमन्यु-
र्जगाम कौरव्य निजं निकेतनम् ॥ १९ ॥
niṣidhyamānaḥ sa sadasya-mukhyair
dakṣo giritrāya visṛjya śāpam
tasmād viniṣkramya vivṛddha-manyur
jagāma kauravya nijaṁ niketanam
Synonyms
niṣidhyamānaḥ — being requested not to; saḥ — he (Dakṣa); sadasya-mukhyaiḥ — by the members of the sacrifice; dakṣaḥ — Dakṣa; giritrāya — to Śiva; visṛjya — giving; śāpam — a curse; tasmāt — from that place; viniṣkramya — going out; vivṛddha-manyuḥ — being exceedingly angry; jagāma — went; kauravya — O Vidura; nijam — to his own; niketanam — home.

Translation
Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, in spite of the requests of all the members of the sacrificial assembly, Dakṣa, in great anger, cursed Lord Śiva and then left the assembly and went back to his home.

Text 20
विज्ञाय शापं गिरिशानुगाग्रणी-
र्नन्दीश्वरो रोषकषायदूषित: ।
दक्षाय शापं विससर्ज दारुणं
ये चान्वमोदंस्तदवाच्यतां द्विजा: ॥ २० ॥
vijñāya śāpaṁ giriśānugāgraṇīr
nandīśvaro roṣa-kaṣāya-dūṣitaḥ
dakṣāya śāpaṁ visasarja dāruṇaṁ
ye cānvamodaṁs tad-avācyatāṁ dvijāḥ
Synonyms
vijñāya — understanding; śāpam — the curse; giriśa — of Śiva; anuga-agraṇīḥ — one of the principal associates; nandīśvaraḥ — Nandīśvara; roṣa — anger; kaṣāya — red; dūṣitaḥ — blinded; dakṣāya — to Dakṣa; śāpam — a curse; visasarja — gave; dāruṇam — harsh; ye — who; ca — and; anvamodan — tolerated; tat-avācyatām — the cursing of Śiva; dvijāḥ — brāhmaṇas.

Translation
Upon understanding that Lord Śiva had been cursed, Nandīśvara, one of Lord Śiva’s principal associates, became greatly angry. His eyes became red, and he prepared to curse Dakṣa and all the brāhmaṇas present there who had tolerated Dakṣa’s cursing Śiva in harsh words.

Text 21
य एतन्मर्त्यमुद्दिश्य भगवत्यप्रतिद्रुहि ।
द्रुह्यत्यज्ञ: पृथग्दृष्टिस्तत्त्वतो विमुखो भवेत् ॥ २१ ॥
ya etan martyam uddiśya
bhagavaty apratidruhi
druhyaty ajñaḥ pṛthag-dṛṣṭis
tattvato vimukho bhavet
Synonyms
yaḥ — who (Dakṣa); etat martyam — this body; uddiśya — with reference to; bhagavati — to Śiva; apratidruhi — who is not envious; druhyati — bears envy; ajñaḥ — less intelligent persons; pṛthak-dṛṣṭiḥ — the vision of duality; tattvataḥ — from transcendental knowledge; vimukhaḥ — bereft; bhavet — may become.

Translation
Anyone who has accepted Dakṣa as the most important personality and neglected Lord Śiva because of envy is less intelligent and, because of visualizing in duality, will be bereft of transcendental knowledge.

Text 22
गृहेषु कूटधर्मेषु सक्तो ग्राम्यसुखेच्छया ।
कर्मतन्त्रं वितनुते वेदवादविपन्नधी: ॥ २२ ॥
gṛheṣu kūṭa-dharmeṣu
sakto grāmya-sukhecchayā
karma-tantraṁ vitanute
veda-vāda-vipanna-dhīḥ
Synonyms
gṛheṣu — in householder life; kūṭa-dharmeṣu — of pretentious religiosity; saktaḥ — being attracted; grāmya-sukha-icchayā — by desire for material happiness; karma-tantram — fruitive activities; vitanute — he performs; veda-vāda — by the explanations of the Vedas; vipanna-dhīḥ — intelligence being lost.

Translation
Pretentiously religious householder life, in which one is attracted to material happiness and thus also attracted to the superficial explanation of the Vedas, robs one of all intelligence and attaches one to fruitive activities as all in all.

Text 23
बुद्ध्या पराभिध्यायिन्या विस्मृतात्मगति: पशु: ।
स्त्रीकाम: सोऽस्त्वतितरां दक्षो बस्तमुखोऽचिरात् ॥ २३ ॥
buddhyā parābhidhyāyinyā
vismṛtātma-gatiḥ paśuḥ
strī-kāmaḥ so ’stv atitarāṁ
dakṣo basta-mukho ’cirāt
Synonyms
buddhyā — by intelligence; para-abhidhyāyinyā — by accepting the body as the self; vismṛta-ātma-gatiḥ — having forgotten the knowledge of Viṣṇu; paśuḥ — an animal; strī-kāmaḥ — attached to sex life; saḥ — he (Dakṣa); astu — let; atitarām — excessive; dakṣaḥ — Dakṣa; basta-mukhaḥ — the face of a goat; acirāt — in a very short time.

Translation
Dakṣa has accepted the body as all in all. Therefore, since he has forgotten the viṣṇu-pāda, or viṣṇu-gati, and is attached to sex life only, within a short time he will have the face of a goat.

Text 24
विद्याबुद्धिरविद्यायां कर्ममय्यामसौ जड: ।
संसरन्त्विह ये चामुमनु शर्वावमानिनम् ॥ २४ ॥
vidyā-buddhir avidyāyāṁ
karmamayyām asau jaḍaḥ
saṁsarantv iha ye cāmum
anu śarvāvamāninam
Synonyms
vidyā-buddhiḥ — materialistic education and intelligence; avidyāyām — in nescience; karma-mayyām — formed of fruitive activities; asau — he (Dakṣa); jaḍaḥ — dull; saṁsarantu — let them take birth again and again; iha — here in this world; ye — who; ca — and; amum — Dakṣa; anu — following; śarva — Śiva; avamāninam — insulting.

Translation
Those who have become as dull as matter by cultivating materialistic education and intelligence are nesciently involved in fruitive activities. Such men have purposely insulted Lord Śiva. May they continue in the cycle of repeated birth and death.

Text 25
गिर: श्रुताया: पुष्पिण्या मधुगन्धेन भूरिणा ।
मथ्ना चोन्मथितात्मान: सम्मुह्यन्तु हरद्विष: ॥ २५ ॥
giraḥ śrutāyāḥ puṣpiṇyā
madhu-gandhena bhūriṇā
mathnā conmathitātmānaḥ
sammuhyantu hara-dviṣaḥ
Synonyms
giraḥ — words; śrutāyāḥ — of the Vedas; puṣpiṇyāḥ — flowery; madhu-gandhena — with the scent of honey; bhūriṇā — profuse; mathnā — enchanting; ca — and; unmathita-ātmānaḥ — whose minds have become dull; sammuhyantu — let them remain attached; hara-dviṣaḥ — envious of Lord Śiva.

Translation
May those who are envious of Lord Śiva, being attracted by the flowery language of the enchanting Vedic promises, and who have thus become dull, always remain attached to fruitive activities.

Text 26
सर्वभक्षा द्विजा वृत्त्यै धृतविद्यातपोव्रता: ।
वित्तदेहेन्द्रियारामा याचका विचरन्त्विह ॥ २६ ॥
sarva-bhakṣā dvijā vṛttyai
dhṛta-vidyā-tapo-vratāḥ
vitta-dehendriyārāmā
yācakā vicarantv iha
Synonyms
sarva-bhakṣāḥ — eating everything; dvijāḥ — the brāhmaṇas; vṛttyai — for maintaining the body; dhṛta-vidyā — having taken to education; tapaḥ — austerity; vratāḥ — and vows; vitta — money; deha — the body; indriya — the senses; ārāmāḥ — the satisfaction; yācakāḥ — as beggars; vicarantu — let them wander; iha — here.

Translation
These brāhmaṇas take to education, austerity and vows only for the purpose of maintaining the body. They shall be devoid of discrimination between what to eat and what not to eat. They will acquire money, begging from door to door, simply for the satisfaction of the body.

Text 27
तस्यैवं वदत: शापं श्रुत्वा द्विजकुलाय वै ।
भृगु: प्रत्यसृजच्छापं ब्रह्मदण्डं दुरत्ययम् ॥ २७ ॥
tasyaivaṁ vadataḥ śāpaṁ
śrutvā dvija-kulāya vai
bhṛguḥ pratyasṛjac chāpaṁ
brahma-daṇḍaṁ duratyayam
Synonyms
tasya — his (Nandīśvara’s); evam — thus; vadataḥ — words; śāpam — the curse; śrutvā — hearing; dvija-kulāya — unto the brāhmaṇas; vai — indeed; bhṛguḥ — Bhṛgu; pratyasṛjat — made; śāpam — a curse; brahma-daṇḍam — the punishment of a brāhmaṇa; duratyayam — insurmountable.

Translation
When all the hereditary brāhmaṇas were thus cursed by Nandīśvara, the sage Bhṛgu, as a reaction, condemned the followers of Lord Śiva with this very strong brahminical curse.

Text 28
भवव्रतधरा ये च ये च तान्समनुव्रता: ।
पाषण्डिनस्ते भवन्तु सच्छास्त्रपरिपन्थिन: ॥ २८ ॥
bhava-vrata-dharā ye ca
ye ca tān samanuvratāḥ
pāṣaṇḍinas te bhavantu
sac-chāstra-paripanthinaḥ
Synonyms
bhava-vrata-dharāḥ — taking a vow to satisfy Lord Śiva; ye — who; ca — and; ye — who; ca — and; tān — such principles; samanuvratāḥ — following; pāṣaṇḍinaḥ — atheists; te — they; bhavantu — let them become; sat-śāstra-paripanthinaḥ — diverted from transcendental scriptural injunctions.

Translation
One who takes a vow to satisfy Lord Śiva or who follows such principles will certainly become an atheist and be diverted from transcendental scriptural injunctions.

Text 29
नष्टशौचा मूढधियो जटाभस्मास्थिधारिण: ।
विशन्तु शिवदीक्षायां यत्र दैवं सुरासवम् ॥ २९ ॥
naṣṭa-śaucā mūḍha-dhiyo
jaṭā-bhasmāsthi-dhāriṇaḥ
viśantu śiva-dīkṣāyāṁ
yatra daivaṁ surāsavam
Synonyms
naṣṭa-śaucāḥ — cleanliness being abandoned; mūḍha-dhiyaḥ — foolish; jaṭā-bhasma-asthi-dhāriṇaḥ — wearing long hair, ashes and bones; viśantu — may enter; śiva-dīkṣāyām — into initiation of worship of Śiva; yatra — where; daivam — are spiritual; sura-āsavam — wine and liquor.

Translation
Those who vow to worship Lord Śiva are so foolish that they imitate him by keeping long hair on their heads. When initiated into worship of Lord Śiva, they prefer to live on wine, flesh and other such things.

Text 30
ब्रह्म च ब्राह्मणांश्चैव यद्यूयं परिनिन्दथ ।
सेतुं विधारणं पुंसामत: पाषण्डमाश्रिता: ॥ ३० ॥
brahma ca brāhmaṇāṁś caiva
yad yūyaṁ parinindatha
setuṁ vidhāraṇaṁ puṁsām
ataḥ pāṣaṇḍam āśritāḥ
Synonyms
brahma — the Vedas; ca — and; brāhmaṇān — the brāhmaṇas; ca — and; eva — certainly; yat — because; yūyam — you; parinindatha — blaspheme; setum — Vedic principles; vidhāraṇam — holding; puṁsām — of mankind; ataḥ — therefore; pāṣaṇḍam — atheism; āśritāḥ — have taken shelter.

Translation
Bhṛgu Muni continued: Since you blaspheme the Vedas and the brāhmaṇas, who are followers of the Vedic principles, it is understood that you have already taken shelter of the doctrine of atheism.

Text 31
एष एव हि लोकानां शिव: पन्था: सनातन: ।
यं पूर्वे चानुसन्तस्थुर्यत्प्रमाणं जनार्दन: ॥ ३१ ॥
eṣa eva hi lokānāṁ
śivaḥ panthāḥ sanātanaḥ
yaṁ pūrve cānusantasthur
yat-pramāṇaṁ janārdanaḥ
Synonyms
eṣaḥ — the Vedas; eva — certainly; hi — for; lokānām — of all people; śivaḥ — auspicious; panthāḥ — path; sanātanaḥ — eternal; yam — which (Vedic path); pūrve — in the past; ca — and; anusantasthuḥ — was rigidly followed; yat — in which; pramāṇam — the evidence; janārdanaḥ — Janārdana.

Translation
The Vedas give the eternal regulative principles for auspicious advancement in human civilization which have been rigidly followed in the past. The strong evidence of this principle is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is called Janārdana, the well-wisher of all living entities.

Text 32
तद्ब्रह्म परमं शुद्धं सतां वर्त्म सनातनम् ।
विगर्ह्य यात पाषण्डं दैवं वो यत्र भूतराट् ॥ ३२ ॥
tad brahma paramaṁ śuddhaṁ
satāṁ vartma sanātanam
vigarhya yāta pāṣaṇḍaṁ
daivaṁ vo yatra bhūta-rāṭ
Synonyms
tat — that; brahma — Veda; paramam — supreme; śuddham — pure; satām — of the saintly persons; vartma — path; sanātanam — eternal; vigarhya — blaspheming; yāta — should go; pāṣaṇḍam — to atheism; daivam — deity; vaḥ — your; yatra — where; bhūta-rāṭ — the lord of the bhūtas.

Translation
By blaspheming the principles of the Vedas, which are the pure and supreme path of the saintly persons, certainly you followers of Bhūtapati, Lord Śiva, will descend to the standard of atheism without a doubt.

Text 33
मैत्रेय उवाच
तस्यैवं वदत: शापं भृगो: स भगवान् भव: ।
निश्चक्राम तत: किञ्चिद्विमना इव सानुग: ॥ ३३ ॥
maitreya uvāca
tasyaivaṁ vadataḥ śāpaṁ
bhṛgoḥ sa bhagavān bhavaḥ
niścakrāma tataḥ kiñcid
vimanā iva sānugaḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; tasya — of him; evam — thus; vadataḥ — being spoken; śāpam — curse; bhṛgoḥ — of Bhṛgu; saḥ — he; bhagavān — the possessor of all opulences; bhavaḥ — Lord Śiva; niścakrāma — went; tataḥ — from there; kiñcit — somewhat; vimanāḥ — morose; iva — as; sa-anugaḥ — followed by his disciples.

Translation
The sage Maitreya said: When such cursing and countercursing was going on between Lord Śiva’s followers and the parties of Dakṣa and Bhṛgu, Lord Śiva became very morose. Not saying anything, he left the arena of the sacrifice, followed by his disciples.

Text 34
तेऽपि विश्वसृज: सत्रं सहस्रपरिवत्सरान् ।
संविधाय महेष्वास यत्रेज्य ऋषभो हरि: ॥ ३४ ॥
te ’pi viśva-sṛjaḥ satraṁ
sahasra-parivatsarān
saṁvidhāya maheṣvāsa
yatrejya ṛṣabho hariḥ
Synonyms
te — those; api — even; viśva-sṛjaḥ — progenitors of the universal population; satram — the sacrifice; sahasra — one thousand; parivatsarān — years; saṁvidhāya — performing; maheṣvāsa — O Vidura; yatra — in which; ijyaḥ — to be worshiped; ṛṣabhaḥ — the presiding Deity of all demigods; hariḥ — Hari.

Translation
The sage Maitreya continued: O Vidura, all the progenitors of the universal population thus executed a sacrifice for thousands of years, for sacrifice is the best way to worship the Supreme Lord, Hari, the Personality of Godhead.

Text 35
आप्लुत्यावभृथं यत्र गङ्गा यमुनयान्विता ।
विरजेनात्मना सर्वे स्वं स्वं धाम ययुस्तत: ॥ ३५ ॥
āplutyāvabhṛthaṁ yatra
gaṅgā yamunayānvitā
virajenātmanā sarve
svaṁ svaṁ dhāma yayus tataḥ
Synonyms
āplutya — taking a bath; avabhṛtham — the bath which is taken after performing sacrifices; yatra — where; gaṅgā — the river Ganges; yamunayā — by the river Yamunā; anvitā — mixed; virajena — without infection; ātmanā — by the mind; sarve — all; svam svam — their respective; dhāma — abodes; yayuḥ — went; tataḥ — from there.

Translation
My dear Vidura, carrier of bows and arrows, all the demigods who were performing the sacrifice took their bath at the confluence of the Ganges and the Yamunā after completing the yajña performance. Such a bath is called avabhṛtha-snāna. After thus becoming purified in heart, they departed for their respective abodes.