Text 1
maitreya uvāca
bhagavān api vaikuṇṭhaḥ
sākaṁ maghavatā vibhuḥ
yajñair yajña-patis tuṣṭo
yajña-bhuk tam abhāṣata
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya continued to speak; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu; api — also; vaikuṇṭhaḥ — the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha; sākam — along with; maghavatā — King Indra; vibhuḥ — the Lord; yajñaiḥ — by the sacrifices; yajña-patiḥ — the Lord of all yajñas; tuṣṭaḥ — satisfied; yajña-bhuk — the enjoyer of the yajña; tam — unto King Pṛthu; abhāṣata — said.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, being very much satisfied by the performance of ninety-nine horse sacrifices, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, appeared on the scene. Accompanying Him was King Indra. Lord Viṣṇu then began to speak.

Text 2
श्रीभगवानुवाच
एष तेऽकार्षीद्भङ्गं हयमेधशतस्य ह ।
क्षमापयत आत्मानममुष्य क्षन्तुमर्हसि ॥ २ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
eṣa te ’kārṣīd bhaṅgaṁ
haya-medha-śatasya ha
kṣamāpayata ātmānam
amuṣya kṣantum arhasi
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, spoke; eṣaḥ — this Lord Indra; te — your; akārṣīt — performed; bhaṅgam — disturbance; haya — horse; medha — sacrifice; śatasya — of the one-hundredth; ha — indeed; kṣamāpayataḥ — who is asking pardon; ātmānam — unto yourself; amuṣya — him; kṣantum — to forgive; arhasi — you ought.

Translation
Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, said: My dear King Pṛthu, Indra, the King of heaven, has disturbed your execution of one hundred sacrifices. Now he has come with Me to be forgiven by you. Therefore excuse him.

Text 3
सुधिय: साधवो लोके नरदेव नरोत्तमा: ।
नाभिद्रुह्यन्ति भूतेभ्यो यर्हि नात्मा कलेवरम् ॥ ३ ॥
sudhiyaḥ sādhavo loke
naradeva narottamāḥ
nābhidruhyanti bhūtebhyo
yarhi nātmā kalevaram
Synonyms
su-dhiyaḥ — the most intelligent persons; sādhavaḥ — who are inclined to perform welfare activities; loke — in this world; nara-deva — O King; nara-uttamāḥ — the best of human beings; na abhidruhyanti — never become malicious; bhūtebhyaḥ — toward other living beings; yarhi — because; na — never; ātmā — the self or soul; kalevaram — this body.

Translation
O King, one who is advanced in intelligence and eager to perform welfare activities for others is considered best amongst human beings. An advanced human being is never malicious to others. Those with advanced intelligence are always conscious that this material body is different from the soul.

Text 4
पुरुषा यदि मुह्यन्ति त्वाद‍ृशा देवमायया ।
श्रम एव परं जातो दीर्घया वृद्धसेवया ॥ ४ ॥
puruṣā yadi muhyanti
tvādṛśā deva-māyayā
śrama eva paraṁ jāto
dīrghayā vṛddha-sevayā
Synonyms
puruṣāḥ — persons; yadi — if; muhyanti — become bewildered; tvādṛśāḥ — like you; deva — of the Supreme Lord; māyayā — by the energy; śramaḥ — exertion; eva — certainly; param — only; jātaḥ — produced; dīrghayā — for a long time; vṛddha-sevayā — by serving the superiors.

Translation
If a personality like you, who are so much advanced because of executing the instructions of the previous ācāryas, is carried away by the influence of My material energy, then all your advancement may be considered simply a waste of time.

Text 5
अत: कायमिमं विद्वानविद्याकामकर्मभि: ।
आरब्ध इति नैवास्मिन्प्रतिबुद्धोऽनुषज्जते ॥ ५ ॥
ataḥ kāyam imaṁ vidvān
avidyā-kāma-karmabhiḥ
ārabdha iti naivāsmin
pratibuddho ’nuṣajjate
Synonyms
ataḥ — therefore; kāyam — body; imam — this; vidvān — he who has knowledge; avidyā — by nescience; kāma — desires; karmabhiḥ — and by activities; ārabdhaḥ — created; iti — thus; na — never; eva — certainly; asmin — to this body; pratibuddhaḥ — one who knows; anuṣajjate — becomes addicted.

Translation
Those who are in full knowledge of the bodily conception of life, who know that this body is composed of nescience, desires and activities resulting from illusion, do not become addicted to the body.

Text 6
असंसक्त: शरीरेऽस्मिन्नमुनोत्पादिते गृहे ।
अपत्ये द्रविणे वापि क: कुर्यान्ममतां बुध: ॥ ६ ॥
asaṁsaktaḥ śarīre ’sminn
amunotpādite gṛhe
apatye draviṇe vāpi
kaḥ kuryān mamatāṁ budhaḥ
Synonyms
asaṁsaktaḥ — being unattached; śarīre — to the body; asmin — this; amunā — by such a bodily conception; utpādite — produced; gṛhe — house; apatye — children; draviṇe — wealth; vā — or; api — also; kaḥ — who; kuryāt — would do; mamatām — affinity; budhaḥ — learned person.

Translation
How can a highly learned person who has absolutely no affinity for the bodily conception of life be affected by the bodily conception in regard to house, children, wealth and similar other bodily productions?

Text 7
एक: शुद्ध: स्वयंज्योतिर्निर्गुणोऽसौ गुणाश्रय: ।
सर्वगोऽनावृत: साक्षी निरात्मात्मात्मन: पर: ॥ ७ ॥
ekaḥ śuddhaḥ svayaṁ-jyotir
nirguṇo ’sau guṇāśrayaḥ
sarva-go ’nāvṛtaḥ sākṣī
nirātmātmātmanaḥ paraḥ
Synonyms
ekaḥ — one; śuddhaḥ — pure; svayam — self; jyotiḥ — effulgent; nirguṇaḥ — without material qualifications; asau — that; guṇa-āśrayaḥ — the reservoir of good qualities; sarva-gaḥ — able to go everywhere; anāvṛtaḥ — without being covered by matter; sākṣī — witness; nirātmā — without another self; ātma-ātmanaḥ — to the body and mind; paraḥ — transcendental.

Translation
The individual soul is one, pure, nonmaterial and self-effulgent. He is the reservoir of all good qualities, and He is all-pervading. He is without material covering, and He is the witness of all activities. He is completely distinguished from other living entities, and He is transcendental to all embodied souls.

Text 8
य एवं सन्तमात्मानमात्मस्थं वेद पूरुष: ।
नाज्यते प्रकृतिस्थोऽपि तद्गुणै: स मयि स्थित: ॥ ८ ॥
ya evaṁ santam ātmānam
ātma-sthaṁ veda pūruṣaḥ
nājyate prakṛti-stho ’pi
tad-guṇaiḥ sa mayi sthitaḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — anyone who; evam — thus; santam — existing; ātmānam — the individual ātmā and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Paramātmā; ātma-stham — situated within his body; veda — knows; pūruṣaḥ — person; na — never; ajyate — is affected; prakṛti — in material nature; sthaḥ — situated; api — although; tat-guṇaiḥ — by the material modes of nature; saḥ — such a person; mayi — in Me; sthitaḥ — situated.

Translation
Although within the material nature, one who is thus situated in full knowledge of the Paramātmā and ātmā is never affected by the modes of material nature, for he is always situated in My transcendental loving service.

Text 9
य: स्वधर्मेण मां नित्यं निराशी: श्रद्धयान्वित: ।
भजते शनकैस्तस्य मनो राजन् प्रसीदति ॥ ९ ॥
yaḥ sva-dharmeṇa māṁ nityaṁ
nirāśīḥ śraddhayānvitaḥ
bhajate śanakais tasya
mano rājan prasīdati
Synonyms
yaḥ — anyone who; sva-dharmeṇa — by his occupational duties; mām — Me; nityam — regularly; nirāśīḥ — without any motive; śraddhayā — with faith and devotion; anvitaḥ — endowed; bhajate — worships; śanakaiḥ — gradually; tasya — his; manaḥ — mind; rājan — O King Pṛthu; prasīdati — becomes fully satisfied.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, continued: My dear King Pṛthu, when one situated in his occupational duty engages in My loving service without motive for material gain, he gradually becomes very satisfied within.

Text 10
परित्यक्तगुण: सम्यग्दर्शनो विशदाशय: ।
शान्तिं मे समवस्थानं ब्रह्म कैवल्यमश्नुते ॥ १० ॥
parityakta-guṇaḥ samyag
darśano viśadāśayaḥ
śāntiṁ me samavasthānaṁ
brahma kaivalyam aśnute
Synonyms
parityakta-guṇaḥ — one who is disassociated from the material modes of nature; samyak — equal; darśanaḥ — whose vision; viśada — uncontaminated; āśayaḥ — whose mind or heart; śāntim — peace; me — My; samavasthānam — equal situation; brahma — spirit; kaivalyam — freedom from material contamination; aśnute — achieves.

Translation
When the heart is cleansed of all material contamination, the devotee’s mind becomes broader and transparent and he can see things equally. At that stage of life there is peace, and one is situated equally with Me as sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha.

Text 11
उदासीनमिवाध्यक्षं द्रव्यज्ञानक्रियात्मनाम् ।
कूटस्थमिममात्मानं यो वेदाप्नोति शोभनम् ॥ ११ ॥
udāsīnam ivādhyakṣaṁ
dravya-jñāna-kriyātmanām
kūṭa-stham imam ātmānaṁ
yo vedāpnoti śobhanam
Synonyms
udāsīnam — indifferent; iva — simply; adhyakṣam — the superintendent; dravya — of the physical elements; jñāna — knowledge-acquiring senses; kriyā — working senses; ātmanām — and of the mind; kūṭa-stham — fixed; imam — this; ātmānam — soul; yaḥ — anyone who; veda — knows; āpnoti — gets; śobhanam — all good fortune.

Translation
Anyone who knows that this material body, made of the five gross elements, the sense organs, the working senses and the mind, is simply supervised by the fixed soul is eligible to be liberated from material bondage.

Text 12
भिन्नस्य लिङ्गस्य गुणप्रवाहो
द्रव्यक्रियाकारकचेतनात्मन: ।
द‍ृष्टासु सम्पत्सु विपत्सु सूरयो
न विक्रियन्ते मयि बद्धसौहृदा: ॥ १२ ॥
bhinnasya liṅgasya guṇa-pravāho
dravya-kriyā-kāraka-cetanātmanaḥ
dṛṣṭāsu sampatsu vipatsu sūrayo
na vikriyante mayi baddha-sauhṛdāḥ
Synonyms
bhinnasya — different; liṅgasya — of the body; guṇa — of the three modes of material nature; pravāhaḥ — the constant change; dravya — physical elements; kriyā — activities of the senses; kāraka — demigods; cetanā — and the mind; ātmanaḥ — consisting of; dṛṣṭāsu — when experienced; sampatsu — happiness; vipatsu — distress; sūrayaḥ — those who are advanced in knowledge; na — never; vikriyante — become disturbed; mayi — unto Me; baddha-sauhṛdāḥ — bound in friendship.

Translation
Lord Viṣṇu told King Pṛthu: My dear King, the constant change of this material world is due to the interaction of the three modes of material nature. The five elements, the senses, the demigods who control the senses, as well as the mind, which is agitated by the spirit soul — all these taken together comprise the body. Since the spirit soul is completely different from this combination of gross and subtle material elements, My devotee who is connected with Me in intense friendship and affection, being completely in knowledge, is never agitated by material happiness and distress.

Text 13
सम: समानोत्तममध्यमाधम:
सुखे च दु:खे च जितेन्द्रियाशय: ।
मयोपक्लृप्ताखिललोकसंयुतो
विधत्स्व वीराखिललोकरक्षणम् ॥ १३ ॥
samaḥ samānottama-madhyamādhamaḥ
sukhe ca duḥkhe ca jitendriyāśayaḥ
mayopakḷptākhila-loka-saṁyuto
vidhatsva vīrākhila-loka-rakṣaṇam
Synonyms
samaḥ — equipoised; samāna — all equal; uttama — one who is greater; madhyama — one who is in an intermediate position; adhamaḥ — one who is in a lower standard of life; sukhe — in happiness; ca — and; duḥkhe — in distress; ca — also; jita-indriya — having controlled the senses; āśayaḥ — and mind; mayā — by Me; upakḷpta — arranged; akhila — all; loka — by people; saṁyutaḥ — being accompanied; vidhatsva — give; vīra — O hero; akhila — all; loka — to the citizens; rakṣaṇam — protection.

Translation
My dear heroic King, please keep yourself always equipoised and treat people equally, whether they are greater than you, in the intermediate stage or lower than you. Do not be disturbed by temporary distress or happiness. Fully control your mind and senses. In this transcendental position, try to execute your duty as king in whatever condition of life you may be posted by My arrangement, for your only duty here is to give protection to the citizens of your kingdom.

Text 14
श्रेय: प्रजापालनमेव राज्ञो
यत्साम्पराये सुकृतात् षष्ठमंशम् ।
हर्तान्यथा हृतपुण्य: प्रजाना-
मरक्षिता करहारोऽघमत्ति ॥ १४ ॥
śreyaḥ prajā-pālanam eva rājño
yat sāmparāye sukṛtāt ṣaṣṭham aṁśam
hartānyathā hṛta-puṇyaḥ prajānām
arakṣitā kara-hāro ’gham atti
Synonyms
śreyaḥ — auspicious; prajā-pālanam — ruling over the general mass of people; eva — certainly; rājñaḥ — for the king; yat — because; sāmparāye — in the next birth; su-kṛtāt — from the pious activities; ṣaṣṭham aṁśam — one-sixth part; hartā — collector; anyathā — otherwise; hṛta-puṇyaḥ — being bereft of the results of pious activities; prajānām — of the citizens; arakṣitā — one who does not protect; kara-hāraḥ — tax collector; agham — sin; atti — receives or suffers.

Translation
To give protection to the general mass of people who are citizens of the state is the prescribed occupational duty for a king. By acting in that way, the king in his next life shares one sixth of the result of the pious activities of the citizens. But a king or executive head of state who simply collects taxes from the citizens but does not give them proper protection as human beings has the results of his own pious activities taken away by the citizens, and in exchange for his not giving protection he becomes liable to punishment for the impious activities of his subjects.

Text 15
एवं द्विजाग्र्यानुमतानुवृत्त
धर्मप्रधानोऽन्यतमोऽवितास्या: ।
ह्रस्वेन कालेन गृहोपयातान्
द्रष्टासि सिद्धाननुरक्तलोक: ॥ १५ ॥
evaṁ dvijāgryānumatānuvṛtta-
dharma-pradhāno ’nyatamo ’vitāsyāḥ
hrasvena kālena gṛhopayātān
draṣṭāsi siddhān anurakta-lokaḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; dvija — of the brāhmaṇas; agrya — by the foremost; anumata — approved; anuvṛtta — received by disciplic succession; dharma — religious principles; pradhānaḥ — he whose chief interest is; anyatamaḥ — unattached; avitā — the protector; asyāḥ — of the earth; hrasvena — short; kālena — in time; gṛha — to your home; upayātān — having come personally; draṣṭāsi — you will see; siddhān — perfected personalities; anurakta-lokaḥ — being loved by the citizens.

Translation
Lord Viṣṇu continued: My dear King Pṛthu, if you continue to protect the citizens according to the instructions of the learned brāhmaṇa authorities, as they are received by the disciplic succession — by hearing — from master to disciple, and if you follow the religious principles laid down by them, without attachment to ideas manufactured by mental concoction, then every one of your citizens will be happy and will love you, and very soon you will be able to see such already liberated personalities as the four Kumāras [Sanaka, Sanātana, Sanandana and Sanat-kumāra].

Text 16
वरं च मत्कञ्चन मानवेन्द्र
वृणीष्व तेऽहं गुणशीलयन्त्रित: ।
नाहं मखैर्वै सुलभस्तपोभि-
र्योगेन वा यत्समचित्तवर्ती ॥ १६ ॥
varaṁ ca mat kañcana mānavendra
vṛṇīṣva te ’haṁ guṇa-śīla-yantritaḥ
nāhaṁ makhair vai sulabhas tapobhir
yogena vā yat sama-citta-vartī
Synonyms
varam — benediction; ca — also; mat — from Me; kañcana — whatever you like; mānava-indra — O chief of human beings; vṛṇīṣva — please request; te — your; aham — I; guṇa-śīla — by elevated qualities and excellent behavior; yantritaḥ — being captivated; na — not; aham — I; makhaiḥ — by sacrifices; vai — certainly; su-labhaḥ — easily obtained; tapobhiḥ — by austerities; yogena — by practice of mystic yoga; vā — or; yat — because of which; sama-citta — in one who is equipoised; vartī — being situated.

Translation
My dear King, I am very captivated by your elevated qualities and excellent behavior, and thus I am very favorably inclined toward you. You may therefore ask from Me any benediction you like. One who does not possess elevated qualities and behavior cannot possibly achieve My favor simply by performance of sacrifices, severe austerities or mystic yoga. But I always remain equipoised in the heart of one who is also equipoised in all circumstances.

Text 17
मैत्रेय उवाच
स इत्थं लोकगुरुणा विष्वक्सेनेन विश्वजित् ।
अनुशासित आदेशं शिरसा जगृहे हरे: ॥ १७ ॥
maitreya uvāca
sa itthaṁ loka-guruṇā
viṣvaksenena viśva-jit
anuśāsita ādeśaṁ
śirasā jagṛhe hareḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; saḥ — he; ittham — thus; loka-guruṇā — by the supreme master of all people; viṣvaksenena — by the Personality of Godhead; viśva-jit — the conqueror of the world (Mahārāja Pṛthu); anuśāsitaḥ — being ordered; ādeśam — instructions; śirasā — on the head; jagṛhe — accepted; hareḥ — of the Personality of Godhead.

Translation
The great saint Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, in this way Mahārāja Pṛthu, the conqueror of the entire world, accepted the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead on his head.

Text 18
स्पृशन्तं पादयो: प्रेम्णा व्रीडितं स्वेन कर्मणा ।
शतक्रतुं परिष्वज्य विद्वेषं विससर्ज ह ॥ १८ ॥
spṛśantaṁ pādayoḥ premṇā
vrīḍitaṁ svena karmaṇā
śata-kratuṁ pariṣvajya
vidveṣaṁ visasarja ha
Synonyms
spṛśantam — touching; pādayoḥ — the feet; premṇā — in ecstasy; vrīḍitam — ashamed; svena — his own; karmaṇā — by activities; śata-kratum — King Indra; pariṣvajya — embracing; vidveṣam — envy; visasarja — gave up; ha — of course.

Translation
As King Indra was standing by, he became ashamed of his own activities and fell down before King Pṛthu to touch his lotus feet. But Pṛthu Mahārāja immediately embraced him in great ecstasy and gave up all envy against him for his having stolen the horse meant for the sacrifice.

Text 19
भगवानथ विश्वात्मा पृथुनोपहृतार्हण: ।
समुज्जिहानया भक्त्या गृहीतचरणाम्बुज: ॥ १९ ॥
bhagavān atha viśvātmā
pṛthunopahṛtārhaṇaḥ
samujjihānayā bhaktyā
gṛhīta-caraṇāmbujaḥ
Synonyms
bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; atha — thereupon; viśva-ātmā — the Supersoul; pṛthunā — by King Pṛthu; upahṛta — being offered; arhaṇaḥ — all the paraphernalia for worship; samujjihānayā — gradually increased; bhaktyā — whose devotional service; gṛhīta — taken; caraṇa-ambujaḥ — His lotus feet.

Translation
King Pṛthu abundantly worshiped the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who was so merciful to him. While worshiping the lotus feet of the Lord, Pṛthu Mahārāja gradually increased his ecstasy in devotional service.

Text 20
प्रस्थानाभिमुखोऽप्येनमनुग्रहविलम्बित: ।
पश्यन् पद्मपलाशाक्षो न प्रतस्थे सुहृत्सताम् ॥ २० ॥
prasthānābhimukho ’py enam
anugraha-vilambitaḥ
paśyan padma-palāśākṣo
na pratasthe suhṛt satām
Synonyms
prasthāna — to leave; abhimukhaḥ — ready; api — although; enam — him (Pṛthu); anugraha — by kindness; vilambitaḥ — detained; paśyan — seeing; padma-palāśa-akṣaḥ — the Lord, whose eyes are like the petals of a lotus flower; na — not; pratasthe — departed; suhṛt — the well-wisher; satām — of the devotees.

Translation
The Lord was just about to leave, but because He was so greatly inclined toward the behavior of King Pṛthu, He did not depart. Seeing the behavior of Mahārāja Pṛthu with His lotus eyes, He was detained because He is always the well-wisher of His devotees.

Text 21
स आदिराजो रचिताञ्जलिर्हरिं
विलोकितुं नाशकदश्रुलोचन: ।
न किञ्चनोवाच स बाष्पविक्लवो
हृदोपगुह्यामुमधादवस्थित: ॥ २१ ॥
sa ādi-rājo racitāñjalir hariṁ
vilokituṁ nāśakad aśru-locanaḥ
na kiñcanovāca sa bāṣpa-viklavo
hṛdopaguhyāmum adhād avasthitaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he; ādi-rājaḥ — the original king; racita-añjaliḥ — with folded hands; harim — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vilokitum — to look upon; na — not; aśakat — was able; aśru-locanaḥ — his eyes full of tears; na — not; kiñcana — anything; uvāca — spoke; saḥ — he; bāṣpa-viklavaḥ — his voice being choked up; hṛdā — with his heart; upaguhya — embracing; amum — the Lord; adhāt — he remained; avasthitaḥ — standing.

Translation
The original king, Mahārāja Pṛthu, his eyes full of tears and his voice faltering and choked up, could neither see the Lord very distinctly nor speak to address the Lord in any way. He simply embraced the Lord within his heart and remained standing in that way with folded hands.

Text 22
अथावमृज्याश्रुकला विलोकयन्-
नतृप्तद‍ृग्गोचरमाह पूरुषम् ।
पदा स्पृशन्तं क्षितिमंस उन्नते
विन्यस्तहस्ताग्रमुरङ्गविद्विष: ॥ २२ ॥
athāvamṛjyāśru-kalā vilokayann
atṛpta-dṛg-gocaram āha pūruṣam
padā spṛśantaṁ kṣitim aṁsa unnate
vinyasta-hastāgram uraṅga-vidviṣaḥ
Synonyms
atha — thereupon; avamṛjya — wiping; aśru-kalāḥ — the tears in his eyes; vilokayan — observing; atṛpta — not satisfied; dṛk-gocaram — visible to his naked eyes; āha — he said; pūruṣam — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; padā — with His lotus feet; spṛśantam — just touching; kṣitim — the ground; aṁse — on the shoulder; unnate — raised; vinyasta — rested; hasta — of His hand; agram — the front part; uraṅga-vidviṣaḥ — of Garuḍa, the enemy of the snakes.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead stood with His lotus feet almost touching the ground while He rested the front of His hand on the raised shoulder of Garuḍa, the enemy of the snakes. Mahārāja Pṛthu, wiping the tears from his eyes, tried to look upon the Lord, but it appeared that the King was not fully satisfied by looking at Him. Thus the King offered the following prayers.

Text 23
पृथुरुवाच
वरान्विभो त्वद्वरदेश्वराद् बुध:
कथं वृणीते गुणविक्रियात्मनाम् ।
ये नारकाणामपि सन्ति देहिनां
तानीश कैवल्यपते वृणे न च ॥ २३ ॥
pṛthur uvāca
varān vibho tvad varadeśvarād budhaḥ
kathaṁ vṛṇīte guṇa-vikriyātmanām
ye nārakāṇām api santi dehināṁ
tān īśa kaivalya-pate vṛṇe na ca
Synonyms
pṛthuḥ uvāca — Pṛthu Mahārāja said; varān — benedictions; vibho — my dear Supreme Lord; tvat — from You; vara-da-īśvarāt — from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the highest of the bestowers of benedictions; budhaḥ — a learned person; katham — how; vṛṇīte — could ask for; guṇa-vikriyā — bewildered by the modes of material nature; ātmanām — of the living entities; ye — which; nārakāṇām — of the living entities living in hell; api — also; santi — exist; dehinām — of the embodied; tān — all those; īśa — O Supreme Lord; kaivalya-pate — O bestower of merging in the existence of the Lord; vṛṇe — I ask for; na — not; ca — also.

Translation
My dear Lord, You are the best of the demigods who can offer benedictions. Why, therefore, should any learned person ask You for benedictions meant for living entities bewildered by the modes of nature? Such benedictions are available automatically, even in the lives of living entities suffering in hellish conditions. My dear Lord, You can certainly bestow merging into Your existence, but I do not wish to have such a benediction.

Text 24
न कामये नाथ तदप्यहं क्‍वचिन्
न यत्र युष्मच्चरणाम्बुजासव: ।
महत्तमान्तर्हृदयान्मुखच्युतो
विधत्स्व कर्णायुतमेष मे वर: ॥ २४ ॥
na kāmaye nātha tad apy ahaṁ kvacin
na yatra yuṣmac-caraṇāmbujāsavaḥ
mahattamāntar-hṛdayān mukha-cyuto
vidhatsva karṇāyutam eṣa me varaḥ
Synonyms
na — not; kāmaye — do I desire; nātha — O master; tat — that; api — even; aham — I; kvacit — at any time; na — not; yatra — where; yuṣmat — Your; caraṇa-ambuja — of the lotus feet; āsavaḥ — the nectarean beverage; mahat-tama — of the great devotees; antaḥ-hṛdayāt — from the core of the heart; mukha — from the mouths; cyutaḥ — being delivered; vidhatsva — give; karṇa — ears; ayutam — one million; eṣaḥ — this; me — my; varaḥ — benediction.

Translation
My dear Lord, I therefore do not wish to have the benediction of merging into Your existence, a benediction in which there is no existence of the nectarean beverage of Your lotus feet. I want the benediction of at least one million ears, for thus I may be able to hear about the glories of Your lotus feet from the mouths of Your pure devotees.

Text 25
स उत्तमश्लोक महन्मुखच्युतो
भवत्पदाम्भोजसुधा कणानिल: ।
स्मृतिं पुनर्विस्मृततत्त्ववर्त्मनां
कुयोगिनां नो वितरत्यलं वरै: ॥ २५ ॥
sa uttamaśloka mahan-mukha-cyuto
bhavat-padāmbhoja-sudhā kaṇānilaḥ
smṛtiṁ punar vismṛta-tattva-vartmanāṁ
kuyogināṁ no vitaraty alaṁ varaiḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — that; uttama-śloka — O Lord, who are praised by selected verses; mahat — of great devotees; mukha-cyutaḥ — delivered from the mouths; bhavat — Your; pada-ambhoja — from the lotus feet; sudhā — of nectar; kaṇa — particles; anilaḥ — soothing breeze; smṛtim — remembrance; punaḥ — again; vismṛta — forgotten; tattva — to the truth; vartmanām — of persons whose path; ku-yoginām — of persons not in the line of devotional service; naḥ — of us; vitarati — restores; alam — unnecessary; varaiḥ — other benedictions.

Translation
My dear Lord, You are glorified by the selected verses uttered by great personalities. Such glorification of Your lotus feet is just like saffron particles. When the transcendental vibration from the mouths of great devotees carries the aroma of the saffron dust of Your lotus feet, the forgetful living entity gradually remembers his eternal relationship with You. Devotees thus gradually come to the right conclusion about the value of life. My dear Lord, I therefore do not need any other benediction but the opportunity to hear from the mouth of Your pure devotee.

Text 26
यश: शिवं सुश्रव आर्यसङ्गमे
यद‍ृच्छया चोपश‍ृणोति ते सकृत् ।
कथं गुणज्ञो विरमेद्विना पशुं
श्रीर्यत्प्रवव्रे गुणसङ्ग्रहेच्छया ॥ २६ ॥
yaśaḥ śivaṁ suśrava ārya-saṅgame
yadṛcchayā copaśṛṇoti te sakṛt
kathaṁ guṇa-jño viramed vinā paśuṁ
śrīr yat pravavre guṇa-saṅgrahecchayā
Synonyms
yaśaḥ — glorification; śivam — all-auspicious; su-śravaḥ — O highly glorified Lord; ārya-saṅgame — in the association of advanced devotees; yadṛcchayā — somehow or other; ca — also; upaśṛṇoti — hears; te — Your; sakṛt — even once; katham — how; guṇa-jñaḥ — one who appreciates good qualities; viramet — can cease; vinā — unless; paśum — an animal; śrīḥ — the goddess of fortune; yat — which; pravavre — accepted; guṇa — Your qualities; saṅgraha — to receive; icchayā — with a desire.

Translation
My dear highly glorified Lord, if one, in the association of pure devotees, hears even once the glories of Your activities, he does not, unless he is nothing but an animal, give up the association of devotees, for no intelligent person would be so careless as to leave their association. The perfection of chanting and hearing about Your glories was accepted even by the goddess of fortune, who desired to hear of Your unlimited activities and transcendental glories.

Text 27
अथाभजे त्वाखिलपूरुषोत्तमं
गुणालयं पद्मकरेव लालस: ।
अप्यावयोरेकपतिस्पृधो: कलि-
र्न स्यात्कृतत्वच्चरणैकतानयो: ॥ २७ ॥
athābhaje tvākhila-pūruṣottamaṁ
guṇālayaṁ padma-kareva lālasaḥ
apy āvayor eka-pati-spṛdhoḥ kalir
na syāt kṛta-tvac-caraṇaika-tānayoḥ
Synonyms
atha — therefore; ābhaje — I shall engage in devotional service; tvā — unto You; akhila — all-inclusive; pūruṣa-uttamam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; guṇa-ālayam — the reservoir of all transcendental qualities; padma-karā — the goddess of fortune, who carries a lotus flower in her hand; iva — like; lālasaḥ — being desirous; api — indeed; āvayoḥ — of Lakṣmī and me; eka-pati — one master; spṛdhoḥ — competing; kaliḥ — quarrel; na — not; syāt — may take place; kṛta — having done; tvat-caraṇa — unto Your lotus feet; eka-tānayoḥ — one attention.

Translation
Now I wish to engage in the service of the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and to serve just like the goddess of fortune, who carries a lotus flower in her hand, because His Lordship, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the reservoir of all transcendental qualities. I am afraid that the goddess of fortune and I would quarrel because both of us would be attentively engaged in the same service.

Text 28
जगज्जनन्यां जगदीश वैशसं
स्यादेव यत्कर्मणि न: समीहितम् ।
करोषि फल्ग्वप्युरु दीनवत्सल:
स्व एव धिष्ण्येऽभिरतस्य किं तया ॥ २८ ॥
jagaj-jananyāṁ jagad-īśa vaiśasaṁ
syād eva yat-karmaṇi naḥ samīhitam
karoṣi phalgv apy uru dīna-vatsalaḥ
sva eva dhiṣṇye ’bhiratasya kiṁ tayā
Synonyms
jagat-jananyām — in the mother of the universe (Lakṣmī); jagat-īśa — O Lord of the universe; vaiśasam — anger; syāt — may arise; eva — certainly; yat-karmaṇi — in whose activity; naḥ — my; samīhitam — desire; karoṣi — You consider; phalgu — insignificant service; api — even; uru — very great; dīna-vatsalaḥ — favorably inclined to the poor; sve — own; eva — certainly; dhiṣṇye — in Your opulence; abhiratasya — of one who is fully satisfied; kim — what need is there; tayā — with her.

Translation
My dear Lord of the universe, the goddess of fortune, Lakṣmī, is the mother of the universe, and yet I think that she may be angry with me because of my intruding upon her service and acting on that very platform to which she is so much attached. Yet I am hopeful that even though there is some misunderstanding, You will take my part, for You are very much inclined to the poor, and You always magnify even insignificant service unto You. Therefore even though she becomes angry, I think that there is no harm for You, because You are so self-sufficient that You can do without her.

Text 29
भजन्त्यथ त्वामत एव साधवो
व्युदस्तमायागुणविभ्रमोदयम् ।
भवत्पदानुस्मरणाद‍ृते सतां
निमित्तमन्यद्भगवन्न विद्महे ॥ २९ ॥
bhajanty atha tvām ata eva sādhavo
vyudasta-māyā-guṇa-vibhramodayam
bhavat-padānusmaraṇād ṛte satāṁ
nimittam anyad bhagavan na vidmahe
Synonyms
bhajanti — they worship; atha — therefore; tvām — You; ataḥ eva — therefore; sādhavaḥ — all saintly persons; vyudasta — who dispel; māyā-guṇa — the modes of material nature; vibhrama — misconceptions; udayam — produced; bhavat — Your; pada — lotus feet; anusmaraṇāt — constantly remembering; ṛte — except; satām — of great saintly persons; nimittam — reason; anyat — other; bhagavan — O Supreme Personality of Godhead; na — not; vidmahe — I can understand.

Translation
Great saintly persons who are always liberated take to Your devotional service because only by devotional service can one be relieved from the illusions of material existence. O my Lord, there is no reason for the liberated souls to take shelter at Your lotus feet except that such souls are constantly thinking of Your feet.

Text 30
मन्ये गिरं ते जगतां विमोहिनीं
वरं वृणीष्वेति भजन्तमात्थ यत् ।
वाचा नु तन्त्या यदि ते जनोऽसित:
कथं पुन: कर्म करोति मोहित: ॥ ३० ॥
manye giraṁ te jagatāṁ vimohinīṁ
varaṁ vṛṇīṣveti bhajantam āttha yat
vācā nu tantyā yadi te jano ’sitaḥ
kathaṁ punaḥ karma karoti mohitaḥ
Synonyms
manye — I consider; giram — words; te — Your; jagatām — to the material world; vimohinīm — bewildering; varam — benediction; vṛṇīṣva — just accept; iti — in this way; bhajantam — unto Your devotee; āttha — You spoke; yat — because; vācā — by the statements of the Vedas; nu — certainly; tantyā — by the ropes; yadi — if; te — Your; janaḥ — the people in general; asitaḥ — not bound; katham — how; punaḥ — again and again; karma — fruitive activities; karoti — perform; mohitaḥ — being enamored.

Translation
My dear Lord, what You have said to Your unalloyed devotee is certainly very much bewildering. The allurements You offer in the Vedas are certainly not suitable for pure devotees. People in general, bound by the sweet words of the Vedas, engage themselves again and again in fruitive activities, enamored by the results of their actions.

Text 31
त्वन्माययाद्धा जन ईश खण्डितो
यदन्यदाशास्त ऋतात्मनोऽबुध: ।
यथा चरेद् बालहितं पिता स्वयं
तथा त्वमेवार्हसि न: समीहितुम् ॥ ३१ ॥
tvan-māyayāddhā jana īśa khaṇḍito
yad anyad āśāsta ṛtātmano ’budhaḥ
yathā cared bāla-hitaṁ pitā svayaṁ
tathā tvam evārhasi naḥ samīhitum
Synonyms
tvat — Your; māyayā — by illusory energy; addhā — certainly; janaḥ — the people in general; īśa — O my Lord; khaṇḍitaḥ — separated; yat — because; anyat — other; āśāste — they desire; ṛta — real; ātmanaḥ — from the self; abudhaḥ — without proper understanding; yathā — as; caret — would engage in; bāla-hitam — the welfare of one’s child; pitā — the father; svayam — personally; tathā — similarly; tvam — Your Lordship; eva — certainly; arhasi naḥ samīhitum — please act on my behalf.

Translation
My Lord, due to Your illusory energy, all living beings in this material world have forgotten their real constitutional position, and out of ignorance they are always desirous of material happiness in the form of society, friendship and love. Therefore, please do not ask me to take some material benefits from You, but as a father, not waiting for the son’s demand, does everything for the benefit of the son, please bestow upon me whatever You think best for me.

Text 32
मैत्रेय उवाच
इत्यादिराजेन नुत: स विश्वद‍ृक्
तमाह राजन्मयि भक्तिरस्तु ते ।
दिष्ट्येद‍ृशी धीर्मयि ते कृता यया
मायां मदीयां तरति स्म दुस्त्यजाम् ॥ ३२ ॥
maitreya uvāca
ity ādi-rājena nutaḥ sa viśva-dṛk
tam āha rājan mayi bhaktir astu te
diṣṭyedṛśī dhīr mayi te kṛtā yayā
māyāṁ madīyāṁ tarati sma dustyajām
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ — Maitreya, the great sage; uvāca — spoke; iti — thus; ādi-rājena — by the original king (Pṛthu); nutaḥ — being worshiped; saḥ — He (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); viśva-dṛk — the seer of the whole universe; tam — unto him; āha — said; rājan — my dear King; mayi — unto Me; bhaktiḥ — devotional service; astu — let it be; te — your; diṣṭyā — by good fortune; īdṛśī — like this; dhīḥ — intelligence; mayi — unto Me; te — by you; kṛtā — having been performed; yayā — by which; māyām — illusory energy; madīyām — My; tarati — crosses over; sma — certainly; dustyajām — very difficult to give up.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya continued by saying that the Lord, the seer of the universe, after hearing Pṛthu Mahārāja’s prayer, addressed the King: My dear King, may you always be blessed by engaging in My devotional service. Only by such purity of purpose, as you yourself very intelligently express, can one cross over the insurmountable illusory energy of māyā.

Text 33
तत्त्वं कुरु मयादिष्टमप्रमत्त: प्रजापते ।
मदादेशकरो लोक: सर्वत्राप्नोति शोभनम् ॥ ३३ ॥
tat tvaṁ kuru mayādiṣṭam
apramattaḥ prajāpate
mad-ādeśa-karo lokaḥ
sarvatrāpnoti śobhanam
Synonyms
tat — therefore; tvam — you; kuru — do; mayā — by Me; ādiṣṭam — what is ordered; apramattaḥ — without being misguided; prajā-pate — O master of the citizens; mat — of Me; ādeśa-karaḥ — who executes the order; lokaḥ — any person; sarvatra — everywhere; āpnoti — achieves; śobhanam — all good fortune.

Translation
My dear King, O protector of the citizens, henceforward be very careful to execute My orders and not be misled by anything. Anyone who lives in that way, simply carrying out My orders faithfully, will always find good fortune all over the world.

Text 34
मैत्रेय उवाच
इति वैन्यस्य राजर्षे: प्रतिनन्द्यार्थवद्वच: ।
पूजितोऽनुगृहीत्वैनं गन्तुं चक्रेऽच्युतो मतिम् ॥ ३४ ॥
maitreya uvāca
iti vainyasya rājarṣeḥ
pratinandyārthavad vacaḥ
pūjito ’nugṛhītvainaṁ
gantuṁ cakre ’cyuto matim
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya continued to speak; iti — thus; vainyasya — of the son of King Vena (Pṛthu Mahārāja); rāja-ṛṣeḥ — of the saintly King; pratinandya — appreciating; artha-vat vacaḥ — the prayers, which were full of meaning; pūjitaḥ — being worshiped; anugṛhītvā — sufficiently benedicting; enam — King Pṛthu; gantum — to go from that place; cakre — made up; acyutaḥ — the infallible Lord; matim — His mind.

Translation
The great saint Maitreya told Vidura: The Supreme Personality of Godhead amply appreciated the meaningful prayers of Mahārāja Pṛthu. Thus, after being properly worshiped by the King, the Lord blessed him and decided to depart.

Texts 35-36
देवर्षिपितृगन्धर्वसिद्धचारणपन्नगा: ।
किन्नराप्सरसो मर्त्या: खगा भूतान्यनेकश: ॥ ३५ ॥
यज्ञेश्वरधिया राज्ञा वाग्वित्ताञ्जलिभक्तित: ।
सभाजिता ययु: सर्वे वैकुण्ठानुगतास्तत: ॥ ३६ ॥
devarṣi-pitṛ-gandharva-
siddha-cāraṇa-pannagāḥ
kinnarāpsaraso martyāḥ
khagā bhūtāny anekaśaḥ
yajñeśvara-dhiyā rājñā
vāg-vittāñjali-bhaktitaḥ
sabhājitā yayuḥ sarve
vaikuṇṭhānugatās tataḥ
Synonyms
deva — the demigods; ṛṣi — the great sages; pitṛ — inhabitants of Pitṛloka; gandharva — inhabitants of Gandharvaloka; siddha — inhabitants of Siddhaloka; cāraṇa — inhabitants of Cāraṇaloka; pannagāḥ — inhabitants of the planets where serpents live; kinnara — inhabitants of the Kinnara planets; apsarasaḥ — inhabitants of Apsaroloka; martyāḥ — inhabitants of the earthly planets; khagāḥ — birds; bhūtāni — other living entities; anekaśaḥ — many; yajña-īśvara-dhiyā — with the perfect intelligence of thinking as part and parcel of the Supreme Lord; rājñā — by the King; vāk — with sweet words; vitta — wealth; añjali — with folded hands; bhaktitaḥ — in a spirit of devotional service; sabhājitāḥ — being properly worshiped; yayuḥ — went; sarve — all; vaikuṇṭha — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu; anugatāḥ — followers; tataḥ — from that place.

Translation
King Pṛthu worshiped the demigods, the great sages, the inhabitants of Pitṛloka, the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka, and those of Siddhaloka, Cāraṇaloka, Pannagaloka, Kinnaraloka, Apsaroloka, the earthly planets and the planets of the birds. He also worshiped many other living entities who presented themselves in the sacrificial arena. With folded hands he worshiped all these, as well as the Supreme Personality of Godhead and the personal associates of the Lord, by offering sweet words and as much wealth as possible. After this function, they all went back to their respective abodes, following in the footsteps of Lord Viṣṇu.

Text 37
भगवानपि राजर्षे: सोपाध्यायस्य चाच्युत: ।
हरन्निव मनोऽमुष्य स्वधाम प्रत्यपद्यत ॥ ३७ ॥
bhagavān api rājarṣeḥ
sopādhyāyasya cācyutaḥ
harann iva mano ’muṣya
sva-dhāma pratyapadyata
Synonyms
bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api — also; rāja-ṛṣeḥ — of the saintly King; sa-upādhyāyasya — along with all the priests; ca — also; acyutaḥ — the infallible Lord; haran — captivating; iva — indeed; manaḥ — the mind; amuṣya — of him; sva-dhāma — to His abode; pratyapadyata — returned.

Translation
The infallible Supreme Personality of Godhead, having captivated the minds of the King and the priests who were present, returned to His abode in the spiritual sky.

Text 38
अद‍ृष्टाय नमस्कृत्य नृप: सन्दर्शितात्मने ।
अव्यक्ताय च देवानां देवाय स्वपुरं ययौ ॥ ३८ ॥
adṛṣṭāya namaskṛtya
nṛpaḥ sandarśitātmane
avyaktāya ca devānāṁ
devāya sva-puraṁ yayau
Synonyms
adṛṣṭāya — unto one who is beyond the purview of material vision; namaḥ-kṛtya — offering obeisances; nṛpaḥ — the King; sandarśita — revealed; ātmane — unto the Supreme Soul; avyaktāya — who is beyond the manifestation of the material world; ca — also; devānām — of the demigods; devāya — unto the Supreme Lord; sva-puram — to his own house; yayau — returned.

Translation
King Pṛthu then offered his respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the Supreme Lord of all demigods. Although not an object of material vision, the Lord revealed Himself to the sight of Mahārāja Pṛthu. After offering obeisances to the Lord, the King returned to his home.