Text 1
maitreya uvāca
mauktikaiḥ kusuma-sragbhir
dukūlaiḥ svarṇa-toraṇaiḥ
mahā-surabhibhir dhūpair
maṇḍitaṁ tatra tatra vai
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya continued to speak; mauktikaiḥ — with pearls; kusuma — of flowers; sragbhiḥ — with garlands; dukūlaiḥ — cloth; svarṇa — golden; toraṇaiḥ — by gates; mahā-surabhibhiḥ — highly perfumed; dhūpaiḥ — by incense; maṇḍitam — decorated; tatra tatra — here and there; vai — certainly.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya told Vidura: When the King entered his city, it was very beautifully decorated to receive him with pearls, flower garlands, beautiful cloth and golden gates, and the entire city was perfumed with highly fragrant incense.

Text 2
चन्दनागुरुतोयार्द्ररथ्याचत्वरमार्गवत् ।
पुष्पाक्षतफलैस्तोक्‍मैर्लाजैरर्चिर्भिरर्चितम् ॥ २ ॥
candanāguru-toyārdra-
rathyā-catvara-mārgavat
puṣpākṣata-phalais tokmair
lājair arcirbhir arcitam
Synonyms
candana — sandalwood; aguru — a kind of fragrant herb; toya — the water of; ārdra — sprinkled with; rathyā — a path for driving a chariot; catvara — small parks; mārgavat — lanes; puṣpa — flowers; akṣata — unbroken; phalaiḥ — by the fruits; tokmaiḥ — minerals; lājaiḥ — wetted grains; arcirbhiḥ — by lamps; arcitam — decorated.

Translation
Fragrant water distilled from sandalwood and aguru herb was sprinkled everywhere on the lanes, roads and small parks throughout the city, and everywhere were decorations of unbroken fruits, flowers, wetted grains, varied minerals, and lamps, all presented as auspicious paraphernalia.

Text 3
सवृन्दै: कदलीस्तम्भै: पूगपोतै: परिष्कृतम् ।
तरुपल्लवमालाभि: सर्वत: समलङ्‌कृतम् ॥ ३ ॥
savṛndaiḥ kadalī-stambhaiḥ
pūga-potaiḥ pariṣkṛtam
taru-pallava-mālābhiḥ
sarvataḥ samalaṅkṛtam
Synonyms
sa-vṛndaiḥ — along with fruits and flowers; kadalī-stambhaiḥ — by the pillars of banana trees; pūga-potaiḥ — by collections of young animals and by processions of elephants; pariṣkṛtam — very nicely cleansed; taru — young plants; pallava — new leaves of mango trees; mālābhiḥ — by garlands; sarvataḥ — everywhere; samalaṅkṛtam — nicely decorated.

Translation
At the street crossings there were bunches of fruits and flowers, as well as pillars of banana trees and betel nut branches. All these combined decorations everywhere looked very attractive.

Text 4
प्रजास्तं दीपबलिभि: सम्भृताशेषमङ्गलै: ।
अभीयुर्मृष्टकन्याश्च मृष्टकुण्डलमण्डिता: ॥ ४ ॥
prajās taṁ dīpa-balibhiḥ
sambhṛtāśeṣa-maṅgalaiḥ
abhīyur mṛṣṭa-kanyāś ca
mṛṣṭa-kuṇḍala-maṇḍitāḥ
Synonyms
prajāḥ — citizens; tam — to him; dīpa-balibhiḥ — with lamps; sambhṛta — equipped with; aśeṣa — unlimited; maṅgalaiḥ — auspicious articles; abhīyuḥ — came forward to welcome; mṛṣṭa — with beautiful bodily luster; kanyāḥ ca — and unmarried girls; mṛṣṭa — colliding with; kuṇḍala — earrings; maṇḍitāḥ — being bedecked with.

Translation
As the King entered the gate of the city, all the citizens received him with many auspicious articles like lamps, flowers and yogurt. The King was also received by many beautiful unmarried girls whose bodies were bedecked with various ornaments, especially with earrings which collided with one another.

Text 5
शङ्खदुन्दुभिघोषेण ब्रह्मघोषेण चर्त्विजाम् ।
विवेश भवनं वीर: स्तूयमानो गतस्मय: ॥ ५ ॥
śaṅkha-dundubhi-ghoṣeṇa
brahma-ghoṣeṇa cartvijām
viveśa bhavanaṁ vīraḥ
stūyamāno gata-smayaḥ
Synonyms
śaṅkha — conchshells; dundubhi — kettledrums; ghoṣeṇa — by the sound of; brahma — Vedic; ghoṣeṇa — chanting; ca — also; ṛtvijām — of the priests; viveśa — entered; bhavanam — the palace; vīraḥ — the King; stūyamānaḥ — being worshiped; gata-smayaḥ — without pride.

Translation
When the King entered the palace, conchshells and kettledrums were sounded, priests chanted Vedic mantras, and professional reciters offered different prayers. But in spite of all this ceremony to welcome him, the King was not the least bit affected.

Text 6
पूजित: पूजयामास तत्र तत्र महायशा: ।
पौराञ्जानपदांस्तांस्तान्प्रीत: प्रियवरप्रद: ॥ ६ ॥
pūjitaḥ pūjayām āsa
tatra tatra mahā-yaśāḥ
paurāñ jānapadāṁs tāṁs tān
prītaḥ priya-vara-pradaḥ
Synonyms
pūjitaḥ — being worshiped; pūjayām āsa — offered worship; tatra tatra — here and there; mahā-yaśāḥ — with a background of great activities; paurān — the noble men of the city; jāna-padān — common citizens; tān tān — in that way; prītaḥ — being satisfied; priya-vara-pradaḥ — was ready to offer them all benediction.

Translation
Both the important citizens and the common citizens welcomed the King very heartily, and he also bestowed upon them their desired blessings.

Text 7
स एवमादीन्यनवद्यचेष्टित:
कर्माणि भूयांसि महान्महत्तम: ।
कुर्वन् शशासावनिमण्डलं यश:
स्फीतं निधायारुरुहे परं पदम् ॥ ७ ॥
sa evam ādīny anavadya-ceṣṭitaḥ
karmāṇi bhūyāṁsi mahān mahattamaḥ
kurvan śaśāsāvani-maṇḍalaṁ yaśaḥ
sphītaṁ nidhāyāruruhe paraṁ padam
Synonyms
saḥ — King Pṛthu; evam — thus; ādīni — from the very beginning; anavadya — magnanimous; ceṣṭitaḥ — performing various works; karmāṇi — work; bhūyāṁsi — repeatedly; mahān — great; mahat-tamaḥ — greater than the greatest; kurvan — performing; śaśāsa — ruled; avani-maṇḍalam — the surface of the earth; yaśaḥ — reputation; sphītam — widespread; nidhāya — achieving; āruruhe — was elevated; param padam — to the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord.

Translation
King Pṛthu was greater than the greatest soul and was therefore worshipable by everyone. He performed many glorious activities in ruling over the surface of the world and was always magnanimous. After achieving such great success and a reputation which spread throughout the universe, he at last obtained the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 8
सूत उवाच
तदादिराजस्य यशो विजृम्भितं
गुणैरशेषैर्गुणवत्सभाजितम् ।
क्षत्ता महाभागवत: सदस्पते
कौषारविं प्राह गृणन्तमर्चयन् ॥ ८ ॥
sūta uvāca
tad ādi-rājasya yaśo vijṛmbhitaṁ
guṇair aśeṣair guṇavat-sabhājitam
kṣattā mahā-bhāgavataḥ sadaspate
kauṣāraviṁ prāha gṛṇantam arcayan
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Sūta Gosvāmī said; tat — that; ādi-rājasya — of the original king; yaśaḥ — reputation; vijṛmbhitam — highly qualified; guṇaiḥ — by qualities; aśeṣaiḥ — unlimited; guṇa-vat — fittingly; sabhājitam — being praised; kṣattā — Vidura; mahā-bhāgavataḥ — the great saintly devotee; sadaḥ-pate — leader of the great sages; kauṣāravim — unto Maitreya; prāha — said; gṛṇantam — while talking; arcayan — offering all respectful obeisances.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī continued: O Śaunaka, leader of the great sages, after hearing Maitreya speak about the various activities of King Pṛthu, the original king, who was fully qualified, glorified and widely praised all over the world, Vidura, the great devotee, very submissively worshiped Maitreya Ṛṣi and asked him the following question.

Text 9
विदुर उवाच
सोऽभिषिक्त: पृथुर्विप्रैर्लब्धाशेषसुरार्हण: ।
बिभ्रत् स वैष्णवं तेजो बाह्वोर्याभ्यां दुदोह गाम् ॥ ९ ॥
vidura uvāca
so ’bhiṣiktaḥ pṛthur viprair
labdhāśeṣa-surārhaṇaḥ
bibhrat sa vaiṣṇavaṁ tejo
bāhvor yābhyāṁ dudoha gām
Synonyms
viduraḥ uvāca — Vidura said; saḥ — he (King Pṛthu); abhiṣiktaḥ — when enthroned; pṛthuḥ — King Pṛthu; vipraiḥ — by the great sages and brāhmaṇas; labdha — achieved; aśeṣa — innumerable; sura-arhaṇaḥ — presentations by the demigods; bibhrat — expanding; saḥ — he; vaiṣṇavam — who has received through Lord Viṣṇu; tejaḥ — strength; bāhvoḥ — arms; yābhyām — by which; dudoha — exploited; gām — the earth.

Translation
Vidura said: My dear brāhmaṇa Maitreya, it is very enlightening to understand that King Pṛthu was enthroned by the great sages and brāhmaṇas. All the demigods presented him with innumerable gifts, and he also expanded his influence upon personally receiving strength from Lord Viṣṇu. Thus he greatly developed the earth.

Text 10
को न्वस्य कीर्तिं न श‍ृणोत्यभिज्ञो
यद्विक्रमोच्छिष्टमशेषभूपा: ।
लोका: सपाला उपजीवन्ति काम-
मद्यापि तन्मे वद कर्म शुद्धम् ॥ १० ॥
ko nv asya kīrtiṁ na śṛṇoty abhijño
yad-vikramocchiṣṭam aśeṣa-bhūpāḥ
lokāḥ sa-pālā upajīvanti kāmam
adyāpi tan me vada karma śuddham
Synonyms
kaḥ — who; nu — but; asya — King Pṛthu; kīrtim — glorious activities; na śṛṇoti — does not hear; abhijñaḥ — intelligent; yat — his; vikrama — chivalry; ucchiṣṭam — remnants; aśeṣa — innumerable; bhūpāḥ — kings; lokāḥ — planets; sa-pālāḥ — with their demigods; upajīvanti — execute livelihood; kāmam — desired objects; adya api — up to that; tat — that; me — unto me; vada — please speak; karma — activities; śuddham — auspicious.

Translation
Pṛthu Mahārāja was so great in his activities and magnanimous in his method of ruling that all the kings and demigods on the various planets still follow in his footsteps. Who is there who will not try to hear about his glorious activities? I wish to hear more and more about Pṛthu Mahārāja because his activities are so pious and auspicious.

Text 11
मैत्रेय उवाच
गङ्गायमुनयोर्नद्योरन्तरा क्षेत्रमावसन् ।
आरब्धानेव बुभुजे भोगान् पुण्यजिहासया ॥ ११ ॥
maitreya uvāca
gaṅgā-yamunayor nadyor
antarā kṣetram āvasan
ārabdhān eva bubhuje
bhogān puṇya-jihāsayā
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great saint Maitreya said; gaṅgā — the river Ganges; yamunayoḥ — of the river Yamunā; nadyoḥ — of the two rivers; antarā — between; kṣetram — the land; āvasan — living there; ārabdhān — destined; eva — like; bubhuje — enjoyed; bhogān — fortunes; puṇya — pious activities; jihāsayā — for the purpose of diminishing.

Translation
The great saintly sage Maitreya told Vidura: My dear Vidura, King Pṛthu lived in the tract of land between the two great rivers Ganges and Yamunā. Because he was very opulent, it appeared that he was enjoying his destined fortune in order to diminish the results of his past pious activities.

Text 12
सर्वत्रास्खलितादेश: सप्तद्वीपैकदण्डधृक् ।
अन्यत्र ब्राह्मणकुलादन्यत्राच्युतगोत्रत: ॥ १२ ॥
sarvatrāskhalitādeśaḥ
sapta-dvīpaika-daṇḍa-dhṛk
anyatra brāhmaṇa-kulād
anyatrācyuta-gotrataḥ
Synonyms
sarvatra — everywhere; askhalita — irrevocable; ādeśaḥ — order; sapta-dvīpa — seven islands; eka — one; daṇḍa-dhṛk — the ruler who holds the scepter; anyatra — except; brāhmaṇa-kulāt — brāhmaṇas and saintly persons; anyatra — except; acyuta-gotrataḥ — descendants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (Vaiṣṇavas).

Translation
Mahārāja Pṛthu was an unrivaled king and possessed the scepter for ruling all the seven islands on the surface of the globe. No one could disobey his irrevocable orders but the saintly persons, the brāhmaṇas and the descendants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead [the Vaiṣṇavas].

Text 13
एकदासीन्महासत्रदीक्षा तत्र दिवौकसाम् ।
समाजो ब्रह्मर्षीणां च राजर्षीणां च सत्तम ॥ १३ ॥
ekadāsīn mahā-satra-
dīkṣā tatra divaukasām
samājo brahmarṣīṇāṁ ca
rājarṣīṇāṁ ca sattama
Synonyms
ekadā — once upon a time; āsīt — took a vow; mahā-satra — great sacrifice; dīkṣā — initiation; tatra — in that function; diva-okasām — of the demigods; samājaḥ — assembly; brahma-ṛṣīṇām — of great saintly brāhmaṇas; ca — also; rāja-ṛṣīṇām — of great saintly kings; ca — also; sat-tama — the greatest of devotees.

Translation
Once upon a time King Pṛthu initiated the performance of a very great sacrifice in which great saintly sages, brāhmaṇas, demigods from higher planetary systems and great saintly kings known as rājarṣis all assembled together.

Text 14
तस्मिन्नर्हत्सु सर्वेषु स्वर्चितेषु यथार्हत: ।
उत्थित: सदसो मध्ये ताराणामुडुराडिव ॥ १४ ॥
tasminn arhatsu sarveṣu
sv-arciteṣu yathārhataḥ
utthitaḥ sadaso madhye
tārāṇām uḍurāḍ iva
Synonyms
tasmin — in that great meeting; arhatsu — of all those who are worshipable; sarveṣu — all of them; su-arciteṣu — being worshiped according to their respective positions; yathā-arhataḥ — as they deserved; utthitaḥ — stood up; sadasaḥ — amongst the assembly members; madhye — within the midst; tārāṇām — of the stars; uḍu-rāṭ — the moon; iva — like.

Translation
In that great assembly, Mahārāja Pṛthu first of all worshiped all the respectable visitors according to their respective positions. After this, he stood up in the midst of the assembly, and it appeared that the full moon had arisen amongst the stars.

Text 15
प्रांशु: पीनायतभुजो गौर: कञ्जारुणेक्षण: ।
सुनास: सुमुख: सौम्य: पीनांस: सुद्विजस्मित: ॥ १५ ॥
prāṁśuḥ pīnāyata-bhujo
gauraḥ kañjāruṇekṣaṇaḥ
sunāsaḥ sumukhaḥ saumyaḥ
pīnāṁsaḥ sudvija-smitaḥ
Synonyms
prāṁśuḥ — very tall; pīna-āyata — full and broad; bhujaḥ — arms; gauraḥ — fair-complexioned; kañja — lotuslike; aruṇa-īkṣaṇaḥ — with bright eyes resembling a morning sunrise; su-nāsaḥ — straight nose; su-mukhaḥ — with a beautiful face; saumyaḥ — of a grave bodily stature; pīna-aṁsaḥ — shoulders raised; su — beautiful; dvija — teeth; smitaḥ — smiling.

Translation
King Pṛthu’s body was tall and sturdy, and his complexion was fair. His arms were full and broad and his eyes as bright as the rising sun. His nose was straight, his face very beautiful, and his personality grave. His teeth were set beautifully in his smiling face.

Text 16
व्यूढवक्षा बृहच्छ्रोणिर्वलिवल्गुदलोदर: ।
आवर्तनाभिरोजस्वी काञ्चनोरुरुदग्रपात् ॥ १६ ॥
vyūḍha-vakṣā bṛhac-chroṇir
vali-valgu-dalodaraḥ
āvarta-nābhir ojasvī
kāñcanorur udagra-pāt
Synonyms
vyūḍha — broad; vakṣāḥ — chest; bṛhat-śroṇiḥ — thick waist; vali — wrinkles; valgu — very beautiful; dala — like a leaf of a banyan tree; udaraḥ — abdomen; āvarta — coiled; nābhiḥ — navel; ojasvī — lustrous; kāñcana — golden; uruḥ — thighs; udagra-pāt — arched instep.

Translation
The chest of Mahārāja Pṛthu was very broad, his waist was very thick, and his abdomen, wrinkled by lines of skin, resembled in construction a leaf of a banyan tree. His navel was coiled and deep, his thighs were of a golden hue, and his instep was arched.

Text 17
सूक्ष्मवक्रासितस्‍निग्धमूर्धज: कम्बुकन्धर: ।
महाधने दुकूलाग्र्ये परिधायोपवीय च ॥ १७ ॥
sūkṣma-vakrāsita-snigdha-
mūrdhajaḥ kambu-kandharaḥ
mahā-dhane dukūlāgrye
paridhāyopavīya ca
Synonyms
sūkṣma — very fine; vakra — curly; asita — black; snigdha — slick; mūrdhajaḥ — hair on the head; kambu — like a conch; kandharaḥ — neck; mahā-dhane — very valuable; dukūla-agrye — dressed with a dhotī; paridhāya — on the upper portion of the body; upavīya — placed like a sacred thread; ca — also.

Translation
The black, slick hair on his head was very fine and curly, and his neck, like a conchshell, was decorated with auspicious lines. He wore a very valuable dhotī, and there was a nice wrapper on the upper part of his body.

Text 18
व्यञ्जिताशेषगात्रश्रीर्नियमे न्यस्तभूषण: ।
कृष्णाजिनधर: श्रीमान् कुशपाणि:कृतोचित: ॥ १८ ॥
vyañjitāśeṣa-gātra-śrīr
niyame nyasta-bhūṣaṇaḥ
kṛṣṇājina-dharaḥ śrīmān
kuśa-pāṇiḥ kṛtocitaḥ
Synonyms
vyañjita — indicating; aśeṣa — innumerable; gātra — bodily; śrīḥ — beauty; niyame — regulated; nyasta — given up; bhūṣaṇaḥ — garments; kṛṣṇa — black; ajina — skin; dharaḥ — putting on; śrīmān — beautiful; kuśa-pāṇiḥ — having kuśa grass on the fingers; kṛta — performed; ucitaḥ — as it is required.

Translation
As Mahārāja Pṛthu was being initiated to perform the sacrifice, he had to leave aside his valuable dress, and therefore his natural bodily beauty was visible. It was very pleasing to see him put on a black deerskin and wear a ring of kuśa grass on his finger, for this increased the natural beauty of his body. It appears that Mahārāja Pṛthu observed all the regulative principles before he performed the sacrifice.

Text 19
शिशिरस्‍निग्धताराक्ष: समैक्षत समन्तत: ।
ऊचिवानिदमुर्वीश: सद: संहर्षयन्निव ॥ १९ ॥
śiśira-snigdha-tārākṣaḥ
samaikṣata samantataḥ
ūcivān idam urvīśaḥ
sadaḥ saṁharṣayann iva
Synonyms
śiśira — dew; snigdha — wet; tārā — stars; akṣaḥ — eyes; samaikṣata — glanced over; samantataḥ — all around; ūcivān — began to speak; idam — this; urvīśaḥ — highly elevated; sadaḥ — amongst the members of the assembly; saṁharṣayan — enhancing their pleasure; iva — like.

Translation
Just to encourage the members of the assembly and to enhance their pleasure, King Pṛthu glanced over them with eyes that seemed like stars in a sky wet with dew. He then spoke to them in a great voice.

Text 20
चारु चित्रपदं श्लक्ष्णं मृष्टं गूढमविक्लवम् ।
सर्वेषामुपकारार्थं तदा अनुवदन्निव ॥ २० ॥
cāru citra-padaṁ ślakṣṇaṁ
mṛṣṭaṁ gūḍham aviklavam
sarveṣām upakārārthaṁ
tadā anuvadann iva
Synonyms
cāru — beautiful; citra-padam — flowery; ślakṣṇam — very clear; mṛṣṭam — very great; gūḍham — meaningful; aviklavam — without any doubt; sarveṣām — for all; upakāra-artham — just to benefit them; tadā — at that time; anuvadan — began to repeat; iva — like.

Translation
Mahārāja Pṛthu’s speech was very beautiful, full of metaphorical language, clearly understandable and very pleasing to hear. His words were all grave and certain. It appears that when he spoke, he expressed his personal realization of the Absolute Truth in order to benefit all who were present.

Text 21
राजोवाच
सभ्या: श‍ृणुत भद्रं व: साधवो य इहागता: ।
सत्सु जिज्ञासुभिर्धर्ममावेद्यं स्वमनीषितम् ॥ २१ ॥
rājovāca
sabhyāḥ śṛṇuta bhadraṁ vaḥ
sādhavo ya ihāgatāḥ
satsu jijñāsubhir dharmam
āvedyaṁ sva-manīṣitam
Synonyms
rājā uvāca — the King began to speak; sabhyāḥ — addressing the ladies and gentlemen; śṛṇuta — kindly hear; bhadram — good fortune; vaḥ — your; sādhavaḥ — all great souls; ye — who; iha — here; āgatāḥ — present; satsu — unto the noble men; jijñāsubhiḥ — one who is inquisitive; dharmam — religious principles; āvedyam — must be presented; sva-manīṣitam — concluded by someone.

Translation
King Pṛthu said: O gentle members of the assembly, may all good fortune be upon you! May all of you great souls who have come to attend this meeting kindly hear my prayer attentively. A person who is actually inquisitive must present his decision before an assembly of noble souls.

Text 22
अहं दण्डधरो राजा प्रजानामिह योजित: ।
रक्षिता वृत्तिद: स्वेषु सेतुषु स्थापिता पृथक् ॥ २२ ॥
ahaṁ daṇḍa-dharo rājā
prajānām iha yojitaḥ
rakṣitā vṛttidaḥ sveṣu
setuṣu sthāpitā pṛthak
Synonyms
aham — I; daṇḍa-dharaḥ — carrier of the scepter; rājā — king; prajānām — of the citizens; iha — in this world; yojitaḥ — engaged; rakṣitā — protector; vṛtti-daḥ — employer; sveṣu — in their own; setuṣu — respective social orders; sthāpitā — established; pṛthak — differently.

Translation
King Pṛthu continued: By the grace of the Supreme Lord I have been appointed the king of this planet, and I carry the scepter to rule the citizens, protect them from all danger, and give them employment according to their respective positions in the social order established by Vedic injunction.

Text 23
तस्य मे तदनुष्ठानाद्यानाहुर्ब्रह्मवादिन: ।
लोका: स्यु: कामसन्दोहा यस्य तुष्यति दिष्टद‍ृक् ॥ २३ ॥
tasya me tad-anuṣṭhānād
yān āhur brahma-vādinaḥ
lokāḥ syuḥ kāma-sandohā
yasya tuṣyati diṣṭa-dṛk
Synonyms
tasya — his; me — mine; tat — that; anuṣṭhānāt — by executing; yān — that which; āhuḥ — is spoken; brahma-vādinaḥ — by the experts in Vedic knowledge; lokāḥ — planets; syuḥ — become; kāma-sandohāḥ — fulfilling one’s desirable objectives; yasya — whose; tuṣyati — becomes satisfied; diṣṭa-dṛk — the seer of all destiny.

Translation
Mahārāja Pṛthu said: I think that upon the execution of my duties as king, I shall be able to achieve the desirable objectives described by experts in Vedic knowledge. This destination is certainly achieved by the pleasure of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the seer of all destiny.

Text 24
य उद्धरेत्करं राजा प्रजा धर्मेष्वशिक्षयन् ।
प्रजानां शमलं भुङ्क्ते भगं च स्वं जहाति स: ॥ २४ ॥
ya uddharet karaṁ rājā
prajā dharmeṣv aśikṣayan
prajānāṁ śamalaṁ bhuṅkte
bhagaṁ ca svaṁ jahāti saḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — anyone (king or governor); uddharet — exact; karam — taxes; rājā — king; prajāḥ — the citizens; dharmeṣu — in executing their respective duties; aśikṣayan — without teaching them how to execute their respective duties; prajānām — of the citizens; śamalam — impious; bhuṅkte — enjoys; bhagam — fortune; ca — also; svam — own; jahāti — gives up; saḥ — that king.

Translation
Any king who does not teach his citizens about their respective duties in terms of varṇa and āśrama but who simply exacts tolls and taxes from them is liable to suffer for the impious activities which have been performed by the citizens. In addition to such degradation, the king also loses his own fortune.

Text 25
तत् प्रजा भर्तृपिण्डार्थं स्वार्थमेवानसूयव: ।
कुरुताधोक्षजधियस्तर्हि मेऽनुग्रह: कृत: ॥ २५ ॥
tat prajā bhartṛ-piṇḍārthaṁ
svārtham evānasūyavaḥ
kurutādhokṣaja-dhiyas
tarhi me ’nugrahaḥ kṛtaḥ
Synonyms
tat — therefore; prajāḥ — my dear citizens; bhartṛ — of the master; piṇḍa-artham — welfare after death; sva-artham — own interest; eva — certainly; anasūyavaḥ — without being envious; kuruta — just execute; adhokṣaja — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dhiyaḥ — thinking of Him; tarhi — therefore; me — unto me; anugrahaḥ — mercy; kṛtaḥ — being done.

Translation
Pṛthu Mahārāja continued: Therefore, my dear citizens, for the welfare of your king after his death, you should execute your duties properly in terms of your positions of varṇa and āśrama and should always think of the Supreme Personality of Godhead within your hearts. By doing so, you will protect your own interests, and you will bestow mercy upon your king for his welfare after death.

Text 26
यूयं तदनुमोदध्वं पितृदेवर्षयोऽमला: ।
कर्तु: शास्तुरनुज्ञातुस्तुल्यं यत्प्रेत्य तत्फलम् ॥ २६ ॥
yūyaṁ tad anumodadhvaṁ
pitṛ-devarṣayo ’malāḥ
kartuḥ śāstur anujñātus
tulyaṁ yat pretya tat phalam
Synonyms
yūyam — all you respectable persons who are present here; tat — that; anumodadhvam — kindly approve of my proposal; pitṛ — persons coming from Pitṛloka; deva — persons coming from the heavenly planets; ṛṣayaḥ — great sages and saintly persons; amalāḥ — those who are cleansed of all sinful activities; kartuḥ — the performer; śāstuḥ — the order-giver; anujñātuḥ — of the supporter; tulyam — equal; yat — which; pretya — after death; tat — that; phalam — result.

Translation
I request all the purehearted demigods, forefathers and saintly persons to support my proposal, for after death the result of an action is equally shared by its doer, its director and its supporter.

Text 27
अस्ति यज्ञपतिर्नाम केषाञ्चिदर्हसत्तमा: ।
इहामुत्र च लक्ष्यन्ते ज्योत्‍स्‍नावत्य: क्‍वचिद्भुव: ॥ २७ ॥
asti yajña-patir nāma
keṣāñcid arha-sattamāḥ
ihāmutra ca lakṣyante
jyotsnāvatyaḥ kvacid bhuvaḥ
Synonyms
asti — there must be; yajña-patiḥ — the enjoyer of all sacrifices; nāma — of the name; keṣāñcit — in the opinion of some; arha-sattamāḥ — O most respectable; iha — in this material world; amutra — after death; ca — also; lakṣyante — it is visible; jyotsnā-vatyaḥ — powerful, beautiful; kvacit — somewhere; bhuvaḥ — bodies.

Translation
My dear respectable ladies and gentlemen, according to the authoritative statements of śāstra, there must be a supreme authority who is able to award the respective benefits of our present activities. Otherwise, why should there be persons who are unusually beautiful and powerful both in this life and in the life after death?

Texts 28-29
मनोरुत्तानपादस्य ध्रुवस्यापि महीपते: ।
प्रियव्रतस्य राजर्षेरङ्गस्यास्मत्पितु: पितु: ॥ २८ ॥
ईद‍ृशानामथान्येषामजस्य च भवस्य च ।
प्रह्लादस्य बलेश्चापि कृत्यमस्ति गदाभृता ॥ २९ ॥
manor uttānapādasya
dhruvasyāpi mahīpateḥ
priyavratasya rājarṣer
aṅgasyāsmat-pituḥ pituḥ
īdṛśānām athānyeṣām
ajasya ca bhavasya ca
prahlādasya baleś cāpi
kṛtyam asti gadābhṛtā
Synonyms
manoḥ — of Manu (Svāyambhuva Manu); uttānapādasya — of Uttānapāda, the father of Dhruva Mahārāja; dhruvasya — of Dhruva Mahārāja; api — certainly; mahī-pateḥ — of the great king; priyavratasya — of Priyavrata, in the family of Mahārāja Dhruva; rājarṣeḥ — of great saintly kings; aṅgasya — of the name Aṅga; asmat — my; pituḥ — of my father; pituḥ — of the father; īdṛśānām — of such personalities; atha — also; anyeṣām — of others; ajasya — of the supreme immortal; ca — also; bhavasya — of the living entities; ca — also; prahlādasya — of Mahārāja Prahlāda; baleḥ — of Mahārāja Bali; ca — also; api — certainly; kṛtyam — acknowledged by them; asti — there is; gadā-bhṛtā — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who carries a club.

Translation
This is confirmed not only by the evidence of the Vedas but also by the personal behavior of great personalities like Manu, Uttānapāda, Dhruva, Priyavrata and my grandfather Aṅga, as well as by many other great personalities and ordinary living entities, exemplified by Mahārāja Prahlāda and Bali, all of whom are theists, believing in the existence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who carries a club.

Text 30
दौहित्रादीनृते मृत्यो: शोच्यान् धर्मविमोहितान् ।
वर्गस्वर्गापवर्गाणां प्रायेणैकात्म्यहेतुना ॥ ३० ॥
dauhitrādīn ṛte mṛtyoḥ
śocyān dharma-vimohitān
varga-svargāpavargāṇāṁ
prāyeṇaikātmya-hetunā
Synonyms
dauhitra-ādīn — grandsons like my father, Vena; ṛte — except; mṛtyoḥ — of personified death; śocyān — abominable; dharma-vimohitān — bewildered on the path of religion; varga — religion, economic development, sense gratification and liberation; svarga — elevation to the heavenly planets; apavargāṇām — being freed from material contamination; prāyeṇa — almost always; eka — one; ātmya — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hetunā — on account of.

Translation
Although abominable persons like my father, Vena, the grandson of death personified, are bewildered on the path of religion, all the great personalities like those mentioned agree that in this world the only bestower of the benedictions of religion, economic development, sense gratification, liberation or elevation to the heavenly planets is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 31
यत्पादसेवाभिरुचिस्तपस्विना-
मशेषजन्मोपचितं मलं धिय: ।
सद्य: क्षिणोत्यन्वहमेधती सती
यथा पदाङ्गुष्ठविनि:सृता सरित् ॥ ३१ ॥
yat-pāda-sevābhirucis tapasvinām
aśeṣa-janmopacitaṁ malaṁ dhiyaḥ
sadyaḥ kṣiṇoty anvaham edhatī satī
yathā padāṅguṣṭha-viniḥsṛtā sarit
Synonyms
yat-pāda — whose lotus feet; sevā — service; abhiruciḥ — inclination; tapasvinām — persons undergoing severe penances; aśeṣa — innumerable; janma — birth; upacitam — acquire; malam — dirtiness; dhiyaḥ — mind; sadyaḥ — immediately; kṣiṇoti — destroys; anvaham — day after day; edhatī — increasing; satī — being; yathā — as; pada-aṅguṣṭha — the toes of His lotus feet; viniḥsṛtā — emanating from; sarit — water.

Translation
By the inclination to serve the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, suffering humanity can immediately cleanse the dirt which has accumulated in their minds during innumerable births. Like the Ganges water, which emanates from the toes of the lotus feet of the Lord, such a process immediately cleanses the mind, and thus spiritual or Kṛṣṇa consciousness gradually increases.

Text 32
विनिर्धुताशेषमनोमल: पुमा-
नसङ्गविज्ञानविशेषवीर्यवान् ।
यदङ्‌घ्रिमूले कृतकेतन: पुन-
र्न संसृतिं क्लेशवहां प्रपद्यते ॥ ३२ ॥
vinirdhutāśeṣa-mano-malaḥ pumān
asaṅga-vijñāna-viśeṣa-vīryavān
yad-aṅghri-mūle kṛta-ketanaḥ punar
na saṁsṛtiṁ kleśa-vahāṁ prapadyate
Synonyms
vinirdhuta — being specifically cleansed; aśeṣa — unlimited; manaḥ-malaḥ — mental speculation or the dirt accumulated in the mind; pumān — the person; asaṅga — being disgusted; vijñāna — scientifically; viśeṣa — particularly; vīrya-vān — being strengthened in bhakti-yoga; yat — whose; aṅghri — lotus feet; mūle — at the root of; kṛta-ketanaḥ — taken shelter; punaḥ — again; na — never; saṁsṛtim — material existence; kleśa-vahām — full of miserable conditions; prapadyate — takes to.

Translation
When a devotee takes shelter at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he is completely cleansed of all misunderstanding or mental speculation, and he manifests renunciation. This is possible only when one is strengthened by practicing bhakti-yoga. Once having taken shelter at the root of the lotus feet of the Lord, a devotee never comes back to this material existence, which is full of the threefold miseries.

Text 33
तमेव यूयं भजतात्मवृत्तिभि-
र्मनोवच:कायगुणै: स्वकर्मभि: ।
अमायिन: कामदुघाङ्‌घ्रिपङ्कजं
यथाधिकारावसितार्थसिद्धय: ॥ ३३ ॥
tam eva yūyaṁ bhajatātma-vṛttibhir
mano-vacaḥ-kāya-guṇaiḥ sva-karmabhiḥ
amāyinaḥ kāma-dughāṅghri-paṅkajaṁ
yathādhikārāvasitārtha-siddhayaḥ
Synonyms
tam — unto Him; eva — certainly; yūyam — all you citizens; bhajata — worship; ātma — own; vṛttibhiḥ — occupational duty; manaḥ — mind; vacaḥ — words; kāya — body; guṇaiḥ — by the particular qualities; sva-karmabhiḥ — by occupational duties; amāyinaḥ — without reservation; kāma-dugha — fulfilling all desires; aṅghri-paṅkajam — the lotus feet; yathā — as far as; adhikāra — ability; avasita-artha — fully convinced of one’s interest; siddhayaḥ — satisfaction.

Translation
Pṛthu Mahārāja advised his citizens: Engaging your minds, your words, your bodies and the results of your occupational duties, and being always open-minded, you should all render devotional service to the Lord. According to your abilities and the occupations in which you are situated, you should engage your service at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead with full confidence and without reservation. Then you will surely be successful in achieving the final objective in your lives.

Text 34
असाविहानेकगुणोऽगुणोऽध्वर:
पृथग्विधद्रव्यगुणक्रियोक्तिभि: ।
सम्पद्यतेऽर्थाशयलिङ्गनामभि-
र्विशुद्धविज्ञानघन: स्वरूपत: ॥ ३४ ॥
asāv ihāneka-guṇo ’guṇo ’dhvaraḥ
pṛthag-vidha-dravya-guṇa-kriyoktibhiḥ
sampadyate ’rthāśaya-liṅga-nāmabhir
viśuddha-vijñāna-ghanaḥ svarūpataḥ
Synonyms
asau — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; iha — in this material world; aneka — various; guṇaḥ — qualities; aguṇaḥ — transcendental; adhvaraḥ — yajña; pṛthak-vidha — varieties; dravya — physical elements; guṇa — ingredients; kriyā — performances; uktibhiḥ — by chanting different mantras; sampadyate — is worshiped; artha — interest; āśaya — purpose; liṅga — form; nāmabhiḥ — name; viśuddha — without contamination; vijñāna — science; ghanaḥ — concentrated; sva-rūpataḥ — in His own form.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is transcendental and not contaminated by this material world. But although He is concentrated spirit soul without material variety, for the benefit of the conditioned soul He nevertheless accepts different types of sacrifice performed with various material elements, rituals and mantras and offered to the demigods under different names according to the interests and purposes of the performers.

Text 35
प्रधानकालाशयधर्मसङ्ग्रहे
शरीर एष प्रतिपद्य चेतनाम् ।
क्रियाफलत्वेन विभुर्विभाव्यते
यथानलो दारुषु तद्गुणात्मक: ॥ ३५ ॥
pradhāna-kālāśaya-dharma-saṅgrahe
śarīra eṣa pratipadya cetanām
kriyā-phalatvena vibhur vibhāvyate
yathānalo dāruṣu tad-guṇātmakaḥ
Synonyms
pradhāna — material nature; kāla — time; āśaya — desire; dharma — occupational duties; saṅgrahe — aggregate; śarīre — body; eṣaḥ — this; pratipadya — accepting; cetanām — consciousness; kriyā — activities; phalatvena — by the result of; vibhuḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vibhāvyate — manifested; yathā — as much as; analaḥ — fire; dāruṣu — in the wood; tat-guṇa-ātmakaḥ — according to shape and quality.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is all-pervading, but He is also manifested in different types of bodies which arise from a combination of material nature, time, desires and occupational duties. Thus different types of consciousness develop, just as fire, which is always basically the same, blazes in different ways according to the shape and dimension of firewood.

Text 36
अहो ममामी वितरन्त्यनुग्रहं
हरिं गुरुं यज्ञभुजामधीश्वरम् ।
स्वधर्मयोगेन यजन्ति मामका
निरन्तरं क्षोणितले द‍ृढव्रता: ॥ ३६ ॥
aho mamāmī vitaranty anugrahaṁ
hariṁ guruṁ yajña-bhujām adhīśvaram
sva-dharma-yogena yajanti māmakā
nirantaraṁ kṣoṇi-tale dṛḍha-vratāḥ
Synonyms
aho — O all of you; mama — unto me; amī — all of them; vitaranti — distributing; anugraham — mercy; harim — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; gurum — the supreme spiritual master; yajña-bhujām — all the demigods eligible to accept yajña offerings; adhīśvaram — the supreme master; sva-dharma — occupational duties; yogena — by dint of; yajanti — worship; māmakāḥ — having a relationship with me; nirantaram — incessantly; kṣoṇi-tale — on the surface of the globe; dṛḍha-vratāḥ — with firm determination.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the master and enjoyer of the results of all sacrifices, and He is the supreme spiritual master as well. All of you citizens on the surface of the globe who have a relationship with me and are worshiping Him by dint of your occupational duties are bestowing your mercy upon me. Therefore, O my citizens, I thank you.

Text 37
मा जातु तेज: प्रभवेन्महर्द्धिभि-
स्तितिक्षया तपसा विद्यया च ।
देदीप्यमानेऽजितदेवतानां
कुले स्वयं राजकुलाद् द्विजानाम् ॥ ३७ ॥
mā jātu tejaḥ prabhaven maharddhibhis
titikṣayā tapasā vidyayā ca
dedīpyamāne ’jita-devatānāṁ
kule svayaṁ rāja-kulād dvijānām
Synonyms
mā — never do it; jātu — at any time; tejaḥ — supreme power; prabhavet — exhibit; mahā — great; ṛddhibhiḥ — by opulence; titikṣayā — by tolerance; tapasā — penance; vidyayā — by education; ca — also; dedīpyamāne — upon those who are already glorified; ajita-devatānām — Vaiṣṇavas, or the devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kule — in the society; svayam — personally; rāja-kulāt — greater than the royal family; dvijānām — of the brāhmaṇas.

Translation
The brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas are personally glorified by their characteristic powers of tolerance, penance, knowledge and education. By dint of all these spiritual assets, Vaiṣṇavas are more powerful than royalty. It is therefore advised that the princely order not exhibit its material prowess before these two communities and should avoid offending them.

Text 38
ब्रह्मण्यदेव: पुरुष: पुरातनो
नित्यं हरिर्यच्चरणाभिवन्दनात् ।
अवाप लक्ष्मीमनपायिनीं यशो
जगत्पवित्रं च महत्तमाग्रणी: ॥ ३८ ॥
brahmaṇya-devaḥ puruṣaḥ purātano
nityaṁ harir yac-caraṇābhivandanāt
avāpa lakṣmīm anapāyinīṁ yaśo
jagat-pavitraṁ ca mahattamāgraṇīḥ
Synonyms
brahmaṇya-devaḥ — the Lord of the brahminical culture; puruṣaḥ — the Supreme Personality; purātanaḥ — the oldest; nityam — eternal; hariḥ — the Personality of Godhead; yat — whose; caraṇa — lotus feet; abhivandanāt — by means of worshiping; avāpa — obtained; lakṣmīm — opulences; anapāyinīm — perpetually; yaśaḥ — reputation; jagat — universal; pavitram — purified; ca — also; mahat — great; tama — supreme; agraṇīḥ — foremost.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, the ancient, eternal Godhead, who is foremost amongst all great personalities, obtained the opulence of His staunch reputation, which purifies the entire universe, by worshiping the lotus feet of those brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas.

Text 39
यत्सेवयाशेषगुहाशय: स्वराड्
विप्रप्रियस्तुष्यति काममीश्वर: ।
तदेव तद्धर्मपरैर्विनीतै:
सर्वात्मना ब्रह्मकुलं निषेव्यताम् ॥ ३९ ॥
yat-sevayāśeṣa-guhāśayaḥ sva-rāḍ
vipra-priyas tuṣyati kāmam īśvaraḥ
tad eva tad-dharma-parair vinītaiḥ
sarvātmanā brahma-kulaṁ niṣevyatām
Synonyms
yat — whose; sevayā — by serving; aśeṣa — unlimited; guhā-āśayaḥ — dwelling within the heart of everyone; sva-rāṭ — but still fully independent; vipra-priyaḥ — very dear to the brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas; tuṣyati — becomes satisfied; kāmam — of desires; īśvaraḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat — that; eva — certainly; tat-dharma-paraiḥ — by following in the footsteps of the Lord; vinītaiḥ — by humbleness; sarva-ātmanā — in all respects; brahma-kulam — the descendants of brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas; niṣevyatām — always being engaged in their service.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is everlastingly independent and who exists in everyone’s heart, is very pleased with those who follow in His footsteps and engage without reservation in the service of the descendants of brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas, for He is always dear to brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas and they are always dear to Him.

Text 40
पुमाँल्लभेतानतिवेलमात्मन:
प्रसीदतोऽत्यन्तशमं स्वत: स्वयम् ।
यन्नित्यसम्बन्धनिषेवया तत:
परं किमत्रास्ति मुखं हविर्भुजाम् ॥ ४० ॥
pumāḻ labhetānativelam ātmanaḥ
prasīdato ’tyanta-śamaṁ svataḥ svayam
yan-nitya-sambandha-niṣevayā tataḥ
paraṁ kim atrāsti mukhaṁ havir-bhujām
Synonyms
pumān — a person; labheta — can achieve; anati-velam — without delay; ātmanaḥ — of his soul; prasīdataḥ — being satisfied; atyanta — the greatest; śamam — peace; svataḥ — automatically; svayam — personally; yat — whose; nitya — regular; sambandha — relationship; niṣevayā — by dint of service; tataḥ — after that; param — superior; kim — what; atra — here; asti — there is; mukham — happiness; haviḥ — clarified butter; bhujām — those who drink.

Translation
By regular service to the brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas, one can clear the dirt from his heart and thus enjoy supreme peace and liberation from material attachment and be satisfied. In this world there is no fruitive activity superior to serving the brāhmaṇa class, for this can bring pleasure to the demigods, for whom the many sacrifices are recommended.

Text 41
अश्नात्यनन्त: खलु तत्त्वकोविदै:
श्रद्धाहुतं यन्मुख इज्यनामभि: ।
न वै तथा चेतनया बहिष्कृते
हुताशने पारमहंस्यपर्यगु: ॥ ४१ ॥
aśnāty anantaḥ khalu tattva-kovidaiḥ
śraddhā-hutaṁ yan-mukha ijya-nāmabhiḥ
na vai tathā cetanayā bahiṣ-kṛte
hutāśane pāramahaṁsya-paryaguḥ
Synonyms
aśnāti — eats; anantaḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; khalu — nevertheless; tattva-kovidaiḥ — persons in knowledge of the Absolute Truth; śraddhā — faith; hutam — offering fire sacrifices; yat-mukhe — whose mouth; ijya-nāmabhiḥ — by different names of demigods; na — never; vai — certainly; tathā — as much; cetanayā — by living force; bahiḥ-kṛte — being bereft of; huta-aśane — in the fire sacrifice; pāramahaṁsya — regarding devotees; paryaguḥ — never goes away.

Translation
Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Ananta, eats through the fire sacrifices offered in the names of the different demigods, He does not take as much pleasure in eating through fire as He does in accepting offerings through the mouths of learned sages and devotees, for then He does not leave the association of devotees.

Text 42
यद्ब्रह्म नित्यं विरजं सनातनं
श्रद्धातपोमङ्गलमौनसंयमै: ।
समाधिना बिभ्रति हार्थद‍ृष्टये
यत्रेदमादर्श इवावभासते ॥ ४२ ॥
yad brahma nityaṁ virajaṁ sanātanaṁ
śraddhā-tapo-maṅgala-mauna-saṁyamaiḥ
samādhinā bibhrati hārtha-dṛṣṭaye
yatredam ādarśa ivāvabhāsate
Synonyms
yat — that which; brahma — the brahminical culture; nityam — eternally; virajam — without contamination; sanātanam — without beginning; śraddhā — faith; tapaḥ — austerity; maṅgala — auspicious; mauna — silence; saṁyamaiḥ — controlling the mind and senses; samādhinā — with full concentration; bibhrati — illuminates; ha — as he did it; artha — the real purpose of the Vedas; dṛṣṭaye — for the purpose of finding out; yatra — wherein; idam — all this; ādarśe — in a mirror; iva — like; avabhāsate — manifests.

Translation
In brahminical culture a brāhmaṇa’s transcendental position is eternally maintained because the injunctions of the Vedas are accepted with faith, austerity, scriptural conclusions, full sense and mind control, and meditation. In this way the real goal of life is illuminated, just as one’s face is fully reflected in a clear mirror.

Text 43
तेषामहं पादसरोजरेणु-
मार्या वहेयाधिकिरीटमायु: ।
यं नित्यदा बिभ्रत आशु पापं
नश्यत्यमुं सर्वगुणा भजन्ति ॥ ४३ ॥
teṣām ahaṁ pāda-saroja-reṇum
āryā vaheyādhi-kirīṭam āyuḥ
yaṁ nityadā bibhrata āśu pāpaṁ
naśyaty amuṁ sarva-guṇā bhajanti
Synonyms
teṣām — of all of them; aham — I; pāda — feet; saroja — lotus; reṇum — dust; āryāḥ — O respectable persons; vaheya — shall bear; adhi — up to; kirīṭam — helmet; āyuḥ — up to the end of life; yam — which; nityadā — always; bibhrataḥ — carrying; āśu — very soon; pāpam — sinful activities; naśyati — are vanquished; amum — all those; sarva-guṇāḥ — fully qualified; bhajanti — worship.

Translation
O respectable personalities present here, I beg the blessings of all of you that I may perpetually carry on my crown the dust of the lotus feet of such brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas until the end of my life. He who can carry such dust on his head is very soon relieved of all the reactions which arise from sinful life, and eventually he develops all good and desirable qualities.

Text 44
गुणायनं शीलधनं कृतज्ञं
वृद्धाश्रयं संवृणतेऽनु सम्पद: ।
प्रसीदतां ब्रह्मकुलं गवां च
जनार्दन: सानुचरश्च मह्यम् ॥ ४४ ॥
guṇāyanaṁ śīla-dhanaṁ kṛta-jñaṁ
vṛddhāśrayaṁ saṁvṛṇate ’nu sampadaḥ
prasīdatāṁ brahma-kulaṁ gavāṁ ca
janārdanaḥ sānucaraś ca mahyam
Synonyms
guṇa-ayanam — one who has acquired all the good qualities; śīla-dhanam — one whose wealth is good behavior; kṛta-jñam — one who is grateful; vṛddha-āśrayam — one who takes shelter of the learned; saṁvṛṇate — achieves; anu — certainly; sampadaḥ — all opulences; prasīdatām — be pleased upon; brahma-kulam — the brāhmaṇa class; gavām — the cows; ca — and; janārdanaḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sa — with; anucaraḥ — along with His devotee; ca — and; mahyam — upon me.

Translation
Whoever acquires the brahminical qualifications — whose only wealth is good behavior, who is grateful, and who takes shelter of experienced persons — gets all the opulence of the world. I therefore wish that the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His associates be pleased with the brāhmaṇa class, with the cows and with me.

Text 45
मैत्रेय उवाच
इति ब्रुवाणं नृपतिं पितृदेवद्विजातय: ।
तुष्टुवुर्हृष्टमनस: साधुवादेन साधव: ॥ ४५ ॥
maitreya uvāca
iti bruvāṇaṁ nṛpatiṁ
pitṛ-deva-dvijātayaḥ
tuṣṭuvur hṛṣṭa-manasaḥ
sādhu-vādena sādhavaḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya continued to speak; iti — thus; bruvāṇam — while speaking; nṛ-patim — the King; pitṛ — the denizens of Pitṛloka; deva — the demigods; dvi-jātayaḥ — and the twice-born (the brāhmaṇas and the Vaiṣṇavas); tuṣṭuvuḥ — satisfied; hṛṣṭa-manasaḥ — greatly pacified in mind; sādhu-vādena — by expressing congratulations; sādhavaḥ — all the saintly persons present.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya said: After hearing King Pṛthu speak so nicely, all the demigods, the denizens of Pitṛloka, the brāhmaṇas and the saintly persons present at the meeting congratulated him by expressing their good will.

Text 46
पुत्रेण जयते लोकानिति सत्यवती श्रुति: ।
ब्रह्मदण्डहत: पापो यद्वेनोऽत्यतरत्तम: ॥ ४६ ॥
putreṇa jayate lokān
iti satyavatī śrutiḥ
brahma-daṇḍa-hataḥ pāpo
yad veno ’tyatarat tamaḥ
Synonyms
putreṇa — by the son; jayate — one becomes victorious; lokān — all the heavenly planets; iti — thus; satya-vatī — becomes true; śrutiḥ — the Vedas; brahma-daṇḍa — by the curse of brāhmaṇas; hataḥ — killed; pāpaḥ — the most sinful; yat — as; venaḥ — the father of Mahārāja Pṛthu; ati — great; atarat — became delivered; tamaḥ — from the darkness of hellish life.

Translation
They all declared that the Vedic conclusion that one can conquer the heavenly planets by the action of a putra, or son, was fulfilled, for the most sinful Vena, who had been killed by the curse of the brāhmaṇas, was now delivered from the darkest region of hellish life by his son, Mahārāja Pṛthu.

Text 47
हिरण्यकशिपुश्चापि भगवन्निन्दया तम: ।
विविक्षुरत्यगात्सूनो: प्रह्लादस्यानुभावत: ॥ ४७ ॥
hiraṇyakaśipuś cāpi
bhagavan-nindayā tamaḥ
vivikṣur atyagāt sūnoḥ
prahlādasyānubhāvataḥ
Synonyms
hiraṇyakaśipuḥ — the father of Prahlāda Mahārāja; ca — also; api — again; bhagavat — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nindayā — by blaspheming; tamaḥ — in the darkest region of hellish life; vivikṣuḥ — entered; atyagāt — was delivered; sūnoḥ — of his son; prahlādasya — of Mahārāja Prahlāda; anubhāvataḥ — by the influence of.

Translation
Similarly, Hiraṇyakaśipu, who by dint of his sinful activities always defied the supremacy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, entered into the darkest region of hellish life; but by the grace of his great son, Prahlāda Mahārāja, he also was delivered and went back home, back to Godhead.

Text 48
वीरवर्य पित: पृथ्व्या: समा: सञ्जीव शाश्वती: ।
यस्येद‍ृश्यच्युते भक्ति: सर्वलोकैकभर्तरि ॥ ४८ ॥
vīra-varya pitaḥ pṛthvyāḥ
samāḥ sañjīva śāśvatīḥ
yasyedṛśy acyute bhaktiḥ
sarva-lokaika-bhartari
Synonyms
vīra-varya — the best of the warriors; pitaḥ — the father; pṛthvyāḥ — of the globe; samāḥ — equal to in years; sañjīva — live; śāśvatīḥ — forever; yasya — whose; īdṛśī — like this; acyute — unto the Supreme; bhaktiḥ — devotion; sarva — all; loka — planets; eka — one; bhartari — maintainer.

Translation
All the saintly brāhmaṇas thus addressed Pṛthu Mahārāja: O best of the warriors, O father of this globe, may you be blessed with a long life, for you have great devotion to the infallible Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the master of all the universe.

Text 49
अहो वयं ह्यद्य पवित्रकीर्ते
त्वयैव नाथेन मुकुन्दनाथा: ।
य उत्तमश्लोकतमस्य विष्णो-
र्ब्रह्मण्यदेवस्य कथां व्यनक्ति ॥ ४९ ॥
aho vayaṁ hy adya pavitra-kīrte
tvayaiva nāthena mukunda-nāthāḥ
ya uttamaślokatamasya viṣṇor
brahmaṇya-devasya kathāṁ vyanakti
Synonyms
aho — oh, goodness; vayam — we; hi — certainly; adya — today; pavitra-kīrte — O supreme purity; tvayā — by you; eva — certainly; nāthena — by the Lord; mukunda — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nāthāḥ — being the subject of the Supreme; ye — one who; uttama-śloka-tamasya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is praised by the nicest verses; viṣṇoḥ — of Viṣṇu; brahmaṇya-devasya — of the worshipable Lord of the brāhmaṇas; kathām — words; vyanakti — expressed.

Translation
The audience continued: Dear King Pṛthu, your reputation is the purest of all, for you are preaching the glories of the most glorified of all, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord of the brāhmaṇas. Since, due to our great fortune, we have you as our master, we think that we are living directly under the agency of the Lord.

Text 50
नात्यद्भुतमिदं नाथ तवाजीव्यानुशासनम् ।
प्रजानुरागो महतां प्रकृति: करुणात्मनाम् ॥ ५० ॥
nātyadbhutam idaṁ nātha
tavājīvyānuśāsanam
prajānurāgo mahatāṁ
prakṛtiḥ karuṇātmanām
Synonyms
na — not; ati — very great; adbhutam — wonderful; idam — this; nātha — O lord; tava — your; ājīvya — source of income; anuśāsanam — ruling over the citizens; prajā — citizens; anurāgaḥ — affection; mahatām — of the great; prakṛtiḥ — nature; karuṇa — merciful; ātmanām — of the living entities.

Translation
Our dear lord, it is your occupational duty to rule over your citizens. That is not a very wonderful task for a personality like you, who are so affectionate in seeing to the interests of the citizens, because you are full of mercy. That is the greatness of your character.

Text 51
अद्य नस्तमस: पारस्त्वयोपासादित: प्रभो ।
भ्राम्यतां नष्टद‍ृष्टीनां कर्मभिर्दैवसंज्ञितै: ॥ ५१ ॥
adya nas tamasaḥ pāras
tvayopāsāditaḥ prabho
bhrāmyatāṁ naṣṭa-dṛṣṭīnāṁ
karmabhir daiva-saṁjñitaiḥ
Synonyms
adya — today; naḥ — of us; tamasaḥ — of the darkness of material existence; pāraḥ — the other side; tvayā — by you; upāsāditaḥ — increased; prabho — O lord; bhrāmyatām — who are wandering; naṣṭa-dṛṣṭīnām — who have lost their goal of life; karmabhiḥ — on account of past deeds; daiva-saṁjñitaiḥ — arranged by superior authority.

Translation
The citizens continued: Today you have opened our eyes and revealed how to cross to the other side of the ocean of darkness. By our past deeds and by the arrangement of superior authority, we are entangled in a network of fruitive activities and have lost sight of the destination of life; thus we have been wandering within the universe.

Text 52
नमो विवृद्धसत्त्वाय पुरुषाय महीयसे ।
यो ब्रह्म क्षत्रमाविश्य बिभर्तीदं स्वतेजसा ॥ ५२ ॥
namo vivṛddha-sattvāya
puruṣāya mahīyase
yo brahma kṣatram āviśya
bibhartīdaṁ sva-tejasā
Synonyms
namaḥ — all obeisances; vivṛddha — highly elevated; sattvāya — unto the existence; puruṣāya — unto the person; mahīyase — unto one who is so glorified; yaḥ — who; brahma — brahminical culture; kṣatram — administrative duty; āviśya — entering; bibharti — maintaining; idam — this; sva-tejasā — by his own prowess.

Translation
Dear lord, you are situated in your pure existential position of goodness; therefore you are the perfect representative of the Supreme Lord. You are glorified by your own prowess, and thus you are maintaining the entire world by introducing brahminical culture and protecting everyone in your line of duty as a kṣatriya.