Texts 1-3
मैत्रेय उवाच
दृष्ट्वात्मानं प्रवयसमेकदा वैन्य आत्मवान् ।
आत्मना वर्धिताशेषस्वानुसर्ग: प्रजापति: ॥ १ ॥
जगतस्तस्थुषश्चापि वृत्तिदो धर्मभृत्सताम् ।
निष्पादितेश्वरादेशो यदर्थमिह जज्ञिवान् ॥ २ ॥
आत्मजेष्वात्मजां न्यस्य विरहाद्रुदतीमिव ।
प्रजासु विमन:स्वेक: सदारोऽगात्तपोवनम् ॥ ३ ॥
maitreya uvāca
dṛṣṭvātmānaṁ pravayasam
ekadā vainya ātmavān
ātmanā vardhitāśeṣa-
svānusargaḥ prajāpatiḥ
jagatas tasthuṣaś cāpi
vṛttido dharma-bhṛt satām
niṣpāditeśvarādeśo
yad-artham iha jajñivān
ātmajeṣv ātmajāṁ nyasya
virahād rudatīm iva
prajāsu vimanaḥsv ekaḥ
sa-dāro ’gāt tapo-vanam
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the sage Maitreya continued to speak; dṛṣṭvā — after seeing; ātmānam — of the body; pravayasam — old age; ekadā — once upon a time; vainyaḥ — King Pṛthu; ātma-vān — fully conversant in spiritual education; ātmanā — by oneself; vardhita — increased; aśeṣa — unlimitedly; sva-anusargaḥ — creation of material opulences; prajā-patiḥ — a protector of citizens; jagataḥ — moving; tasthuṣaḥ — not moving; ca — also; api — certainly; vṛtti-daḥ — one who gives pensions; dharma-bhṛt — one who observes the religious principles; satām — of the devotees; niṣpādita — fully executed; īśvara — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ādeśaḥ — order; yat-artham — in coordination with Him; iha — in this world; jajñivān — performed; ātma-jeṣu — unto his sons; ātma-jām — the earth; nyasya — indicating; virahāt — out of separation; rudatīm iva — just like lamenting; prajāsu — unto the citizens; vimanaḥsu — unto the aggrieved; ekaḥ — alone; sa-dāraḥ — with his wife; agāt — went; tapaḥ-vanam — in the forest where one can execute austerities.

Translation
At the last stage of his life, when Mahārāja Pṛthu saw himself getting old, that great soul, who was king of the world, divided whatever opulence he had accumulated amongst all kinds of living entities, moving and nonmoving. He arranged pensions for everyone according to religious principles, and after executing the orders of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in complete coordination with Him, he dedicated his sons unto the earth, which was considered to be his daughter. Then Mahārāja Pṛthu left the presence of his citizens, who were almost lamenting and crying from feeling separation from the King, and went to the forest alone with his wife to perform austerities.

Text 4
तत्राप्यदाभ्यनियमो वैखानससुसम्मते ।
आरब्ध उग्रतपसि यथा स्वविजये पुरा ॥ ४ ॥
tatrāpy adābhya-niyamo
vaikhānasa-susammate
ārabdha ugra-tapasi
yathā sva-vijaye purā
Synonyms
tatra — there; api — also; adābhya — severe; niyamaḥ — austerities; vaikhānasa — rules and regulations of retired life; su-sammate — perfectly recognized; ārabdhaḥ — beginning; ugra — severe; tapasi — austerity; yathā — as much as; sva-vijaye — in conquering the world; purā — formerly.

Translation
After retiring from family life, Mahārāja Pṛthu strictly followed the regulations of retired life and underwent severe austerities in the forest. He engaged in these activities as seriously as he had formerly engaged in leading the government and conquering everyone.

Text 5
कन्दमूलफलाहार: शुष्कपर्णाशन: क्‍वचित् ।
अब्भक्ष: कतिचित्पक्षान् वायुभक्षस्तत: परम् ॥ ५ ॥
kanda-mūla-phalāhāraḥ
śuṣka-parṇāśanaḥ kvacit
ab-bhakṣaḥ katicit pakṣān
vāyu-bhakṣas tataḥ param
Synonyms
kanda — trunk; mūla — roots; phala — fruits; āhāraḥ — eating; śuṣka — dry; parṇa — leaves; aśanaḥ — eating; kvacit — sometimes; ap-bhakṣaḥ — drinking water; katicit — for several; pakṣān — fortnights; vāyu — the air; bhakṣaḥ — breathing; tataḥ param — thereafter.

Translation
In the tapo-vana, Mahārāja Pṛthu sometimes ate the trunks and roots of trees, sometimes he ate fruit and dried leaves, and for some weeks he drank only water. Finally he lived simply by breathing air.

Text 6
ग्रीष्मे पञ्चतपा वीरो वर्षास्वासारषाण्मुनि: ।
आकण्ठमग्न: शिशिरे उदके स्थण्डिलेशय: ॥ ६ ॥
grīṣme pañca-tapā vīro
varṣāsv āsāraṣāṇ muniḥ
ākaṇṭha-magnaḥ śiśire
udake sthaṇḍile-śayaḥ
Synonyms
grīṣme — in the summer season; pañca-tapāḥ — five kinds of heating; vīraḥ — the hero; varṣāsu — in the rainy season; āsāraṣāṭ — being situated within the torrents of rain; muniḥ — like the great sages; ākaṇṭha — up to the neck; magnaḥ — drowned; śiśire — in winter; udake — within water; sthaṇḍile-śayaḥ — lying down on the floor.

Translation
Following the principles of forest living and the footsteps of the great sages and munis, Pṛthu Mahārāja accepted five kinds of heating processes during the summer season, exposed himself to torrents of rain in the rainy season and, in the winter, stood in water up to his neck. He also used to simply lie down on the floor to sleep.

Text 7
तितिक्षुर्यतवाग्दान्त ऊर्ध्वरेता जितानिल: ।
आरिराधयिषु: कृष्णमचरत्तप उत्तमम् ॥ ७ ॥
titikṣur yata-vāg dānta
ūrdhva-retā jitānilaḥ
ārirādhayiṣuḥ kṛṣṇam
acarat tapa uttamam
Synonyms
titikṣuḥ — tolerating; yata — controlling; vāk — words; dāntaḥ — controlling the senses; ūrdhva-retāḥ — without discharge of semen; jita-anilaḥ — controlling the life air; ārirādhayiṣuḥ — simply desiring; kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; acarat — practice; tapaḥ — austerities; uttamam — the best.

Translation
Mahārāja Pṛthu underwent all these severe austerities in order to control his words and his senses, to refrain from discharging his semen and to control the life air within his body. All this he did for the satisfaction of Kṛṣṇa. He had no other purpose.

Text 8
तेन क्रमानुसिद्धेन ध्वस्तकर्ममलाशय: ।
प्राणायामै: सन्निरुद्धषड्‌वर्गश्छिन्नबन्धन: ॥ ८ ॥
tena kramānusiddhena
dhvasta-karma-malāśayaḥ
prāṇāyāmaiḥ sanniruddha-
ṣaḍ-vargaś chinna-bandhanaḥ
Synonyms
tena — thus by practicing such austerities; krama — gradually; anu — constantly; siddhena — by perfection; dhvasta — smashed; karma — fruitive activities; mala — dirty things; āśayaḥ — desire; prāṇa-āyāmaiḥ — by practice of prāṇāyāma-yoga, breathing exercises; san — being; niruddha — stopped; ṣaṭ-vargaḥ — the mind and the senses; chinna-bandhanaḥ — completely cut off from all bondage.

Translation
By thus practicing severe austerities, Mahārāja Pṛthu gradually became steadfast in spiritual life and completely free of all desires for fruitive activities. He also practiced breathing exercises to control his mind and senses, and by such control he became completely free from all desires for fruitive activity.

Text 9
सनत्कुमारो भगवान् यदाहाध्यात्मिकं परम् ।
योगं तेनैव पुरुषमभजत्पुरुषर्षभ: ॥ ९ ॥
sanat-kumāro bhagavān
yad āhādhyātmikaṁ param
yogaṁ tenaiva puruṣam
abhajat puruṣarṣabhaḥ
Synonyms
sanat-kumāraḥ — Sanat-kumāra; bhagavān — most powerful; yat — that which; āha — said; ādhyātmikam — spiritual advancement of life; param — ultimate; yogam — mysticism; tena — by that; eva — certainly; puruṣam — the Supreme Person; abhajat — worshiped; puruṣa-ṛṣabhaḥ — the best of human beings.

Translation
Thus the best amongst human beings, Mahārāja Pṛthu, followed that path of spiritual advancement which was advised by Sanat-kumāra. That is to say, he worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa.

Text 10
भगवद्धर्मिण: साधो: श्रद्धया यतत: सदा ।
भक्तिर्भगवति ब्रह्मण्यनन्यविषयाभवत् ॥ १० ॥
bhagavad-dharmiṇaḥ sādhoḥ
śraddhayā yatataḥ sadā
bhaktir bhagavati brahmaṇy
ananya-viṣayābhavat
Synonyms
bhagavat-dharmiṇaḥ — one who executes devotional service; sādhoḥ — of the devotee; śraddhayā — with faith; yatataḥ — endeavoring; sadā — always; bhaktiḥ — devotion; bhagavati — unto the Personality of Godhead; brahmaṇi — the origin of impersonal Brahman; ananya-viṣayā — firmly fixed without deviation; abhavat — became.

Translation
Mahārāja Pṛthu thus engaged completely in devotional service, executing the rules and regulations strictly according to principles, twenty-four hours daily. Thus his love and devotion unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, developed and became unflinching and fixed.

Text 11
तस्यानया भगवत: परिकर्मशुद्ध
सत्त्वात्मनस्तदनुसंस्मरणानुपूर्त्या ।
ज्ञानं विरक्तिमदभून्निशितेन येन
चिच्छेद संशयपदं निजजीवकोशम् ॥ ११ ॥
tasyānayā bhagavataḥ parikarma-śuddha-
sattvātmanas tad-anusaṁsmaraṇānupūrtyā
jñānaṁ viraktimad abhūn niśitena yena
ciccheda saṁśaya-padaṁ nija-jīva-kośam
Synonyms
tasya — his; anayā — by this; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parikarma — activities in devotional service; śuddha — pure, transcendental; sattva — existence; ātmanaḥ — of the mind; tat — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anusaṁsmaraṇa — constantly remembering; anupūrtyā — being perfectly done; jñānam — knowledge; virakti — nonattachment; mat — possessing; abhūt — became manifested; niśitena — by sharpened activities; yena — by which; ciccheda — become separated; saṁśaya-padam — position of doubtfulness; nija — own; jīva-kośam — encagement of the living entity.

Translation
By regularly discharging devotional service, Pṛthu Mahārāja became transcendental in mind and could therefore constantly think of the lotus feet of the Lord. Because of this, he became completely detached and attained perfect knowledge by which he could transcend all doubt. Thus he was freed from the clutches of false ego and the material conception of life.

Text 12
छिन्नान्यधीरधिगतात्मगतिर्निरीह-
स्तत्तत्यजेऽच्छिनदिदं वयुनेन येन ।
तावन्न योगगतिभिर्यतिरप्रमत्तो
यावद्गदाग्रजकथासु रतिं न कुर्यात् ॥ १२ ॥
chinnānya-dhīr adhigatātma-gatir nirīhas
tat tatyaje ’cchinad idaṁ vayunena yena
tāvan na yoga-gatibhir yatir apramatto
yāvad gadāgraja-kathāsu ratiṁ na kuryāt
Synonyms
chinna — being separated; anya-dhīḥ — all other concepts of life (the bodily concept of life); adhigata — being firmly convinced; ātma-gatiḥ — the ultimate goal of spiritual life; nirīhaḥ — desireless; tat — that; tatyaje — gave up; acchinat — he had cut; idam — this; vayunena — with the knowledge; yena — by which; tāvat — so long; na — never; yoga-gatibhiḥ — the practice of the mystic yoga system; yatiḥ — the practicer; apramattaḥ — without any illusion; yāvat — so long; gadāgraja — of Kṛṣṇa; kathāsu — words; ratim — attraction; na — never; kuryāt — do it.

Translation
When he became completely free from the conception of bodily life, Mahārāja Pṛthu realized Lord Kṛṣṇa sitting in everyone’s heart as the Paramātmā. Being thus able to get all instructions from Him, he gave up all other practices of yoga and jñāna. He was not even interested in the perfection of the yoga and jñāna systems, for he thoroughly realized that devotional service to Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate goal of life and that unless the yogīs and jñānīs become attracted to kṛṣṇa-kathā [narrations about Kṛṣṇa], their illusions concerning existence can never be dispelled.

Text 13
एवं स वीरप्रवर: संयोज्यात्मानमात्मनि ।
ब्रह्मभूतो द‍ृढं काले तत्याज स्वं कलेवरम् ॥ १३ ॥
evaṁ sa vīra-pravaraḥ
saṁyojyātmānam ātmani
brahma-bhūto dṛḍhaṁ kāle
tatyāja svaṁ kalevaram
Synonyms
evam — thus; saḥ — he; vīra-pravaraḥ — the chief of the heroes; saṁyojya — applying; ātmānam — mind; ātmani — unto the Supersoul; brahma-bhūtaḥ — being liberated; dṛḍham — firmly; kāle — in due course of time; tatyāja — gave up; svam — own; kalevaram — body.

Translation
In due course of time, when Pṛthu Mahārāja was to give up his body, he fixed his mind firmly upon the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, and thus, completely situated on the brahma-bhūta platform, he gave up the material body.

Text 14
सम्पीड्य पायुं पार्ष्णिभ्यां वायुमुत्सारयञ्छनै: ।
नाभ्यां कोष्ठेष्ववस्थाप्य हृदुर:कण्ठशीर्षणि ॥ १४ ॥
sampīḍya pāyuṁ pārṣṇibhyāṁ
vāyum utsārayañ chanaiḥ
nābhyāṁ koṣṭheṣv avasthāpya
hṛd-uraḥ-kaṇṭha-śīrṣaṇi
Synonyms
sampīḍya — by blocking; pāyum — the door of the anus; pārṣṇibhyām — by the calves; vāyum — the air which goes up; utsārayan — pushing upward; śanaiḥ — gradually; nābhyām — by the navel; koṣṭheṣu — in the heart and in the throat; avasthāpya — fixing; hṛt — in the heart; uraḥ — upward; kaṇṭha — throat; śīrṣaṇi — between the two eyebrows.

Translation
When Mahārāja Pṛthu practiced a particular yogic sitting posture, he blocked the door of his anus with his ankles, pressed his right and left calves and gradually raised his life air upward, passing it on to the circle of his navel, up to his heart and throat, and finally pushed it upward to the central position between his two eyebrows.

Text 15
उत्सर्पयंस्तु तं मूर्ध्नि क्रमेणावेश्य नि:स्पृह: ।
वायुं वायौ क्षितौ कायं तेजस्तेजस्ययूयुजत् ॥ १५ ॥
utsarpayaṁs tu taṁ mūrdhni
krameṇāveśya niḥspṛhaḥ
vāyuṁ vāyau kṣitau kāyaṁ
tejas tejasy ayūyujat
Synonyms
utsarpayan — thus placing; tu — but; tam — the air; mūrdhni — on the head; krameṇa — gradually; āveśya — placing; niḥspṛhaḥ — being freed from all material desires; vāyum — the air portion of the body; vāyau — in the total air covering the universe; kṣitau — in the total covering of earth; kāyam — this material body; tejaḥ — the fire in the body; tejasi — in the total fire of the material covering; ayūyujat — mixed.

Translation
In this way, Pṛthu Mahārāja gradually raised his air of life up to the hole in his skull, whereupon he lost all desire for material existence. Gradually he merged his air of life with the totality of air, his body with the totality of earth, and the fire within his body with the totality of fire.

Text 16
खान्याकाशे द्रवं तोये यथास्थानं विभागश: ।
क्षितिमम्भसि तत्तेजस्यदो वायौ नभस्यमुम् ॥ १६ ॥
khāny ākāśe dravaṁ toye
yathā-sthānaṁ vibhāgaśaḥ
kṣitim ambhasi tat tejasy
ado vāyau nabhasy amum
Synonyms
khāni — the different holes in the body for the sense organs; ākāśe — in the sky; dravam — the liquid substance; toye — in the water; yathā-sthānam — according to proper situation; vibhāgaśaḥ — as they are divided; kṣitim — earth; ambhasi — in the water; tat — that; tejasi — in the fire; adaḥ — the fire; vāyau — in the air; nabhasi — in the sky; amum — that.

Translation
In this way, according to the different positions of the various parts of the body, Pṛthu Mahārāja merged the holes of his senses with the sky; his bodily liquids, such as blood and various secretions, with the totality of water; and he merged earth with water, then water with fire, fire with air, air with sky, and so on.

Text 17
इन्द्रियेषु मनस्तानि तन्मात्रेषु यथोद्भवम् ।
भूतादिनामून्युत्कृष्य महत्यात्मनि सन्दधे ॥ १७ ॥
indriyeṣu manas tāni
tan-mātreṣu yathodbhavam
bhūtādināmūny utkṛṣya
mahaty ātmani sandadhe
Synonyms
indriyeṣu — in the sense organs; manaḥ — the mind; tāni — the sense organs; tat-mātreṣu — in the objects of the senses; yathā-udbhavam — wherefrom they generated; bhūta-ādinā — by the five elements; amūni — all those sense objects; utkṛṣya — taking out; mahati — in the mahat-tattva; ātmani — unto the ego; sandadhe — amalgamated.

Translation
He amalgamated the mind with the senses and the senses with the sense objects, according to their respective positions, and he also amalgamated the material ego with the total material energy, mahat-tattva.

Text 18
तं सर्वगुणविन्यासं जीवे मायामये न्यधात् ।
तं चानुशयमात्मस्थमसावनुशयी पुमान् ।
ज्ञानवैराग्यवीर्येण स्वरूपस्थोऽजहात्प्रभु: ॥ १८ ॥
taṁ sarva-guṇa-vinyāsaṁ
jīve māyāmaye nyadhāt
taṁ cānuśayam ātma-stham
asāv anuśayī pumān
jñāna-vairāgya-vīryeṇa
svarūpa-stho ’jahāt prabhuḥ
Synonyms
tam — unto Him; sarva-guṇa-vinyāsam — the reservoir of all qualities; jīve — unto the designations; māyā-maye — the reservoir of all potencies; nyadhāt — placed; tam — that; ca — also; anuśayam — designation; ātma-stham — situated in self-realization; asau — he; anuśayī — the living entity; pumān — the enjoyer; jñāna — knowledge; vairāgya — renunciation; vīryeṇa — by the prowess of; svarūpa-sthaḥ — being situated in one’s constitutional position; ajahāt — returned home; prabhuḥ — the controller.

Translation
Pṛthu Mahārāja then offered the total designation of the living entity unto the supreme controller of illusory energy. Being released from all the designations by which the living entity became entrapped, he became free by knowledge and renunciation and by the spiritual force of his devotional service. In this way, being situated in his original constitutional position of Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he gave up this body as a prabhu, or controller of the senses.

Text 19
अर्चिर्नाम महाराज्ञी तत्पत्‍न्यनुगता वनम् ।
सुकुमार्यतदर्हा च यत्पद्‌भ्यां स्पर्शनं भुव: ॥ १९ ॥
arcir nāma mahā-rājñī
tat-patny anugatā vanam
sukumāry atad-arhā ca
yat-padbhyāṁ sparśanaṁ bhuvaḥ
Synonyms
arciḥ nāma — of the name Arci; mahā-rājñī — the Queen; tat-patnī — the wife of Mahārāja Pṛthu; anugatā — who followed her husband; vanam — in the forest; su-kumārī — very delicate body; a-tat-arhā — who did not deserve; ca — also; yat-padbhyām — by the touch of whose feet; sparśanam — touching; bhuvaḥ — on the earth.

Translation
The Queen, the wife of Pṛthu Mahārāja, whose name was Arci, followed her husband into the forest. Since she was a queen, her body was very delicate. Although she did not deserve to live in the forest, she voluntarily touched her lotus feet to the ground.

Text 20
अतीव भर्तुर्व्रतधर्मनिष्ठया
शुश्रूषया चार्षदेहयात्रया ।
नाविन्दतार्तिं परिकर्शितापि सा
प्रेयस्करस्पर्शनमाननिर्वृति: ॥ २० ॥
atīva bhartur vrata-dharma-niṣṭhayā
śuśrūṣayā cārṣa-deha-yātrayā
nāvindatārtiṁ parikarśitāpi sā
preyaskara-sparśana-māna-nirvṛtiḥ
Synonyms
atīva — very much; bhartuḥ — of the husband; vrata-dharma — vow to serve him; niṣṭhayā — by determination; śuśrūṣayā — by serving; ca — also; ārṣa — like the great saintly sages; deha — body; yātrayā — living condition; na — did not; avindata — perceive; ārtim — any difficulty; parikarśitā api — although transformed to become lean and thin; sā — she; preyaḥ-kara — very pleasing; sparśana — touching; māna — engaged; nirvṛtiḥ — pleasure.

Translation
Although she was not accustomed to such difficulties, Queen Arci followed her husband in the regulative principles of living in the forest like great sages. She lay down on the ground and ate only fruits, flowers and leaves, and because she was not fit for these activities, she became frail and thin. Yet because of the pleasure she derived in serving her husband, she did not feel any difficulties.

Text 21
देहं विपन्नाखिलचेतनादिकं
पत्यु: पृथिव्या दयितस्य चात्मन: ।
आलक्ष्य किञ्चिच्च विलप्य सा सती
चितामथारोपयदद्रिसानुनि ॥ २१ ॥
dehaṁ vipannākhila-cetanādikaṁ
patyuḥ pṛthivyā dayitasya cātmanaḥ
ālakṣya kiñcic ca vilapya sā satī
citām athāropayad adri-sānuni
Synonyms
deham — body; vipanna — completely failing; akhila — all; cetana — feeling; ādikam — symptoms; patyuḥ — of her husband; pṛthivyāḥ — the world; dayitasya — of the merciful; ca ātmanaḥ — also of herself; ālakṣya — by seeing; kiñcit — very little; ca — and; vilapya — lamenting; sā — she; satī — the chaste; citām — unto the fire; atha — now; āropayat — placed; adri — hill; sānuni — on the top.

Translation
When Queen Arci saw that her husband, who had been so merciful to her and the earth, no longer showed symptoms of life, she lamented for a little while and then built a fiery pyre on top of a hill and placed the body of her husband on it.

Text 22
विधाय कृत्यं ह्रदिनीजलाप्लुता
दत्त्वोदकं भर्तुरुदारकर्मण: ।
नत्वा दिविस्थांस्त्रिदशांस्त्रि: परीत्य
विवेश वह्निं ध्यायती भर्तृपादौ ॥ २२ ॥
vidhāya kṛtyaṁ hradinī-jalāplutā
dattvodakaṁ bhartur udāra-karmaṇaḥ
natvā divi-sthāṁs tridaśāṁs triḥ parītya
viveśa vahniṁ dhyāyatī bhartṛ-pādau
Synonyms
vidhāya — executing; kṛtyam — the regulative function; hradinī — in the water of the river; jala-āplutā — taking bath completely; dattvā udakam — offering oblations of water; bhartuḥ — of her husband; udāra-karmaṇaḥ — who was so liberal; natvā — offering obeisances; divi-sthān — situated in the sky; tri-daśān — the thirty million demigods; triḥ — three times; parītya — circumambulating; viveśa — entered; vahnim — the fire; dhyāyatī — while thinking of; bhartṛ — of her husband; pādau — the two lotus feet.

Translation
After this, the Queen executed the necessary funerary functions and offered oblations of water. After bathing in the river, she offered obeisances to various demigods situated in the sky in the different planetary systems. She then circumambulated the fire and, while thinking of the lotus feet of her husband, entered its flames.

Text 23
विलोक्यानुगतां साध्वीं पृथुं वीरवरं पतिम् ।
तुष्टुवुर्वरदा देवैर्देवपत्‍न्य: सहस्रश: ॥ २३ ॥
vilokyānugatāṁ sādhvīṁ
pṛthuṁ vīra-varaṁ patim
tuṣṭuvur varadā devair
deva-patnyaḥ sahasraśaḥ
Synonyms
vilokya — by observing; anugatām — dying after the husband; sādhvīm — the chaste woman; pṛthum — of King Pṛthu; vīra-varam — the great warrior; patim — husband; tuṣṭuvuḥ — offered prayers; vara-dāḥ — able to give benediction; devaiḥ — by the demigods; deva-patnyaḥ — the wives of the demigods; sahasraśaḥ — in thousands.

Translation
After observing this brave act performed by the chaste wife Arci, the wife of the great King Pṛthu, many thousands of the wives of the demigods, along with their husbands, offered prayers to the Queen, for they were very much satisfied.

Text 24
कुर्वत्य: कुसुमासारं तस्मिन्मन्दरसानुनि ।
नदत्स्वमरतूर्येषु गृणन्ति स्म परस्परम् ॥ २४ ॥
kurvatyaḥ kusumāsāraṁ
tasmin mandara-sānuni
nadatsv amara-tūryeṣu
gṛṇanti sma parasparam
Synonyms
kurvatyaḥ — just showering; kusuma-āsāram — showers of flowers; tasmin — in that; mandara — of Mandara Hill; sānuni — on the top; nadatsu — vibrating; amara-tūryeṣu — beating of the drums of the demigods; gṛṇanti sma — they were talking; parasparam — amongst themselves as follows.

Translation
At that time the demigods were situated on the top of Mandara Hill, and all their wives began to shower flowers on the funeral pyre and began to talk amongst themselves as follows.

Text 25
देव्य ऊचु:
अहो इयं वधूर्धन्या या चैवं भूभुजां पतिम् ।
सर्वात्मना पतिं भेजे यज्ञेशं श्रीर्वधूरिव ॥ २५ ॥
devya ūcuḥ
aho iyaṁ vadhūr dhanyā
yā caivaṁ bhū-bhujāṁ patim
sarvātmanā patiṁ bheje
yajñeśaṁ śrīr vadhūr iva
Synonyms
devyaḥ ūcuḥ — the wives of the demigods said; aho — alas; iyam — this; vadhūḥ — the wife; dhanyā — most glorious; yā — who; ca — also; evam — as; bhū — of the world; bhujām — of all the kings; patim — the king; sarva-ātmanā — with full understanding; patim — unto the husband; bheje — worshiped; yajña-īśam — unto Lord Viṣṇu; śrīḥ — the goddess of fortune; vadhūḥ — wife; iva — like.

Translation
The wives of the demigods said: All glories to Queen Arci! We can see that this queen of the great King Pṛthu, the emperor of all the kings of the world, has served her husband with mind, speech and body exactly as the goddess of fortune serves the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Yajñeśa, or Viṣṇu.

Text 26
सैषा नूनं व्रजत्यूर्ध्वमनु वैन्यं पतिं सती ।
पश्यतास्मानतीत्यार्चिर्दुर्विभाव्येन कर्मणा ॥ २६ ॥
saiṣā nūnaṁ vrajaty ūrdhvam
anu vainyaṁ patiṁ satī
paśyatāsmān atītyārcir
durvibhāvyena karmaṇā
Synonyms
sā — she; eṣā — this; nūnam — certainly; vrajati — going; ūrdhvam — upward; anu — following; vainyam — the son of Vena; patim — husband; satī — chaste; paśyata — just see; asmān — us; atītya — overpassing; arciḥ — of the name Arci; durvibhāvyena — by inconceivable; karmaṇā — activities.

Translation
The wives of the demigods continued: Just see how this chaste lady, Arci, by dint of her inconceivable pious activities, is still following her husband upward, as far as we can see.

Text 27
तेषां दुरापं किं त्वन्यन्मर्त्यानां भगवत्पदम् ।
भुवि लोलायुषो ये वै नैष्कर्म्यं साधयन्त्युत ॥ २७ ॥
teṣāṁ durāpaṁ kiṁ tv anyan
martyānāṁ bhagavat-padam
bhuvi lolāyuṣo ye vai
naiṣkarmyaṁ sādhayanty uta
Synonyms
teṣām — of them; durāpam — difficult to obtain; kim — what; tu — but; anyat — anything else; martyānām — of the human beings; bhagavat-padam — the kingdom of God; bhuvi — in the world; lola — flickering; āyuṣaḥ — span of life; ye — those; vai — certainly; naiṣkarmyam — the path of liberation; sādhayanti — execute; uta — exactly.

Translation
In this material world, every human being has a short span of life, but those who are engaged in devotional service go back home, back to Godhead, for they are actually on the path of liberation. For such persons, there is nothing which is not available.

Text 28
स वञ्चितो बतात्मध्रुक् कृच्छ्रेण महता भुवि ।
लब्ध्वापवर्ग्यं मानुष्यं विषयेषु विषज्जते ॥ २८ ॥
sa vañcito batātma-dhruk
kṛcchreṇa mahatā bhuvi
labdhvāpavargyaṁ mānuṣyaṁ
viṣayeṣu viṣajjate
Synonyms
saḥ — he; vañcitaḥ — cheated; bata — certainly; ātma-dhruk — envious of himself; kṛcchreṇa — with great difficulty; mahatā — by great activities; bhuvi — in this world; labdhvā — by achieving; āpavargyam — the path of liberation; mānuṣyam — in the human form of life; viṣayeṣu — in the matter of sense gratification; viṣajjate — becomes engaged.

Translation
Any person who engages himself within this material world in performing activities that necessitate great struggle, and who, after obtaining a human form of life — which is a chance to attain liberation from miseries — undertakes the difficult tasks of fruitive activities, must be considered to be cheated and envious of his own self.

Text 29
मैत्रेय उवाच
स्तुवतीष्वमरस्त्रीषु पतिलोकं गता वधू: ।
यं वा आत्मविदां धुर्यो वैन्य: प्रापाच्युताश्रय: ॥ २९ ॥
maitreya uvāca
stuvatīṣv amara-strīṣu
pati-lokaṁ gatā vadhūḥ
yaṁ vā ātma-vidāṁ dhuryo
vainyaḥ prāpācyutāśrayaḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya continued to speak; stuvatīṣu — while glorifying; amara-strīṣu — by the wives of the denizens of heaven; pati-lokam — the planet where the husband had gone; gatā — reaching; vadhūḥ — the wife; yam — where; vā — or; ātma-vidām — of the self-realized souls; dhuryaḥ — the topmost; vainyaḥ — the son of King Vena (Pṛthu Mahārāja); prāpa — obtained; acyuta-āśrayaḥ — under the protection of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya continued speaking: My dear Vidura, when the wives of the denizens of heaven were thus talking amongst themselves, Queen Arci reached the planet which her husband, Mahārāja Pṛthu, the topmost self-realized soul, had attained.

Text 30
इत्थम्भूतानुभावोऽसौ पृथु: स भगवत्तम: ।
कीर्तितं तस्य चरितमुद्दामचरितस्य ते ॥ ३० ॥
ittham-bhūtānubhāvo ’sau
pṛthuḥ sa bhagavattamaḥ
kīrtitaṁ tasya caritam
uddāma-caritasya te
Synonyms
ittham-bhūta — thus; anubhāvaḥ — very great, powerful; asau — that; pṛthuḥ — King Pṛthu; saḥ — he; bhagavat-tamaḥ — the best among the lords; kīrtitam — described; tasya — his; caritam — character; uddāma — very great; caritasya — one who possesses such qualities; te — to you.

Translation
Maitreya continued: The greatest of all devotees, Mahārāja Pṛthu, was very powerful, and his character was liberal, magnificent and magnanimous. Thus I have described him to you as far as possible.

Text 31
य इदं सुमहत्पुण्यं श्रद्धयावहित: पठेत् ।
श्रावयेच्छृणुयाद्वापि स पृथो: पदवीमियात् ॥ ३१ ॥
ya idaṁ sumahat puṇyaṁ
śraddhayāvahitaḥ paṭhet
śrāvayec chṛṇuyād vāpi
sa pṛthoḥ padavīm iyāt
Synonyms
yaḥ — anyone; idam — this; su-mahat — very great; puṇyam — pious; śraddhayā — with great faith; avahitaḥ — with great attention; paṭhet — reads; śrāvayet — explains; śṛṇuyāt — hears; vā — or; api — certainly; saḥ — that person; pṛthoḥ — of King Pṛthu; padavīm — situation; iyāt — attains.

Translation
Any person who describes the great characteristics of King Pṛthu with faith and determination — whether he reads or hears of them himself or helps others to hear of them — is certain to attain the very planet which Mahārāja Pṛthu attained. In other words, such a person also returns home to the Vaikuṇṭha planets, back to Godhead.

Text 32
ब्राह्मणो ब्रह्मवर्चस्वी राजन्यो जगतीपति: ।
वैश्य: पठन् विट्पति: स्याच्छूद्र: सत्तमतामियात् ॥ ३२ ॥
brāhmaṇo brahma-varcasvī
rājanyo jagatī-patiḥ
vaiśyaḥ paṭhan viṭ-patiḥ syāc
chūdraḥ sattamatām iyāt
Synonyms
brāhmaṇaḥ — the brāhmaṇas; brahma-varcasvī — one who has attained the power of spiritual success; rājanyaḥ — the royal order; jagatī-patiḥ — the king of the world; vaiśyaḥ — the mercantile class of men; paṭhan — by reading; viṭ-patiḥ — becomes master of animals; syāt — becomes; śūdraḥ — the laborer class of men; sattama-tām — the position of a great devotee; iyāt — attains.

Translation
If one hears of the characteristics of Pṛthu Mahārāja and is a brāhmaṇa, he becomes perfectly qualified with brahminical powers; if he is a kṣatriya, he becomes a king of the world; if he is a vaiśya, he becomes a master of other vaiśyas and many animals; and if he is a śūdra, he becomes the topmost devotee.

Text 33
त्रि: कृत्व इदमाकर्ण्य नरो नार्यथवाद‍ृता ।
अप्रज: सुप्रजतमो निर्धनो धनवत्तम: ॥ ३३ ॥
triḥ kṛtva idam ākarṇya
naro nāry athavādṛtā
aprajaḥ su-prajatamo
nirdhano dhanavattamaḥ
Synonyms
triḥ — thrice; kṛtvaḥ — repeating; idam — this; ākarṇya — hearing; naraḥ — man; nārī — woman; athavā — or; ādṛtā — in great respect; aprajaḥ — one who has no children; su-praja-tamaḥ — surrounded by many children; nirdhanaḥ — without any money; dhana-vat — rich; tamaḥ — the greatest.

Translation
It does not matter whether one is a man or woman. Anyone who, with great respect, hears this narration of Mahārāja Pṛthu will become the parent of many children if without children, and will become the richest if without money.

Text 34
अस्पष्टकीर्ति: सुयशा मूर्खो भवति पण्डित: ।
इदं स्वस्त्ययनं पुंसाममङ्गल्यनिवारणम् ॥ ३४ ॥
aspaṣṭa-kīrtiḥ suyaśā
mūrkho bhavati paṇḍitaḥ
idaṁ svasty-ayanaṁ puṁsām
amaṅgalya-nivāraṇam
Synonyms
aspaṣṭa-kīrtiḥ — unmanifested reputation; su-yaśāḥ — very famous; mūrkhaḥ — illiterate; bhavati — becomes; paṇḍitaḥ — learned; idam — this; svasti-ayanam — auspiciousness; puṁsām — of the men; amaṅgalya — inauspiciousness; nivāraṇam — prohibiting.

Translation
Also, one who hears this narration three times will become very reputable if he is not recognized in society, and he will become a great scholar if he is illiterate. In other words, hearing of the narrations of Pṛthu Mahārāja is so auspicious that it drives away all bad luck.

Text 35
धन्यं यशस्यमायुष्यं स्वर्ग्यं कलिमलापहम् ।
धर्मार्थकाममोक्षाणां सम्यक्सिद्धिमभीप्सुभि: ।
श्रद्धयैतदनुश्राव्यं चतुर्णां कारणं परम् ॥ ३५ ॥
dhanyaṁ yaśasyam āyuṣyaṁ
svargyaṁ kali-malāpaham
dharmārtha-kāma-mokṣāṇāṁ
samyak siddhim abhīpsubhiḥ
śraddhayaitad anuśrāvyaṁ
caturṇāṁ kāraṇaṁ param
Synonyms
dhanyam — the source of riches; yaśasyam — the source of reputation; āyuṣyam — the source of an increased span of life; svargyam — the source of elevation to the heavenly planets; kali — of the Age of Kali; mala-apaham — decreasing the contamination; dharma — religion; artha — economic development; kāma — sense gratification; mokṣāṇām — of liberation; samyak — completely; siddhim — perfection; abhīpsubhiḥ — by those desiring; śraddhayā — with great respect; etat — this narration; anuśrāvyam — must one hear; caturṇām — of the four; kāraṇam — cause; param — ultimate.

Translation
By hearing the narration of Pṛthu Mahārāja, one can become great, increase his duration of life, gain promotion to the heavenly planets and counteract the contaminations of this Age of Kali. In addition, one can promote the causes of religion, economic development, sense gratification and liberation. Therefore from all sides it is advisable for a materialistic person who is interested in such things to read and hear the narrations of the life and character of Pṛthu Mahārāja.

Text 36
विजयाभिमुखो राजा श्रुत्वैतदभियाति यान् ।
बलिं तस्मै हरन्त्यग्रे राजान: पृथवे यथा ॥ ३६ ॥
vijayābhimukho rājā
śrutvaitad abhiyāti yān
baliṁ tasmai haranty agre
rājānaḥ pṛthave yathā
Synonyms
vijaya-abhimukhaḥ — one who is about to start for victory; rājā — king; śrutvā — hearing; etat — this; abhiyāti — starts; yān — on the chariot; balim — taxes; tasmai — unto him; haranti — present; agre — before; rājānaḥ — other kings; pṛthave — unto King Pṛthu; yathā — as it was done.

Translation
If a king, who is desirous of attaining victory and ruling power, chants the narration of Pṛthu Mahārāja three times before going forth on his chariot, all subordinate kings will automatically render all kinds of taxes unto him — as they rendered them unto Mahārāja Pṛthu — simply upon his order.

Text 37
मुक्तान्यसङ्गो भगवत्यमलां भक्तिमुद्वहन् ।
वैन्यस्य चरितं पुण्यं श‍ृणुयाच्छ्रावयेत्पठेत् ॥ ३७ ॥
muktānya-saṅgo bhagavaty
amalāṁ bhaktim udvahan
vainyasya caritaṁ puṇyaṁ
śṛṇuyāc chrāvayet paṭhet
Synonyms
mukta-anya-saṅgaḥ — being freed from all material contamination; bhagavati — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; amalām — unalloyed; bhaktim — devotional service; udvahan — carrying out; vainyasya — of the son of Mahārāja Vena; caritam — character; puṇyam — pious; śṛṇuyāt — must hear; śrāvayet — must induce others to hear; paṭhet — and go on reading.

Translation
A pure devotee who is executing the different processes of devotional service may be situated in the transcendental position, being completely absorbed in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, but even he, while discharging devotional service, must hear, read and induce others to hear about the character and life of Pṛthu Mahārāja.

Text 38
वैचित्रवीर्याभिहितं महन्माहात्म्यसूचकम् ।
अस्मिन् कृतमतिमर्त्यं पार्थवीं गतिमाप्नुयात् ॥ ३८ ॥
vaicitravīryābhihitaṁ
mahan-māhātmya-sūcakam
asmin kṛtam atimartyaṁ
pārthavīṁ gatim āpnuyāt
Synonyms
vaicitravīrya — O son of Vicitravīrya (Vidura); abhihitam — explained; mahat — great; māhātmya — greatness; sūcakam — awakening; asmin — in this; kṛtam — performed; ati-martyam — uncommon; pārthavīm — in connection with Pṛthu Mahārāja; gatim — advancement, destination; āpnuyāt — one should achieve.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, I have as far as possible spoken the narrations about Pṛthu Mahārāja, which enrich one’s devotional attitude. Whoever takes advantage of these benefits also goes back home, back to Godhead, like Mahārāja Pṛthu.

Text 39
अनुदिनमिदमादरेण श‍ृण्वन्
पृथुचरितं प्रथयन् विमुक्तसङ्ग: ।
भगवति भवसिन्धुपोतपादे
स च निपुणां लभते रतिं मनुष्य: ॥ ३९ ॥
anudinam idam ādareṇa śṛṇvan
pṛthu-caritaṁ prathayan vimukta-saṅgaḥ
bhagavati bhava-sindhu-pota-pāde
sa ca nipuṇāṁ labhate ratiṁ manuṣyaḥ
Synonyms
anu-dinam — day after day; idam — this; ādareṇa — with great respect; śṛṇvan — hearing; pṛthu-caritam — the narration of Pṛthu Mahārāja; prathayan — chanting; vimukta — liberated; saṅgaḥ — association; bhagavati — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhava-sindhu — the ocean of nescience; pota — the boat; pāde — whose lotus feet; saḥ — he; ca — also; nipuṇām — complete; labhate — achieves; ratim — attachment; manuṣyaḥ — the person.

Translation
Whoever, with great reverence and adoration, regularly reads, chants and describes the history of Mahārāja Pṛthu’s activities will certainly increase unflinching faith and attraction for the lotus feet of the Lord. The Lord’s lotus feet are the boat by which one can cross the ocean of nescience.