Text 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
इति सन्दिश्य भगवान् बार्हिषदैरभिपूजित: ।
पश्यतां राजपुत्राणां तत्रैवान्तर्दधे हर: ॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvāca
iti sandiśya bhagavān
bārhiṣadair abhipūjitaḥ
paśyatāṁ rāja-putrāṇāṁ
tatraivāntardadhe haraḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya continued to speak; iti — thus; sandiśya — giving instruction; bhagavān — the most powerful lord; bārhiṣadaiḥ — by the sons of King Barhiṣat; abhipūjitaḥ — being worshiped; paśyatām — while they were looking on; rāja-putrāṇām — the sons of the King; tatra — there; eva — certainly; antardadhe — became invisible; haraḥ — Lord Śiva.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya continued speaking to Vidura: My dear Vidura, in this way Lord Śiva instructed the sons of King Barhiṣat. The sons of the King also worshiped Lord Śiva with great devotion and respect. Finally, Lord Śiva became invisible to the princes.

Text 2
रुद्रगीतं भगवत: स्तोत्रं सर्वे प्रचेतस: ।
जपन्तस्ते तपस्तेपुर्वर्षाणामयुतं जले ॥ २ ॥
rudra-gītaṁ bhagavataḥ
stotraṁ sarve pracetasaḥ
japantas te tapas tepur
varṣāṇām ayutaṁ jale
Synonyms
rudra-gītam — the song sung by Lord Śiva; bhagavataḥ — of the Lord; stotram — prayer; sarve — all; pracetasaḥ — the princes known as the Pracetās; japantaḥ — reciting; te — all of them; tapaḥ — austerity; tepuḥ — executed; varṣāṇām — of years; ayutam — ten thousand; jale — within the water.

Translation
All the Pracetā princes simply stood in the water for ten thousand years and recited the prayers given to them by Lord Śiva.

Text 3
प्राचीनबर्हिषं क्षत्त: कर्मस्वासक्तमानसम् ।
नारदोऽध्यात्मतत्त्वज्ञ: कृपालु: प्रत्यबोधयत् ॥ ३ ॥
prācīnabarhiṣaṁ kṣattaḥ
karmasv āsakta-mānasam
nārado ’dhyātma-tattva-jñaḥ
kṛpāluḥ pratyabodhayat
Synonyms
prācīnabarhiṣam — unto King Prācīnabarhiṣat; kṣattaḥ — O Vidura; karmasu — in fruitive activities; āsakta — attached; mānasam — with this mentality; nāradaḥ — the great sage Nārada; adhyātma — spiritualism; tattva-jñaḥ — one who knows the truth; kṛpāluḥ — being compassionate; pratyabodhayat — gave instructions.

Translation
While the princes were undergoing severe austerities in the water, their father was performing different types of fruitive activities. At this time the great saint Nārada, master and teacher of all spiritual life, became very compassionate upon the King and decided to instruct him about spiritual life.

Text 4
श्रेयस्त्वं कतमद्राजन् कर्मणात्मन ईहसे । दु:खहानि: सुखावाप्ति: श्रेयस्तन्नेह चेष्यते ॥ ४ ॥
śreyas tvaṁ katamad rājan
karmaṇātmana īhase
duḥkha-hāniḥ sukhāvāptiḥ
śreyas tan neha ceṣyate
Synonyms
śreyaḥ — ultimate benediction; tvam — you; katamat — what is that; rājan — O King; karmaṇā — by fruitive activities; ātmanaḥ — of the soul; īhase — you desire; duḥkha-hāniḥ — disappearance of all distresses; sukha-avāptiḥ — attainment of all happiness; śreyaḥ — benediction; tat — that; na — never; iha — in this connection; ca — and; iṣyate — is available.

Translation
Nārada Muni asked King Prācīnabarhiṣat: My dear King, what do you desire to achieve by performing these fruitive activities? The chief aim of life is to get rid of all miseries and enjoy happiness, but these two things cannot be realized by fruitive activity.

Text 5
राजोवाच
न जानामि महाभाग परं कर्मापविद्धधी: ।
ब्रूहि मे विमलं ज्ञानं येन मुच्येय कर्मभि: ॥ ५ ॥
rājovāca
na jānāmi mahā-bhāga
paraṁ karmāpaviddha-dhīḥ
brūhi me vimalaṁ jñānaṁ
yena mucyeya karmabhiḥ
Synonyms
rājā uvāca — the King replied; na — not; jānāmi — I know; mahā-bhāga — O great soul; param — transcendental; karma — by fruitive activities; apaviddha — being pierced; dhīḥ — my intelligence; brūhi — please tell; me — to me; vimalam — spotless; jñānam — knowledge; yena — by which; mucyeya — I can get relief; karmabhiḥ — from the fruitive activities.

Translation
The King replied: O great soul, Nārada, my intelligence is entangled in fruitive activities; therefore I do not know the ultimate goal of life. Kindly instruct me in pure knowledge so that I can get out of the entanglement of fruitive activities.

Text 6
गृहेषु कूटधर्मेषु पुत्रदारधनार्थधी: ।
न परं विन्दते मूढो भ्राम्यन् संसारवर्त्मसु ॥ ६ ॥
gṛheṣu kūṭa-dharmeṣu
putra-dāra-dhanārtha-dhīḥ
na paraṁ vindate mūḍho
bhrāmyan saṁsāra-vartmasu
Synonyms
gṛheṣu — in family life; kūṭa-dharmeṣu — in false occupational duties; putra — sons; dāra — wife; dhana — wealth; artha — the goal of life; dhīḥ — one who considers; na — not; param — transcendence; vindate — achieves; mūḍhaḥ — rascal; bhrāmyan — wandering; saṁsāra — of material existence; vartmasu — on the paths.

Translation
Those who are interested only in a so-called dutiful life — namely remaining as a householder entangled by sons and a wife and searching after wealth — think that such things are life’s ultimate goal. Such people simply wander in different types of bodies throughout this material existence without finding out the ultimate goal of life.

Text 7
नारद उवाच
भो भो: प्रजापते राजन् पशून् पश्य
त्वयाध्वरे ।
संज्ञापिताञ्जीवसङ्घान्निर्घृणेन सहस्रश: ॥ ७ ॥
nārada uvāca
bhoḥ bhoḥ prajāpate rājan
paśūn paśya tvayādhvare
saṁjñāpitāñ jīva-saṅghān
nirghṛṇena sahasraśaḥ
Synonyms
nāradaḥ uvāca — the great sage Nārada replied; bhoḥ bhoḥ — hello; prajā-pate — O ruler of the citizens; rājan — O King; paśūn — animals; paśya — please see; tvayā — by you; adhvare — in the sacrifice; saṁjñāpitān — killed; jīva-saṅghān — groups of animals; nirghṛṇena — without pity; sahasraśaḥ — in thousands.

Translation
The great saint Nārada said: O ruler of the citizens, my dear King, please see in the sky those animals which you have sacrificed without compassion and without mercy in the sacrificial arena.

Text 8
एते त्वां सम्प्रतीक्षन्ते स्मरन्तो वैशसं
तव ।
सम्परेतम् अय:कूटैश्छिन्दन्त्युत्थितमन्यव: ॥ ८ ॥
ete tvāṁ sampratīkṣante
smaranto vaiśasaṁ tava
samparetam ayaḥ-kūṭaiś
chindanty utthita-manyavaḥ
Synonyms
ete — all of them; tvām — you; sampratīkṣante — are awaiting; smarantaḥ — remembering; vaiśasam — injuries; tava — of you; samparetam — after your death; ayaḥ — made of iron; kūṭaiḥ — by the horns; chindanti — pierce; utthita — enlivened; manyavaḥ — anger.

Translation
All these animals are awaiting your death so that they can avenge the injuries you have inflicted upon them. After you die, they will angrily pierce your body with iron horns.

Text 9
अत्र ते कथयिष्येऽमुमितिहासं पुरातनम् ।
पुरञ्जनस्य चरितं निबोध गदतो मम ॥ ९ ॥
atra te kathayiṣye ’mum
itihāsaṁ purātanam
purañjanasya caritaṁ
nibodha gadato mama
Synonyms
atra — herewith; te — unto you; kathayiṣye — I shall speak; amum — on this subject matter; itihāsam — history; purātanam — very old; purañ-janasya — in the matter of Purañjana; caritam — his character; nibodha — try to understand; gadataḥ mama — while I am speaking.

Translation
In this connection I wish to narrate an old history connected with the character of a king called Purañjana. Please try to hear me with great attention.

Text 10
आसीत्पुरञ्जनो नाम राजा राजन् बृहच्छ्रवा: ।
तस्याविज्ञातनामासीत्सखाविज्ञातचेष्टित: ॥ १० ॥
āsīt purañjano nāma
rājā rājan bṛhac-chravāḥ
tasyāvijñāta-nāmāsīt
sakhāvijñāta-ceṣṭitaḥ
Synonyms
āsīt — there was; purañjanaḥ — Purañjana; nāma — named; rājā — king; rājan — O King; bṛhat-śravāḥ — whose activities were great; tasya — his; avijñāta — the unknown one; nāmā — of the name; āsīt — there was; sakhā — friend; avijñāta — unknown; ceṣṭitaḥ — whose activities.

Translation
My dear King, once in the past lived a king named Purañjana, who was celebrated for his great activities. He had a friend named Avijñāta [“the unknown one”]. No one could understand the activities of Avijñāta.

Text 11
सोऽन्वेषमाण: शरणं बभ्राम पृथिवीं प्रभु: ।
नानुरूपं यदाविन्ददभूत्स विमना इव ॥ ११ ॥
so ’nveṣamāṇaḥ śaraṇaṁ
babhrāma pṛthivīṁ prabhuḥ
nānurūpaṁ yadāvindad
abhūt sa vimanā iva
Synonyms
saḥ — that King Purañjana; anveṣamāṇaḥ — searching after; śaraṇam — shelter; babhrāma — traveled over; pṛthivīm — the whole planet earth; prabhuḥ — to become an independent master; na — never; anurūpam — to his liking; yadā — when; avindat — he could find; abhūt — became; saḥ — he; vimanāḥ — morose; iva — like.

Translation
King Purañjana began to search for a suitable place to live, and thus he traveled all over the world. Even after a great deal of traveling, he could not find a place just to his liking. Finally he became morose and disappointed.

Text 12
न साधु मेने ता: सर्वा भूतले यावती:
पुर: ।
कामान् कामयमानोऽसौ तस्य तस्योपपत्तये ॥ १२ ॥
na sādhu mene tāḥ sarvā
bhūtale yāvatīḥ puraḥ
kāmān kāmayamāno ’sau
tasya tasyopapattaye
Synonyms
na — never; sādhu — good; mene — thought; tāḥ — them; sarvāḥ — all; bhū-tale — on this earth; yāvatīḥ — all kinds of; puraḥ — residential houses; kāmān — objects for sense enjoyment; kāmayamānaḥ — desiring; asau — that King; tasya — his; tasya — his; upapattaye — for obtaining.

Translation
King Purañjana had unlimited desires for sense enjoyment; consequently he traveled all over the world to find a place where all his desires could be fulfilled. Unfortunately he found a feeling of insufficiency everywhere.

Text 13
स एकदा हिमवतो दक्षिणेष्वथ सानुषु ।
ददर्श नवभिर्द्वार्भि: पुरं लक्षितलक्षणाम् ॥ १३ ॥
sa ekadā himavato
dakṣiṇeṣv atha sānuṣu
dadarśa navabhir dvārbhiḥ
puraṁ lakṣita-lakṣaṇām
Synonyms
saḥ — that King Purañjana; ekadā — once upon a time; himavataḥ — of the Himālaya Mountains; dakṣiṇeṣu — southern; atha — after this; sānuṣu — on the ridges; dadarśa — found; navabhiḥ — with nine; dvārbhiḥ — gates; puram — a city; lakṣita — visible; lakṣaṇām — having all auspicious facilities.

Translation
Once, while wandering in this way, he saw on the southern side of the Himālayas, in a place named Bhārata-varṣa [India], a city that had nine gates all about and was characterized by all auspicious facilities.

Text 14
प्राकारोपवनाट्टालपरिखैरक्षतोरणै: ।
स्वर्णरौप्यायसै: श‍ृङ्गै: सङ्कुलां सर्वतो गृहै: ॥ १४ ॥
prākāropavanāṭṭāla-
parikhair akṣa-toraṇaiḥ
svarṇa-raupyāyasaiḥ śṛṅgaiḥ
saṅkulāṁ sarvato gṛhaiḥ
Synonyms
prākāra — walls; upavana — parks; aṭṭāla — towers; parikhaiḥ — with trenches; akṣa — windows; toraṇaiḥ — with gates; svarṇa — gold; raupya — silver; ayasaiḥ — made of iron; śṛṅgaiḥ — with domes; saṅkulām — congested; sarvataḥ — everywhere; gṛhaiḥ — with houses.

Translation
That city was surrounded by walls and parks, and within it were towers, canals, windows and outlets. The houses there were decorated with domes made of gold, silver and iron.

Text 15
नीलस्फटिकवैदूर्यमुक्तामरकतारुणै: ।
क्लृप्तहर्म्यस्थलीं दीप्तां श्रिया भोगवतीमिव ॥ १५ ॥
nīla-sphaṭika-vaidūrya-
muktā-marakatāruṇaiḥ
kḷpta-harmya-sthalīṁ dīptāṁ
śriyā bhogavatīm iva
Synonyms
nīla — sapphires; sphaṭika — crystal; vaidūrya — diamonds; muktā — pearls; marakata — emeralds; aruṇaiḥ — with rubies; kḷpta — bedecked; harmya-sthalīm — the floors of the palaces; dīptām — lustrous; śriyā — with beauty; bhogavatīm — the celestial town named Bhogavatī; iva — like.

Translation
The floors of the houses in that city were made of sapphire, crystal, diamonds, pearls, emeralds and rubies. Because of the luster of the houses in the capital, the city was compared to the celestial town named Bhogavatī.

Text 16
सभाचत्वररथ्याभिराक्रीडायतनापणै: ।
चैत्यध्वजपताकाभिर्युक्तां विद्रुमवेदिभि: ॥ १६ ॥
sabhā-catvara-rathyābhir
ākrīḍāyatanāpaṇaiḥ
caitya-dhvaja-patākābhir
yuktāṁ vidruma-vedibhiḥ
Synonyms
sabhā — assembly houses; catvara — squares; rathyābhiḥ — by streets; ākrīḍa-āyatana — gambling houses; āpaṇaiḥ — by shops; caitya — resting places; dhvaja-patākābhiḥ — with flags and festoons; yuktām — decorated; vidruma — without trees; vedibhiḥ — with platforms.

Translation
In that city there were many assembly houses, street crossings, streets, restaurants, gambling houses, markets, resting places, flags, festoons and beautiful parks. All these surrounded the city.

Text 17
पुर्यास्तु बाह्योपवने दिव्यद्रुमलताकुले ।
नदद्विहङ्गालिकुलकोलाहलजलाशये ॥ १७ ॥
puryās tu bāhyopavane
divya-druma-latākule
nadad-vihaṅgāli-kula-
kolāhala-jalāśaye
Synonyms
puryāḥ — of that town; tu — then; bāhya-upavane — in an outside garden; divya — very nice; druma — trees; latā — creepers; ākule — filled with; nadat — vibrating; vihaṅga — birds; ali — bees; kula — groups of; kolāhala — humming; jala-āśaye — with a lake.

Translation
On the outskirts of that city were many beautiful trees and creepers encircling a nice lake. Also surrounding that lake were many groups of birds and bees that were always chanting and humming.

Text 18
हिमनिर्झरविप्रुष्मत्कुसुमाकरवायुना ।
चलत्प्रवालविटपनलिनीतटसम्पदि ॥ १८ ॥
hima-nirjhara-vipruṣmat-
kusumākara-vāyunā
calat-pravāla-viṭapa-
nalinī-taṭa-sampadi
Synonyms
hima-nirjhara — from the icy mountain waterfall; vipruṭ-mat — carrying particles of water; kusuma-ākara — springtime; vāyunā — by the air; calat — moving; pravāla — branches; viṭapa — trees; nalinī-taṭa — on the bank of the lake with lotus flowers; sampadi — opulent.

Translation
The branches of the trees standing on the bank of the lake received particles of water carried by the spring air from the falls coming down from the icy mountain.

Text 19
नानारण्यमृगव्रातैरनाबाधे मुनिव्रतै: ।
आहूतं मन्यते पान्थो यत्र कोकिलकूजितै: ॥ १९ ॥
nānāraṇya-mṛga-vrātair
anābādhe muni-vrataiḥ
āhūtaṁ manyate pāntho
yatra kokila-kūjitaiḥ
Synonyms
nānā — various; araṇya — forest; mṛga — animals; vrātaiḥ — with groups; anābādhe — in the matter of nonviolence; muni-vrataiḥ — like the great sages; āhūtam — as if invited; manyate — thinks; pānthaḥ — passenger; yatra — where; kokila — of cuckoos; kūjitaiḥ — by the cooing.

Translation
In such an atmosphere even the animals of the forest became nonviolent and nonenvious like great sages. Consequently, the animals did not attack anyone. Over and above everything was the cooing of the cuckoos. Any passenger passing along that path was invited by that atmosphere to take rest in that nice garden.

Text 20
यद‍ृच्छयागतां तत्र ददर्श प्रमदोत्तमाम् ।
भृत्यैर्दशभिरायान्तीमेकैकशतनायकै: ॥ २० ॥
yadṛcchayāgatāṁ tatra
dadarśa pramadottamām
bhṛtyair daśabhir āyāntīm
ekaika-śata-nāyakaiḥ
Synonyms
yadṛcchayā — all of a sudden, without engagement; āgatām — arrived; tatra — there; dadarśa — he saw; pramadā — one woman; uttamām — very beautiful; bhṛtyaiḥ — surrounded by servants; daśabhiḥ — ten; āyāntīm — coming forward; eka-eka — each one of them; śata — of hundreds; nāyakaiḥ — the leaders.

Translation
While wandering here and there in that wonderful garden, King Purañjana suddenly came in contact with a very beautiful woman who was walking there without any engagement. She had ten servants with her, and each servant had hundreds of wives accompanying him.

Text 21
पञ्चशीर्षाहिना गुप्तां प्रतीहारेण सर्वत: ।
अन्वेषमाणामृषभमप्रौढां कामरूपिणीम् ॥ २१ ॥
pañca-śīrṣāhinā guptāṁ
pratīhāreṇa sarvataḥ
anveṣamāṇām ṛṣabham
aprauḍhāṁ kāma-rūpiṇīm
Synonyms
pañca — five; śīrṣa — heads; ahinā — by a snake; guptām — protected; pratīhāreṇa — by a bodyguard; sarvataḥ — all around; anveṣamāṇām — one who is searching after; ṛṣabham — a husband; aprauḍhām — not very old; kāma-rūpiṇīm — very attractive to fulfill lusty desires.

Translation
The woman was protected on all sides by a five-hooded snake. She was very beautiful and young, and she appeared very anxious to find a suitable husband.

Text 22
सुनासां सुदतीं बालां सुकपोलां वराननाम् ।
समविन्यस्तकर्णाभ्यां बिभ्रतीं कुण्डलश्रियम् ॥ २२ ॥
sunāsāṁ sudatīṁ bālāṁ
sukapolāṁ varānanām
sama-vinyasta-karṇābhyāṁ
bibhratīṁ kuṇḍala-śriyam
Synonyms
su-nāsām — very beautiful nose; su-datīm — very beautiful teeth; bālām — the young woman; su-kapolām — nice forehead; vara-ānanām — beautiful face; sama — equally; vinyasta — arranged; karṇābhyām — both ears; bibhratīm — dazzling; kuṇḍala-śriyam — having beautiful earrings.

Translation
The woman’s nose, teeth and forehead were all very beautiful. Her ears were equally very beautiful and were bedecked with dazzling earrings.

Text 23
पिशङ्गनीवीं सुश्रोणीं श्यामां कनकमेखलाम् ।
पद्‌भ्यां क्‍वणद्‌भ्यां चलन्तीं नूपुरैर्देवतामिव ॥ २३ ॥
piśaṅga-nīvīṁ suśroṇīṁ
śyāmāṁ kanaka-mekhalām
padbhyāṁ kvaṇadbhyāṁ calantīṁ
nūpurair devatām iva
Synonyms
piśaṅga — yellow; nīvīm — garment; su-śroṇīm — beautiful waist; śyāmām — blackish; kanaka — golden; mekhalām — belt; padbhyām — with the feet; kvaṇadbhyām — tinkling; calantīm — walking; nūpuraiḥ — with ankle bells; devatām — a denizen of the heavens; iva — like.

Translation
The waist and hips of the woman were very beautiful. She was dressed in a yellow sārī with a golden belt. While she walked, her ankle bells rang. She appeared exactly like a denizen of the heavens.

Text 24
स्तनौ व्यञ्जितकैशोरौ समवृत्तौ निरन्तरौ ।
वस्त्रान्तेन निगूहन्तीं व्रीडया गजगामिनीम् ॥ २४ ॥
stanau vyañjita-kaiśorau
sama-vṛttau nirantarau
vastrāntena nigūhantīṁ
vrīḍayā gaja-gāminīm
Synonyms
stanau — breasts; vyañjita — indicating; kaiśorau — new youth; sama-vṛttau — equally round; nirantarau — fixed close, side by side; vastra-antena — by the end of the sārī; nigūhantīm — trying to cover; vrīḍayā — out of shyness; gaja-gāminīm — walking just like a great elephant.

Translation
With the end of her sārī the woman was trying to cover her breasts, which were equally round and well placed side by side. She again and again tried to cover them out of shyness while she walked exactly like a great elephant.

Text 25
तामाह ललितं वीर: सव्रीडस्मितशोभनाम् ।
स्‍निग्धेनापाङ्गपुङ्खेन स्पृष्ट: प्रेमोद्भ्रमद्भ्रुवा ॥ २५ ॥
tām āha lalitaṁ vīraḥ
savrīḍa-smita-śobhanām
snigdhenāpāṅga-puṅkhena
spṛṣṭaḥ premodbhramad-bhruvā
Synonyms
tām — unto her; āha — addressed; lalitam — very gently; vīraḥ — the hero; sa-vrīḍa — with shyness; smita — smiling; śobhanām — very beautiful; snigdhena — by sex desire; apāṅga-puṅkhena — by the arrow of glancing; spṛṣṭaḥ — thus pierced; prema-udbhramat — exciting love; bhruvā — by the eyebrows.

Translation
Purañjana, the hero, became attracted by the eyebrows and smiling face of the very beautiful girl and was immediately pierced by the arrows of her lusty desires. When she smiled shyly, she looked very beautiful to Purañjana, who, although a hero, could not refrain from addressing her.

Text 26
का त्वं कञ्जपलाशाक्षि कस्यासीह कुत: सति ।
इमामुप पुरीं भीरु किं चिकीर्षसि शंस मे ॥ २६ ॥
kā tvaṁ kañja-palāśākṣi
kasyāsīha kutaḥ sati
imām upa purīṁ bhīru
kiṁ cikīrṣasi śaṁsa me
Synonyms
kā — who; tvam — you; kañja-palāśa — like the petals of the lotus; akṣi — eyes; kasya — whose; asi — you are; iha — here; kutaḥ — wherefrom; sati — O chaste one; imām — this; upa — near; purīm — city; bhīru — O timid one; kim — what; cikīrṣasi — you are trying to do; śaṁsa — kindly explain; me — unto me.

Translation
My dear lotus-eyed, kindly explain to me where you are coming from, who you are, and whose daughter you are. You appear very chaste. What is the purpose of your coming here? What are you trying to do? Please explain all these things to me.

Text 27
क एतेऽनुपथा ये त एकादश महाभटा: ।
एता वा ललना: सुभ्रु कोऽयं तेऽहि: पुर:सर: ॥ २७ ॥
ka ete ’nupathā ye ta
ekādaśa mahā-bhaṭāḥ
etā vā lalanāḥ subhru
ko ’yaṁ te ’hiḥ puraḥ-saraḥ
Synonyms
ke — who; ete — all these; anupathāḥ — followers; ye — they who; te — your; ekādaśa — eleven; mahā-bhaṭāḥ — very powerful bodyguards; etāḥ — all of these; vā — also; lalanāḥ — women; su-bhru — O beautiful-eyed one; kaḥ — who; ayam — this; te — your; ahiḥ — the snake; puraḥ — in front; saraḥ — going.

Translation
My dear lotus-eyed, who are those eleven strong bodyguards with you, and who are those ten specific servants? Who are those women following the ten servants, and who is the snake that is preceding you?

Text 28
त्वं ह्रीर्भवान्यस्यथ वाग्रमा पतिं
विचिन्वती किं मुनिवद्रहो वने ।
त्वदङ्‌घ्रिकामाप्तसमस्तकामं
क्‍व पद्मकोश: पतित: कराग्रात् ॥ २८ ॥
tvaṁ hrīr bhavāny asy atha vāg ramā patiṁ
vicinvatī kiṁ munivad raho vane
tvad-aṅghri-kāmāpta-samasta-kāmaṁ
kva padma-kośaḥ patitaḥ karāgrāt
Synonyms
tvam — you; hrīḥ — shyness; bhavānī — the wife of Lord Śiva; asi — are; atha — rather; vāk — Sarasvatī, the goddess of learning; ramā — the goddess of fortune; patim — husband; vicinvatī — searching after, thinking of; kim — are you; muni-vat — like a sage; rahaḥ — in this lonely place; vane — in the forest; tvat-aṅghri — your feet; kāma — desiring; āpta — achieved; samasta — all; kāmam — desirable things; kva — where is; padma-kośaḥ — the lotus flower; patitaḥ — fallen; kara — of the hand; agrāt — from the front portion, or palm.

Translation
My dear beautiful girl, you are exactly like the goddess of fortune or the wife of Lord Śiva or the goddess of learning, the wife of Lord Brahmā. Although you must be one of them, I see that you are loitering in this forest. Indeed, you are as silent as the great sages. Is it that you are searching after your own husband? Whoever your husband may be, simply by understanding that you are so faithful to him, he will come to possess all opulences. I think you must be the goddess of fortune, but I do not see the lotus flower in your hand. Therefore I am asking you where you have thrown that lotus.

Text 29
नासां वरोर्वन्यतमा भुविस्पृक्
पुरीमिमां वीरवरेण साकम् ।
अर्हस्यलङ्कर्तुमदभ्रकर्मणा
लोकं परं श्रीरिव यज्ञपुंसा ॥ २९ ॥
nāsāṁ varorv anyatamā bhuvi-spṛk
purīm imāṁ vīra-vareṇa sākam
arhasy alaṅkartum adabhra-karmaṇā
lokaṁ paraṁ śrīr iva yajña-puṁsā
Synonyms
na — not; āsām — of these; varoru — O most fortunate one; anya-tamā — anyone; bhuvi-spṛk — touching the ground; purīm — city; imām — this; vīra-vareṇa — the great hero; sākam — along with; arhasi — you deserve; alaṅkartum — to decorate; adabhra — glorious; karmaṇā — whose activities; lokam — world; param — transcendental; śrīḥ — the goddess of fortune; iva — like; yajña-puṁsā — with the enjoyer of all yajñas.

Translation
O greatly fortunate one, it appears that you are none of the women I have mentioned because I see that your feet are touching the ground. But if you are some woman of this planet, you can, like the goddess of fortune — who, accompanied by Lord Viṣṇu, increases the beauty of the Vaikuṇṭha planets — also increase the beauty of this city by associating with me. You should understand that I am a great hero and a very powerful king on this planet.

Text 30
यदेष मापाङ्गविखण्डितेन्द्रियं
सव्रीडभावस्मितविभ्रमद्भ्रुवा ।
त्वयोपसृष्टो भगवान्मनोभव:
प्रबाधतेऽथानुगृहाण शोभने ॥ ३० ॥
yad eṣa māpāṅga-vikhaṇḍitendriyaṁ
savrīḍa-bhāva-smita-vibhramad-bhruvā
tvayopasṛṣṭo bhagavān mano-bhavaḥ
prabādhate ’thānugṛhāṇa śobhane
Synonyms
yat — because; eṣaḥ — this; mā — me; apāṅga — by your glances; vikhaṇḍita — agitated; indriyam — whose senses or mind; sa-vrīḍa — with shyness; bhāva — affection; smita — smiling; vibhramat — bewildering; bhruvā — with eyebrows; tvayā — by you; upasṛṣṭaḥ — being influenced; bhagavān — the most powerful; manaḥ-bhavaḥ — cupid; prabādhate — is harassing; atha — therefore; anugṛhāṇa — be merciful; śobhane — O very beautiful one.

Translation
Certainly your glancing upon me today has very much agitated my mind. Your smile, which is full of shyness but at the same time lusty, is agitating the most powerful cupid within me. Therefore, O most beautiful, I ask you to be merciful upon me.

Text 31
त्वदाननं सुभ्रु सुतारलोचनं
व्यालम्बिनीलालकवृन्दसंवृतम् ।
उन्नीय मे दर्शय वल्गुवाचकं
यद्‌व्रीडया नाभिमुखं शुचिस्मिते ॥ ३१ ॥
tvad-ānanaṁ subhru sutāra-locanaṁ
vyālambi-nīlālaka-vṛnda-saṁvṛtam
unnīya me darśaya valgu-vācakaṁ
yad vrīḍayā nābhimukhaṁ śuci-smite
Synonyms
tvat — your; ānanam — face; su-bhru — having nice eyebrows; su-tāra — with nice pupils; locanam — eyes; vyālambi — scattered; nīla — bluish; alaka-vṛnda — by locks of hair; saṁvṛtam — surrounded; unnīya — having raised; me — unto me; darśaya — show; valgu-vācakam — having words very sweet to hear; yat — which face; vrīḍayā — by shyness; na — not; abhimukham — face to face; śuci-smite — O woman with lovely smiles.

Translation
My dear girl, your face is so beautiful with your nice eyebrows and eyes and with your bluish hair scattered about. In addition, very sweet sounds are coming from your mouth. Nonetheless, you are so covered with shyness that you do not see me face to face. I therefore request you, my dear girl, to smile and kindly raise your head to see me.

Text 32
नारद उवाच
इत्थं पुरञ्जनं नारी याचमानमधीरवत् ।
अभ्यनन्दत तं वीरं हसन्ती वीर मोहिता ॥ ३२ ॥
nārada uvāca
itthaṁ purañjanaṁ nārī
yācamānam adhīravat
abhyanandata taṁ vīraṁ
hasantī vīra mohitā
Synonyms
nāradaḥ uvāca — the great sage Nārada continued to speak; ittham — upon this; purañjanam — unto Purañjana; nārī — the woman; yācamānam — begging; adhīra-vat — being too impatient; abhyanandata — she addressed; tam — him; vīram — the hero; hasantī — smiling; vīra — O hero; mohitā — being attracted by him.

Translation
Nārada continued: My dear King, when Purañjana became so attracted and impatient to touch the girl and enjoy her, the girl also became attracted by his words and accepted his request by smiling. By this time she was certainly attracted by the King.

Text 33
न विदाम वयं सम्यक्‍कर्तारं पुरुषर्षभ ।
आत्मनश्च परस्यापि गोत्रं नाम च यत्कृतम् ॥ ३३ ॥
na vidāma vayaṁ samyak
kartāraṁ puruṣarṣabha
ātmanaś ca parasyāpi
gotraṁ nāma ca yat-kṛtam
Synonyms
na — do not; vidāma — know; vayam — I; samyak — perfectly; kartāram — maker; puruṣa-ṛṣabha — O best of human beings; ātmanaḥ — of myself; ca — and; parasya — of others; api — also; gotram — family history; nāma — name; ca — and; yat-kṛtam — which has been made by whom.

Translation
The girl said: O best of human beings, I do not know who has begotten me. I cannot speak to you perfectly about this. Nor do I know the names or the origin of the associates with me.

Text 34
इहाद्य सन्तमात्मानं विदाम न तत: परम् ।
येनेयं निर्मिता वीर पुरी शरणमात्मन: ॥ ३४ ॥
ihādya santam ātmānaṁ
vidāma na tataḥ param
yeneyaṁ nirmitā vīra
purī śaraṇam ātmanaḥ
Synonyms
iha — here; adya — today; santam — existing; ātmānam — living entities; vidāma — that much we know; na — not; tataḥ param — beyond that; yena — by whom; iyam — this; nirmitā — created; vīra — O great hero; purī — city; śaraṇam — resting place; ātmanaḥ — of all living entities.

Translation
O great hero, we only know that we are existing in this place. We do not know what will come after. Indeed, we are so foolish that we do not care to understand who has created this beautiful place for our residence.

Text 35
एते सखाय: सख्यो मे नरा नार्यश्च मानद ।
सुप्तायां मयि जागर्ति नागोऽयं पालयन् पुरीम् ॥ ३५ ॥
ete sakhāyaḥ sakhyo me
narā nāryaś ca mānada
suptāyāṁ mayi jāgarti
nāgo ’yaṁ pālayan purīm
Synonyms
ete — all these; sakhāyaḥ — male friends; sakhyaḥ — female associates; me — my; narāḥ — men; nāryaḥ — women; ca — and; māna-da — O very respectful one; suptāyām — while sleeping; mayi — I am; jāgarti — keeps awake; nāgaḥ — snake; ayam — this; pālayan — protecting; purīm — this city.

Translation
My dear gentleman, all these men and women with me are known as my friends, and the snake, who always remains awake, protects this city even during my sleeping hours. So much I know. I do not know anything beyond this.

Text 36
दिष्ट्यागतोऽसि भद्रं ते ग्राम्यान् कामानभीप्ससे ।
उद्वहिष्यामि तांस्तेऽहं स्वबन्धुभिररिन्दम ॥ ३६ ॥
diṣṭyāgato ’si bhadraṁ te
grāmyān kāmān abhīpsase
udvahiṣyāmi tāṁs te ’haṁ
sva-bandhubhir arindama
Synonyms
diṣṭyā — fortunately for me; āgataḥ asi — you have come here; bhadram — all auspiciousness; te — unto you; grāmyān — sensual; kāmān — desired enjoyable objects; abhīpsase — you want to enjoy; udvahiṣyāmi — I shall supply; tān — all of them; te — unto you; aham — I; sva-bandhubhiḥ — with all my friends; arim-dama — O killer of the enemy.

Translation
O killer of the enemy, you have somehow or other come here. This is certainly great fortune for me. I wish all auspicious things for you. You have a great desire to satisfy your senses, and all my friends and I shall try our best in all respects to fulfill your desires.

Text 37
इमां त्वमधितिष्ठस्व पुरीं नवमुखीं विभो ।
मयोपनीतान् गृह्णान: कामभोगान् शतं समा: ॥ ३७ ॥
imāṁ tvam adhitiṣṭhasva
purīṁ nava-mukhīṁ vibho
mayopanītān gṛhṇānaḥ
kāma-bhogān śataṁ samāḥ
Synonyms
imām — this; tvam — your good self; adhitiṣṭhasva — just remain; purīm — in the city; nava-mukhīm — with nine gates; vibho — O my lord; mayā — by me; upanītān — arranged; gṛhṇānaḥ — taking; kāma-bhogān — the materials for sense gratification; śatam — a hundred; samāḥ — years.

Translation
My dear lord, I have just arranged this city of nine gates for you so that you can have all kinds of sense gratification. You may live here for one hundred years, and everything for your sense gratification will be supplied.

Text 38
कं नु त्वदन्यं रमये ह्यरतिज्ञमकोविदम् ।
असम्परायाभिमुखमश्वस्तनविदं पशुम् ॥ ३८ ॥
kaṁ nu tvad-anyaṁ ramaye
hy arati-jñam akovidam
asamparāyābhimukham
aśvastana-vidaṁ paśum
Synonyms
kam — unto whom; nu — then; tvat — than you; anyam — other; ramaye — I shall allow to enjoy; hi — certainly; arati-jñam — without knowledge of sex enjoyment; akovidam — therefore almost foolish; asamparāya — without knowledge of the next life; abhimukham — looking forward; aśvastana-vidam — one who does not know what is happening next; paśum — like animals.

Translation
How can I expect to unite with others, who are neither conversant about sex nor capable of knowing how to enjoy life while living or after death? Such foolish persons are like animals because they do not know the process of sense enjoyment in this life and after death.

Text 39
धर्मो ह्यत्रार्थकामौ च प्रजानन्दोऽमृतं यश: ।
लोका विशोका विरजा यान्न केवलिनो विदु: ॥ ३९ ॥
dharmo hy atrārtha-kāmau ca
prajānando ’mṛtaṁ yaśaḥ
lokā viśokā virajā
yān na kevalino viduḥ
Synonyms
dharmaḥ — religious ritual; hi — certainly; atra — here (in this gṛhastha-āśrama, or householder life); artha — economic development; kāmau — sense gratification; ca — and; prajā-ānandaḥ — the pleasure of generations; amṛtam — the results of sacrifice; yaśaḥ — reputation; lokāḥ — planetary systems; viśokāḥ — without lamentation; virajāḥ — without disease; yān — which; na — never; kevalinaḥ — the transcendentalists; viduḥ — know.

Translation
The woman continued: In this material world, a householder’s life brings all kinds of happiness in religion, economic development, sense gratification and the begetting of children, sons and grandsons. After that, one may desire liberation as well as material reputation. The householder can appreciate the results of sacrifices, which enable him to gain promotion to superior planetary systems. All this material happiness is practically unknown to the transcendentalists. They cannot even imagine such happiness.

Text 40
पितृदेवर्षिमर्त्यानां भूतानामात्मनश्च ह ।
क्षेम्यं वदन्ति शरणं भवेऽस्मिन् यद्गृहाश्रम: ॥ ४० ॥
pitṛ-devarṣi-martyānāṁ
bhūtānām ātmanaś ca ha
kṣemyaṁ vadanti śaraṇaṁ
bhave ’smin yad gṛhāśramaḥ
Synonyms
pitṛ — forefathers; deva — demigods; ṛṣi — sages; martyānām — of humanity in general; bhūtānām — of the infinite living entities; ātmanaḥ — of oneself; ca — also; ha — certainly; kṣemyam — beneficial; vadanti — they say; śaraṇam — shelter; bhave — in the material world; asmin — this; yat — that which; gṛha-āśramaḥ — householder life.

Translation
The woman continued: According to authorities, the householder life is pleasing not only to oneself but to all the forefathers, demigods, great sages, saintly persons and everyone else. A householder life is thus beneficial.

Text 41
का नाम वीर विख्यातं वदान्यं प्रियदर्शनम् ।
न वृणीत प्रियं प्राप्तं माद‍ृशी त्वाद‍ृशं पतिम् ॥ ४१ ॥
kā nāma vīra vikhyātaṁ
vadānyaṁ priya-darśanam
na vṛṇīta priyaṁ prāptaṁ
mādṛśī tvādṛśaṁ patim
Synonyms
kā — who; nāma — indeed; vīra — my dear hero; vikhyātam — famous; vadānyam — magnanimous; priya-darśanam — beautiful; na — not; vṛṇīta — would accept; priyam — easily; prāptam — gotten; mādṛśī — like me; tvādṛśam — like you; patim — husband.

Translation
O my dear hero, who in this world will not accept a husband like you? You are so famous, so magnanimous, so beautiful and so easily gotten.

Text 42
कस्या मनस्ते भुवि भोगिभोगयो:
स्त्रिया न सज्जेद्भुजयोर्महाभुज ।
योऽनाथवर्गाधिमलं घृणोद्धत
स्मितावलोकेन चरत्यपोहितुम् ॥ ४२ ॥
kasyā manas te bhuvi bhogi-bhogayoḥ
striyā na sajjed bhujayor mahā-bhuja
yo ’nātha-vargādhim alaṁ ghṛṇoddhata-
smitāvalokena caraty apohitum
Synonyms
kasyāḥ — whose; manaḥ — mind; te — your; bhuvi — in this world; bhogi-bhogayoḥ — like the body of a serpent; striyāḥ — of a woman; na — not; sajjet — becomes attracted; bhujayoḥ — by the arms; mahā-bhuja — O mighty-armed; yaḥ — one who; anātha-vargā — of poor women like me; adhim — distresses of the mind; alam — able; ghṛṇā-uddhata — by aggressive mercy; smita-avalokena — by attractive smiling; carati — travels; apohitum — to dissipate.

Translation
O mighty-armed, who in this world will not be attracted by your arms, which are just like the bodies of serpents? Actually you relieve the distress of husbandless women like us by your attractive smile and your aggressive mercy. We think that you are traveling on the surface of the earth just to benefit us only.

Text 43
नारद उवाच
इति तौ दम्पती तत्र समुद्य समयं मिथ: ।
तां प्रविश्य पुरीं राजन्मुमुदाते शतं समा: ॥ ४३ ॥
nārada uvāca
iti tau dam-patī tatra
samudya samayaṁ mithaḥ
tāṁ praviśya purīṁ rājan
mumudāte śataṁ samāḥ
Synonyms
nāradaḥ uvāca — the great sage Nārada spoke; iti — thus; tau — they; dam-patī — husband and wife; tatra — there; samudya — being equally enthusiastic; samayam — accepting one another; mithaḥ — mutually; tām — in that place; praviśya — entering; purīm — in that city; rājan — O King; mumudāte — they enjoyed life; śatam — one hundred; samāḥ — years.

Translation
The great sage Nārada continued: My dear King, those two — the man and the woman — supporting one another through mutual understanding, entered that city and enjoyed life for one hundred years.

Text 44
उपगीयमानो ललितं तत्र तत्र च गायकै: ।
क्रीडन् परिवृत: स्त्रीभिर्ह्रदिनीमाविशच्छुचौ ॥ ४४ ॥
upagīyamāno lalitaṁ
tatra tatra ca gāyakaiḥ
krīḍan parivṛtaḥ strībhir
hradinīm āviśac chucau
Synonyms
upagīyamānaḥ — being sung about; lalitam — very nicely; tatra tatra — here and there; ca — also; gāyakaiḥ — by the singers; krīḍan — playing; parivṛtaḥ — surrounded; strībhiḥ — by women; hradinīm — in the water of the river; āviśat — entered; śucau — when it was too hot.

Translation
Many professional singers used to sing about the glories of King Purañjana and his glorious activities. When it was too hot in the summer, he used to enter a reservoir of water. He would surround himself with many women and enjoy their company.

Text 45
सप्तोपरि कृता द्वार: पुरस्तस्यास्तु द्वे अध: ।
पृथग्विषयगत्यर्थं तस्यां य: कश्चनेश्वर: ॥ ४५ ॥
saptopari kṛtā dvāraḥ
puras tasyās tu dve adhaḥ
pṛthag-viṣaya-gaty-arthaṁ
tasyāṁ yaḥ kaścaneśvaraḥ
Synonyms
sapta — seven; upari — up; kṛtāḥ — made; dvāraḥ — gates; puraḥ — of the city; tasyāḥ — that; tu — then; dve — two; adhaḥ — down; pṛthak — different; viṣaya — to places; gati-artham — for going; tasyām — in that city; yaḥ — one who; kaścana — whoever; īśvaraḥ — governor.

Translation
Of the nine gates in that city, seven were on the surface and two were subterranean. A total of nine doors were constructed, and these led to different places. All the gates were used by the city’s governor.

Text 46
पञ्च द्वारस्तु पौरस्त्या दक्षिणैका तथोत्तरा ।
पश्चिमे द्वे अमूषां ते नामानि नृप वर्णये ॥ ४६ ॥
pañca dvāras tu paurastyā
dakṣiṇaikā tathottarā
paścime dve amūṣāṁ te
nāmāni nṛpa varṇaye
Synonyms
pañca — five; dvāraḥ — doors; tu — then; paurastyāḥ — facing the eastern side; dakṣiṇā — southern; ekā — one; tathā — also; uttarā — one toward the north; paścime — similarly, on the western side; dve — two; amūṣām — of them; te — unto you; nāmāni — names; nṛpa — O King; varṇaye — I shall describe.

Translation
My dear King, of the nine doors, five led toward the eastern side, one led toward the northern side, one led toward the southern side, and two led toward the western side. I shall try to give the names of these different doors.

Text 47
खद्योताविर्मुखी च प्राग्द्वारावेकत्र निर्मिते ।
विभ्राजितं जनपदं याति ताभ्यां द्युमत्सख: ॥ ४७ ॥
khadyotāvirmukhī ca prāg
dvārāv ekatra nirmite
vibhrājitaṁ janapadaṁ
yāti tābhyāṁ dyumat-sakhaḥ
Synonyms
khadyotā — of the name Khadyotā; āvirmukhī — of the name Āvirmukhī; ca — also; prāk — toward the eastern side; dvārau — two gates; ekatra — in one place; nirmite — were constructed; vibhrājitam — of the name Vibhrājita; jana-padam — city; yāti — used to go; tābhyām — by them; dyumat — of the name Dyumān; sakhaḥ — with his friend.

Translation
The two gates named Khadyotā and Āvirmukhī were situated facing the eastern side, but they were constructed in one place. Through those two gates the King used to go to the city of Vibhrājita accompanied by a friend whose name was Dyumān.

Text 48
नलिनी नालिनी च प्राग्द्वारावेकत्र निर्मिते ।
अवधूतसखस्ताभ्यां विषयं याति सौरभम् ॥ ४८ ॥
nalinī nālinī ca prāg
dvārāv ekatra nirmite
avadhūta-sakhas tābhyāṁ
viṣayaṁ yāti saurabham
Synonyms
nalinī — of the name Nalinī; nālinī — of the name Nālinī; ca — also; prāk — eastern; dvārau — two gates; ekatra — in one place; nirmite — constructed; avadhūta — of the name Avadhūta; sakhaḥ — with his friend; tābhyām — by those two gates; viṣayam — place; yāti — used to go; saurabham — of the name Saurabha.

Translation
Similarly in the east there were two sets of gates named Nalinī and Nālinī, and these were also constructed in one place. Through these gates the King, accompanied by a friend named Avadhūta, used to go to the city of Saurabha.

Text 49
मुख्या नाम पुरस्ताद् द्वास्तयापणबहूदनौ ।
विषयौ याति पुरराड्रसज्ञविपणान्वित: ॥ ४९ ॥
mukhyā nāma purastād dvās
tayāpaṇa-bahūdanau
viṣayau yāti pura-rāḍ
rasajña-vipaṇānvitaḥ
Synonyms
mukhyā — the chief; nāma — called; purastāt — on the eastern side; dvāḥ — gate; tayā — by that; āpaṇa — of the name Āpaṇa; bahūdanau — of the name Bahūdana; viṣayau — two places; yāti — used to go; pura-rāṭ — the King of the city (Purañjana); rasa-jña — of the name Rasajña; vipaṇa — of the name Vipaṇa; anvitaḥ — along with.

Translation
The fifth gate situated on the eastern side was named Mukhyā, or the chief. Through this gate, accompanied by his friends named Rasajña and Vipaṇa, he used to visit two places named Bahūdana and Āpaṇa.

Text 50
पितृहूर्नृप पुर्या द्वार्दक्षिणेन पुरञ्जन: ।
राष्ट्रं दक्षिणपञ्चालं याति श्रुतधरान्वित: ॥ ५० ॥
pitṛhūr nṛpa puryā dvār
dakṣiṇena purañjanaḥ
rāṣṭraṁ dakṣiṇa-pañcālaṁ
yāti śrutadharānvitaḥ
Synonyms
pitṛhūḥ — of the name Pitṛhū; nṛpa — O King; puryāḥ — of the city; dvāḥ — gate; dakṣiṇena — on the southern side; purañjanaḥ — King Purañjana; rāṣṭram — country; dakṣiṇa — southern; pañcālam — of the name Pañcāla; yāti — used to go; śruta-dhara-anvitaḥ — along with his friend Śrutadhara.

Translation
The southern gate of the city was known as Pitṛhū, and through that gate King Purañjana used to visit the city named Dakṣiṇa-pañcāla, accompanied by his friend Śrutadhara.

Text 51
देवहूर्नाम पुर्या द्वा उत्तरेण पुरञ्जन: ।
राष्ट्रमुत्तरपञ्चालं याति श्रुतधरान्वित: ॥ ५१ ॥
devahūr nāma puryā dvā
uttareṇa purañjanaḥ
rāṣṭram uttara-pañcālaṁ
yāti śrutadharānvitaḥ
Synonyms
devahūḥ — of the name Devahū; nāma — as it was called; puryāḥ — of the city; dvāḥ — gate; uttareṇa — on the northern side; purañjanaḥ — King Purañjana; rāṣṭram — country; uttara — northern; pañcālam — of the name Pañcāla; yāti — used to go; śruta-dhara-anvitaḥ — with his friend Śrutadhara.

Translation
On the northern side was the gate named Devahū. Through that gate, King Purañjana used to go with his friend Śrutadhara to the place known as Uttara-pañcāla.

Text 52
आसुरी नाम पश्चाद् द्वास्तया याति पुरञ्जन: ।
ग्रामकं नाम विषयं दुर्मदेन समन्वित: ॥ ५२ ॥
āsurī nāma paścād dvās
tayā yāti purañjanaḥ
grāmakaṁ nāma viṣayaṁ
durmadena samanvitaḥ
Synonyms
āsurī — of the name Āsurī; nāma — called; paścāt — on the western side; dvāḥ — gate; tayā — by which; yāti — used to go; purañjanaḥ — King Purañjana; grāmakam — of the name Grāmaka; nāma — called; viṣayam — the city of sense enjoyment; durmadena — by Durmada; samanvitaḥ — accompanied.

Translation
On the western side was a gate named Āsurī. Through that gate King Purañjana used to go to the city of Grāmaka, accompanied by his friend Durmada.

Text 53
निऋर्तिर्नाम पश्चाद् द्वास्तया याति पुरञ्जन: ।
वैशसं नाम विषयं लुब्धकेन समन्वित: ॥ ५३ ॥
nirṛtir nāma paścād dvās
tayā yāti purañjanaḥ
vaiśasaṁ nāma viṣayaṁ
lubdhakena samanvitaḥ
Synonyms
nirṛtiḥ — of the name Nirṛti; nāma — called; paścāt — western; dvāḥ — gate; tayā — by which; yāti — used to go; purañjanaḥ — King Purañjana; vaiśasam — of the name Vaiśasa; nāma — called; viṣayam — to the place; lubdhakena — by the friend named Lubdhaka; samanvitaḥ — accompanied.

Translation
Another gate on the western side was known as Nirṛti. Purañjana used to go through this gate to the place known as Vaiśasa, accompanied by his friend Lubdhaka.

Text 54
अन्धावमीषां पौराणां निर्वाक्पेशस्कृतावुभौ ।
अक्षण्वतामधिपतिस्ताभ्यां याति करोति च ॥ ५४ ॥
andhāv amīṣāṁ paurāṇāṁ
nirvāk-peśaskṛtāv ubhau
akṣaṇvatām adhipatis
tābhyāṁ yāti karoti ca
Synonyms
andhau — blind; amīṣām — among those; paurāṇām — of the inhabitants; nirvāk — of the name Nirvāk; peśaskṛtau — of the name Peśaskṛt; ubhau — both of them; akṣaṇ-vatām — of the people who possessed eyes; adhipatiḥ — ruler; tābhyām — with both of them; yāti — used to go; karoti — used to act; ca — and.

Translation
Of the many inhabitants of this city, there are two persons named Nirvāk and Peśaskṛt. Although King Purañjana was the ruler of citizens who possessed eyes, he unfortunately used to associate with these blind men. Accompanied by them, he used to go here and there and perform various activities.

Text 55
स यर्ह्यन्त:पुरगतो विषूचीनसमन्वित: ।
मोहं प्रसादं हर्षं वा याति जायात्मजोद्भवम् ॥ ५५ ॥
sa yarhy antaḥpura-gato
viṣūcīna-samanvitaḥ
mohaṁ prasādaṁ harṣaṁ vā
yāti jāyātmajodbhavam
Synonyms
saḥ — he; yarhi — when; antaḥ-pura — to his private home; gataḥ — used to go; viṣūcīna — by the mind; samanvitaḥ — accompanied; moham — illusion; prasādam — satisfaction; harṣam — happiness; vā — or; yāti — used to enjoy; jāyā — wife; ātma-ja — children; udbhavam — produced by them.

Translation
Sometimes he used to go to his private home with one of his chief servants [the mind], who was named Viṣūcīna. At that time, illusion, satisfaction and happiness used to be produced from his wife and children.

Text 56
एवं कर्मसु संसक्त: कामात्मा वञ्चितोऽबुध: ।
महिषी यद्यदीहेत तत्तदेवान्ववर्तत ॥ ५६ ॥
evaṁ karmasu saṁsaktaḥ
kāmātmā vañcito ’budhaḥ
mahiṣī yad yad īheta
tat tad evānvavartata
Synonyms
evam — thus; karmasu — in fruitive activities; saṁsaktaḥ — being too much attached; kāma-ātmā — lusty; vañcitaḥ — cheated; abudhaḥ — less intelligent; mahiṣī — the Queen; yat yat — whatsoever; īheta — she would desire; tat tat — all of that; eva — certainly; anvavartata — he followed.

Translation
Being thus entangled in different types of mental concoction and engaged in fruitive activities, King Purañjana came completely under the control of material intelligence and was thus cheated. Indeed, he used to fulfill all the desires of his wife, the Queen.

Texts 57-61
क्‍वचित्पिबन्त्यां पिबति मदिरां मदविह्वल: ।
अश्नन्त्यां क्‍वचिदश्नाति जक्षत्यां सह जक्षिति ॥ ५७ ॥
क्‍वचिद्गायति गायन्त्यां रुदत्यां रुदति क्‍वचित् ।
क्‍वचिद्धसन्त्यां हसति जल्पन्त्यामनु जल्पति ॥ ५८ ॥
क्‍वचिद्धावति धावन्त्यां तिष्ठन्त्यामनु तिष्ठति ।
अनु शेते शयानायामन्वास्ते क्‍वचिदासतीम् ॥ ५९ ॥
क्‍वचिच्छृणोति श‍ृण्वन्त्यां पश्यन्त्यामनु पश्यति ।
क्‍वचिज्जिघ्रति जिघ्रन्त्यां स्पृशन्त्यां स्पृशति क्‍वचित् ॥ ६० ॥
क्‍वचिच्च शोचतीं जायामनुशोचति दीनवत् ।
अनु हृष्यति हृष्यन्त्यां मुदितामनु मोदते ॥ ६१ ॥
kvacit pibantyāṁ pibati
madirāṁ mada-vihvalaḥ
aśnantyāṁ kvacid aśnāti
jakṣatyāṁ saha jakṣiti
kvacid gāyati gāyantyāṁ
rudatyāṁ rudati kvacit
kvacid dhasantyāṁ hasati
jalpantyām anu jalpati
kvacid dhāvati dhāvantyāṁ
tiṣṭhantyām anu tiṣṭhati
anu śete śayānāyām
anvāste kvacid āsatīm
kvacic chṛṇoti śṛṇvantyāṁ
paśyantyām anu paśyati
kvacij jighrati jighrantyāṁ
spṛśantyāṁ spṛśati kvacit
kvacic ca śocatīṁ jāyām
anu śocati dīnavat
anu hṛṣyati hṛṣyantyāṁ
muditām anu modate
Synonyms
kvacit — sometimes; pibantyām — while drinking; pibati — he drank; madirām — liquor; mada-vihvalaḥ — being intoxicated; aśnantyām — while she was eating; kvacit — sometimes; aśnāti — he ate; jakṣatyām — while she was chewing; saha — with her; jakṣiti — he chewed; kvacit — sometimes; gāyati — he used to sing; gāyantyām — while his wife was singing; rudatyām — when the wife was crying; rudati — he also cried; kvacit — sometimes; kvacit — sometimes; hasantyām — while she was laughing; hasati — he also laughed; jalpantyām — while she was talking loosely; anu — following her; jalpati — he also talked loosely; kvacit — sometimes; dhāvati — he also used to walk; dhāvantyām — when she was walking; tiṣṭhantyām — while she was standing silently; anu — following her; tiṣṭhati — he used to stand; anu — following her; śete — he used to lie down; śayānāyām — while she was lying on the bed; anu — following her; āste — he also used to sit; kvacit — sometimes; āsatīm — while she was sitting; kvacit — sometimes; śṛṇoti — he used to hear; śṛṇvantyām — while she was engaged in hearing; paśyantyām — while she was seeing something; anu — following her; paśyati — he also used to see; kvacit — sometimes; jighrati — he used to smell; jighrantyām — while his wife was smelling; spṛśantyām — while the wife was touching; spṛśati — he was also touching; kvacit — at that time; kvacit ca — sometimes also; śocatīm — when she was lamenting; jāyām — his wife; anu — following her; śocati — he was also lamenting; dīna-vat — like a poor man; anu — following her; hṛṣyati — he used to enjoy; hṛṣyantyām — while she was feeling enjoyment; muditām — when she was satisfied; anu — following her; modate — he felt satisfaction.

Translation
When the Queen drank liquor, King Purañjana also engaged in drinking. When the Queen dined, he used to dine with her, and when she chewed, King Purañjana used to chew along with her. When the Queen sang, he also sang. Similarly, when the Queen cried, he also cried, and when the Queen laughed, he also laughed. When the Queen talked loosely, he also talked loosely, and when the Queen walked, the King walked behind her. When the Queen would stand still, the King would also stand still, and when the Queen would lie down in bed, he would also follow and lie down with her. When the Queen sat, he would also sit, and when the Queen heard something, he would follow her to hear the same thing. When the Queen saw something, the King would also look at it, and when the Queen smelled something, the King would follow her to smell the same thing. When the Queen touched something, the King would also touch it, and when the dear Queen was lamenting, the poor King also had to follow her in lamentation. In the same way, when the Queen felt enjoyment, he also enjoyed, and when the Queen was satisfied, the King also felt satisfaction.

Text 62
विप्रलब्धो महिष्यैवं सर्वप्रकृतिवञ्चित: ।
नेच्छन्ननुकरोत्यज्ञ: क्लैब्यात्क्रीडामृगो यथा ॥ ६२ ॥
vipralabdho mahiṣyaivaṁ
sarva-prakṛti-vañcitaḥ
necchann anukaroty ajñaḥ
klaibyāt krīḍā-mṛgo yathā
Synonyms
vipralabdhaḥ — captivated; mahiṣyā — by the Queen; evam — thus; sarva — all; prakṛti — existence; vañcitaḥ — being cheated; na icchan — without desiring; anukaroti — used to follow and imitate; ajñaḥ — the foolish King; klaibyāt — by force; krīḍā-mṛgaḥ — a pet animal; yathā — just like.

Translation
In this way, King Purañjana was captivated by his nice wife and was thus cheated. Indeed, he became cheated in his whole existence in the material world. Even against that poor foolish King’s desire, he remained under the control of his wife, just like a pet animal that dances according to the order of its master.