Text 1
नारद उवाच
इत्थं पुरञ्जनं सध्र्यग्वशमानीय विभ्रमै: ।
पुरञ्जनी महाराज रेमे रमयती पतिम् ॥ १ ॥
nārada uvāca
itthaṁ purañjanaṁ sadhryag
vaśamānīya vibhramaiḥ
purañjanī mahārāja
reme ramayatī patim
Synonyms
nāradaḥ uvāca — Nārada said; ittham — thus; purañjanam — King Purañjana; sadhryak — completely; vaśamānīya — bringing under her control; vibhramaiḥ — by her charms; purañjanī — the wife of King Purañjana; mahā-rāja — O King; reme — enjoyed; ramayatī — giving all satisfaction; patim — to her husband.

Translation
The great sage Nārada continued: My dear King, after bewildering her husband in different ways and bringing him under her control, the wife of King Purañjana gave him all satisfaction and enjoyed sex life with him.

Text 2
स राजा महिषीं राजन् सुस्‍नातां
रुचिराननाम् ।
कृतस्वस्त्ययनां तृप्तामभ्यनन्ददुपागताम् ॥ २ ॥
sa rājā mahiṣīṁ rājan
susnātāṁ rucirānanām
kṛta-svastyayanāṁ tṛptām
abhyanandad upāgatām
Synonyms
saḥ — he; rājā — the King; mahiṣīm — the Queen; rājan — O King; su-snātām — nicely bathed; rucira-ānanām — attractive face; kṛta-svasti-ayanām — dressed with auspicious garments and ornaments; tṛptām — satisfied; abhyanandat — he welcomed; upāgatām — approached.

Translation
The Queen took her bath and dressed herself nicely with all auspicious garments and ornaments. After taking food and becoming completely satisfied, she returned to the King. Upon seeing her beautifully decorated attractive face, the King welcomed her with all devotion.

Text 3
तयोपगूढ: परिरब्धकन्धरो
रहोऽनुमन्त्रैरपकृष्टचेतन: ।
न
कालरंहो बुबुधे दुरत्ययं
दिवा निशेति प्रमदापरिग्रह: ॥ ३ ॥
tayopagūḍhaḥ parirabdha-kandharo
raho ’numantrair apakṛṣṭa-cetanaḥ
na kāla-raṁho bubudhe duratyayaṁ
divā niśeti pramadā-parigrahaḥ
Synonyms
tayā — by the Queen; upagūḍhaḥ — was embraced; parirabdha — embraced; kandharaḥ — shoulders; rahaḥ — in a solitary place; anumantraiḥ — by joking words; apakṛṣṭa-cetanaḥ — having degraded consciousness; na — not; kāla-raṁhaḥ — the passing of time; bubudhe — was aware of; duratyayam — impossible to overcome; divā — day; niśā — night; iti — thus; pramadā — by the woman; parigrahaḥ — captivated.

Translation
Queen Purañjanī embraced the King, and the King also responded by embracing her shoulders. In this way, in a solitary place, they enjoyed joking words. Thus King Purañjana became very much captivated by his beautiful wife and deviated from his good sense. He forgot that the passing of days and nights meant that his span of life was being reduced without profit.

Text 4
शयान उन्नद्धमदो महामना
महार्हतल्पे महिषीभुजोपधि: ।
तामेव वीरो मनुते परं यत-
स्तमोऽभिभूतो न निजं परं च यत् ॥ ४ ॥
śayāna unnaddha-mado mahā-manā
mahārha-talpe mahiṣī-bhujopadhiḥ
tām eva vīro manute paraṁ yatas
tamo-’bhibhūto na nijaṁ paraṁ ca yat
Synonyms
śayānaḥ — lying down; unnaddha-madaḥ — increasingly illusioned; mahā-manāḥ — advanced in consciousness; mahā-arha-talpe — on a valuable bedstead; mahiṣī — of the Queen; bhuja — arms; upadhiḥ — pillow; tām — her; eva — certainly; vīraḥ — the hero; manute — he considered; param — the goal of life; yataḥ — from which; tamaḥ — by ignorance; abhibhūtaḥ — overwhelmed; na — not; nijam — his actual self; param — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ca — and; yat — what.

Translation
In this way, increasingly overwhelmed by illusion, King Purañjana, although advanced in consciousness, remained always lying down with his head on the pillow of his wife’s arms. In this way he considered woman to be his ultimate life and soul. Becoming thus overwhelmed by the mode of ignorance, he could not understand the meaning of self-realization, whether regarding his own self or the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 5
तयैवं रममाणस्य कामकश्मलचेतस: ।
क्षणार्धमिव राजेन्द्र व्यतिक्रान्तं नवं वय: ॥ ५ ॥
tayaivaṁ ramamāṇasya
kāma-kaśmala-cetasaḥ
kṣaṇārdham iva rājendra
vyatikrāntaṁ navaṁ vayaḥ
Synonyms
tayā — with her; evam — in this way; ramamāṇasya — enjoying; kāma — full of lust; kaśmala — sinful; cetasaḥ — his heart; kṣaṇa-ardham — in half a moment; iva — like; rāja-indra — O King; vyatikrāntam — expired; navam — new; vayaḥ — life.

Translation
My dear King Prācīnabarhiṣat, in this way King Purañjana, with his heart full of lust and sinful reactions, began to enjoy sex with his wife, and in this way his new life and youth expired in half a moment.

Text 6
तस्यामजनयत्पुत्रान् पुरञ्जन्यां पुरञ्जन: ।
शतान्येकादश विराडायुषोऽर्धमथात्यगात् ॥ ६ ॥
tasyām ajanayat putrān
purañjanyāṁ purañjanaḥ
śatāny ekādaśa virāḍ
āyuṣo ’rdham athātyagāt
Synonyms
tasyām — within her; ajanayat — he begot; putrān — sons; purañjanyām — in Purañjanī; purañjanaḥ — King Purañjana; śatāni — hundreds; ekādaśa — eleven; virāṭ — O King; āyuṣaḥ — of life; ardham — half; atha — in this way; atyagāt — he passed.

Translation
The great sage Nārada then addressed King Prācīnabarhiṣat: O one whose life span is great [virāṭ], in this way King Purañjana begot 1,100 sons within the womb of his wife, Purañjanī. However, in this business he passed away half of his life span.

Text 7
दुहितृर्दशोत्तरशतं पितृमातृयशस्करी: ।
शीलौदार्यगुणोपेता: पौरञ्जन्य: प्रजापते ॥ ७ ॥
duhitṝr daśottara-śataṁ
pitṛ-mātṛ-yaśaskarīḥ
śīlaudārya-guṇopetāḥ
paurañjanyaḥ prajā-pate
Synonyms
duhitṝḥ — daughters; daśa-uttara — ten more than; śatam — one hundred; pitṛ — like the father; mātṛ — and mother; yaśaskarīḥ — glorified; śīla — good behavior; audārya — magnanimity; guṇa — good qualities; upetāḥ — possessed of; paurañjanyaḥ — daughters of Purañjana; prajā-pate — O Prajāpati.

Translation
O Prajāpati, King Prācīnabarhiṣat, in this way King Purañjana also begot 110 daughters. All of these were equally glorified like the father and mother. Their behavior was gentle, and they possessed magnanimity and other good qualities.

Text 8
स पञ्चालपति: पुत्रान् पितृवंशविवर्धनान् ।
दारै: संयोजयामास दुहितृ: सद‍ृशैर्वरै: ॥ ८ ॥
sa pañcāla-patiḥ putrān
pitṛ-vaṁśa-vivardhanān
dāraiḥ saṁyojayām āsa
duhitṝḥ sadṛśair varaiḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he; pañcāla-patiḥ — the King of Pañcāla; putrān — sons; pitṛ-vaṁśa — paternal family; vivardhanān — increasing; dāraiḥ — with wives; saṁyojayām āsa — married; duhitṝḥ — daughters; sadṛśaiḥ — qualified; varaiḥ — with husbands.

Translation
After this, King Purañjana, King of the Pañcāla country, in order to increase the descendants of his paternal family, married his sons with qualified wives and married his daughters with qualified husbands.

Text 9
पुत्राणां चाभवन्पुत्रा एकैकस्य शतं शतम् ।
यैर्वै पौरञ्जनो वंश: पञ्चालेषु समेधित: ॥ ९ ॥
putrāṇāṁ cābhavan putrā
ekaikasya śataṁ śatam
yair vai paurañjano vaṁśaḥ
pañcāleṣu samedhitaḥ
Synonyms
putrāṇām — of the sons; ca — also; abhavan — were produced; putrāḥ — sons; eka-ekasya — of each one; śatam — hundred; śatam — hundred; yaiḥ — by whom; vai — certainly; paurañjanaḥ — of King Purañjana; vaṁśaḥ — family; pañcāleṣu — in the land of Pañcāla; samedhitaḥ — greatly increased.

Translation
Of these many sons, each produced hundreds and hundreds of grandsons. In this way the whole city of Pañcāla became overcrowded by these sons and grandsons of King Purañjana.

Text 10
तेषु तद्रिक्थहारेषु गृहकोशानुजीविषु ।
निरूढेन ममत्वेन विषयेष्वन्वबध्यत ॥ १० ॥
teṣu tad-riktha-hāreṣu
gṛha-kośānujīviṣu
nirūḍhena mamatvena
viṣayeṣv anvabadhyata
Synonyms
teṣu — to them; tat-riktha-hāreṣu — the plunderers of his money; gṛha — home; kośa — treasury; anujīviṣu — to the followers; nirūḍhena — deep-rooted; mamatvena — by attachment; viṣayeṣu — to sense objects; anvabadhyata — became bound.

Translation
These sons and grandsons were virtually plunderers of King Purañjana’s riches, including his home, treasury, servants, secretaries and all other paraphernalia. Purañjana’s attachment for these things was very deep-rooted.

Text 11
ईजे च क्रतुभिर्घोरैर्दीक्षित: पशुमारकै: ।
देवान् पितृन् भूतपतीन्नानाकामो यथा भवान् ॥ ११ ॥
īje ca kratubhir ghorair
dīkṣitaḥ paśu-mārakaiḥ
devān pitṝn bhūta-patīn
nānā-kāmo yathā bhavān
Synonyms
īje — he worshiped; ca — also; kratubhiḥ — by sacrifices; ghoraiḥ — ghastly; dīkṣitaḥ — inspired; paśu-mārakaiḥ — wherein poor animals are killed; devān — the demigods; pitṝn — forefathers; bhūta-patīn — great leaders of human society; nānā — various; kāmaḥ — having desires; yathā — like; bhavān — you.

Translation
The great sage Nārada continued: My dear King Prācīnabarhiṣat, like you King Purañjana also became implicated in so many desires. Thus he worshiped demigods, forefathers and social leaders with various sacrifices which were all very ghastly because they were inspired by the desire to kill animals.

Text 12
युक्तेष्वेवं प्रमत्तस्य कुटुम्बासक्तचेतस: ।
आससाद स वै कालो योऽप्रिय: प्रिययोषिताम् ॥ १२ ॥
yukteṣv evaṁ pramattasya
kuṭumbāsakta-cetasaḥ
āsasāda sa vai kālo
yo ’priyaḥ priya-yoṣitām
Synonyms
yukteṣu — to beneficial activities; evam — thus; pramattasya — being inattentive; kuṭumba — to kith and kin; āsakta — attached; cetasaḥ — consciousness; āsasāda — arrived; saḥ — that; vai — certainly; kālaḥ — time; yaḥ — which; apriyaḥ — not very pleasing; priya-yoṣitām — for persons attached to women.

Translation
Thus King Purañjana, being attached to fruitive activities [karma-kāṇḍīya] as well as kith and kin, and being obsessed with polluted consciousness, eventually arrived at that point not very much liked by those who are overly attached to material things.

Text 13
चण्डवेग इति ख्यातो गन्धर्वाधिपतिर्नृप ।
गन्धर्वास्तस्य बलिन: षष्ट्युत्तरशतत्रयम् ॥ १३ ॥
caṇḍavega iti khyāto
gandharvādhipatir nṛpa
gandharvās tasya balinaḥ
ṣaṣṭy-uttara-śata-trayam
Synonyms
caṇḍavegaḥ — Caṇḍavega; iti — thus; khyātaḥ — celebrated; gandharva — belonging to the Gandharvaloka; adhipatiḥ — king; nṛpa — O King; gandharvāḥ — other Gandharvas; tasya — his; balinaḥ — very powerful soldiers; ṣaṣṭi — sixty; uttara — surpassing; śata — hundred; trayam — three.

Translation
O King! In Gandharvaloka there is a king named Caṇḍavega. Under him there are 360 very powerful Gandharva soldiers.

Text 14
गन्धर्व्यस्ताद‍ृशीरस्य मैथुन्यश्च सितासिता: ।
परिवृत्त्या विलुम्पन्ति सर्वकामविनिर्मिताम् ॥ १४ ॥
gandharvyas tādṛśīr asya
maithunyaś ca sitāsitāḥ
parivṛttyā vilumpanti
sarva-kāma-vinirmitām
Synonyms
gandharvyaḥ — Gandharvīs; tādṛśīḥ — similarly; asya — of Caṇḍavega; maithunyaḥ — companions for sexual intercourse; ca — also; sita — white; asitāḥ — black; parivṛttyā — by surrounding; vilumpanti — they plundered; sarva-kāma — all kinds of desirable objects; vinirmitām — manufactured.

Translation
Along with Caṇḍavega were as many female Gandharvīs as there were soldiers, and all of them repetitively plundered all the paraphernalia for sense enjoyment.

Text 15
ते चण्डवेगानुचरा: पुरञ्जनपुरं यदा ।
हर्तुमारेभिरे तत्र प्रत्यषेधत्प्रजागर: ॥ १५ ॥
te caṇḍavegānucarāḥ
purañjana-puraṁ yadā
hartum ārebhire tatra
pratyaṣedhat prajāgaraḥ
Synonyms
te — all of them; caṇḍavega — of Caṇḍavega; anucarāḥ — followers; purañjana — of King Purañjana; puram — city; yadā — when; hartum — to plunder; ārebhire — began; tatra — there; pratyaṣedhat — defended; prajāgaraḥ — the big serpent.

Translation
When King Gandharva-rāja [Caṇḍavega] and his followers began to plunder the city of Purañjana, a snake with five hoods began to defend the city.

Text 16
स सप्तभि: शतैरेको विंशत्या च शतं समा: ।
पुरञ्जनपुराध्यक्षो गन्धर्वैर्युयुधे बली ॥ १६ ॥
sa saptabhiḥ śatair eko
viṁśatyā ca śataṁ samāḥ
purañjana-purādhyakṣo
gandharvair yuyudhe balī
Synonyms
saḥ — he; saptabhiḥ — with seven; śataiḥ — hundred; ekaḥ — alone; viṁśatyā — with twenty; ca — also; śatam — hundred; samāḥ — years; purañjana — of King Purañjana; pura-adhyakṣaḥ — superintendent of the city; gandharvaiḥ — with the Gandharvas; yuyudhe — fought; balī — very valiant.

Translation
The five-hooded serpent, the superintendent and protector of the city of King Purañjana, fought with the Gandharvas for one hundred years. He fought alone, with all of them, although they numbered 720.

Text 17
क्षीयमाणे स्वसम्बन्धे एकस्मिन् बहुभिर्युधा ।
चिन्तां परां जगामार्त: सराष्ट्रपुरबान्धव: ॥ १७ ॥
kṣīyamāṇe sva-sambandhe
ekasmin bahubhir yudhā
cintāṁ parāṁ jagāmārtaḥ
sa-rāṣṭra-pura-bāndhavaḥ
Synonyms
kṣīyamāṇe — when he became weak; sva-sambandhe — his intimate friend; ekasmin — alone; bahubhiḥ — with many warriors; yudhā — by battle; cintām — anxiety; parām — very great; jagāma — obtained; ārtaḥ — being aggrieved; sa — along with; rāṣṭra — of the kingdom; pura — of the city; bāndhavaḥ — friends and relatives.

Translation
Because he had to fight alone with so many soldiers, all of whom were great warriors, the serpent with five hoods became very weak. Seeing that his most intimate friend was weakening, King Purañjana and his friends and citizens living within the city all became very anxious.

Text 18
स एव पुर्यां मधुभुक्पञ्चालेषु स्वपार्षदै: ।
उपनीतं बलिं गृह्णन् स्त्रीजितो नाविदद्भयम् ॥ १८ ॥
sa eva puryāṁ madhu-bhuk
pañcāleṣu sva-pārṣadaiḥ
upanītaṁ baliṁ gṛhṇan
strī-jito nāvidad bhayam
Synonyms
saḥ — he; eva — certainly; puryām — within the city; madhu-bhuk — enjoying sex life; pañcāleṣu — in the kingdom of Pañcāla (five sense objects); sva-pārṣadaiḥ — along with his followers; upanītam — brought; balim — taxes; gṛhṇan — accepting; strī-jitaḥ — conquered by women; na — did not; avidat — understand; bhayam — fear of death.

Translation
King Purañjana collected taxes in the city known as Pañcāla and thus was able to engage in sexual indulgence. Being completely under the control of women, he could not understand that his life was passing away and that he was reaching the point of death.

Text 19
कालस्य दुहिता काचित्‍त्रिलोकीं वरमिच्छती ।
पर्यटन्ती न बर्हिष्मन् प्रत्यनन्दत कश्चन ॥ १९ ॥
kālasya duhitā kācit
tri-lokīṁ varam icchatī
paryaṭantī na barhiṣman
pratyanandata kaścana
Synonyms
kālasya — of formidable Time; duhitā — the daughter; kācit — someone; tri-lokīm — within the three worlds; varam — husband; icchatī — desiring; paryaṭantī — traveling all over the universe; na — never; barhiṣman — O King Prācīnabarhiṣat; pratyanandata — accepted her proposal; kaścana — anyone.

Translation
My dear King Prācīnabarhiṣat, at this time the daughter of formidable Time was seeking her husband throughout the three worlds. Although no one agreed to accept her, she came.

Text 20
दौर्भाग्येनात्मनो लोके विश्रुता दुर्भगेति सा ।
या तुष्टा राजर्षये तु वृतादात्पूरवे वरम् ॥ २० ॥
daurbhāgyenātmano loke
viśrutā durbhageti sā
yā tuṣṭā rājarṣaye tu
vṛtādāt pūrave varam
Synonyms
daurbhāgyena — on account of misfortune; ātmanaḥ — of herself; loke — in the world; viśrutā — celebrated; durbhagā — most unfortunate; iti — thus; sā — she; yā — who; tuṣṭā — being satisfied; rāja-ṛṣaye — unto the great king; tu — but; vṛtā — being accepted; adāt — delivered; pūrave — unto King Pūru; varam — benediction.

Translation
The daughter of Time [Jarā] was very unfortunate. Consequently she was known as Durbhagā [“ill-fated”]. However, she was once pleased with a great king, and because the king accepted her, she granted him a great benediction.

Text 21
कदाचिदटमाना सा ब्रह्मलोकान्महीं गतम् ।
वव्रे बृहद्‌व्रतं मां तु जानती काममोहिता ॥ २१ ॥
kadācid aṭamānā sā
brahma-lokān mahīṁ gatam
vavre bṛhad-vrataṁ māṁ tu
jānatī kāma-mohitā
Synonyms
kadācit — once upon a time; aṭamānā — traveling; sā — she; brahma-lokāt — from Brahmaloka, the highest planet; mahīm — on the earth; gatam — having come; vavre — she proposed; bṛhat-vratam — avowed brahmacārī; mām — unto me; tu — then; jānatī — knowing; kāma-mohitā — being illusioned by lust.

Translation
When I once came to this earth from Brahmaloka, the highest planetary system, the daughter of Time, wandering over the universe, met me. Knowing me to be an avowed brahmacārī, she became lusty and proposed that I accept her.

Text 22
मयि संरभ्य विपुलमदाच्छापं सुदु:सहम् ।
स्थातुमर्हसि नैकत्र मद्याच्ञाविमुखो मुने ॥ २२ ॥
mayi saṁrabhya vipula-
madāc chāpaṁ suduḥsaham
sthātum arhasi naikatra
mad-yācñā-vimukho mune
Synonyms
mayi — unto me; saṁrabhya — having become angry; vipula — unlimited; madāt — out of illusion; śāpam — curse; su-duḥsaham — unbearable; sthātum arhasi — you may remain; na — never; ekatra — in one place; mat — my; yācñā — request; vimukhaḥ — having refused; mune — O great sage.

Translation
The great sage Nārada continued: When I refused to accept her request, she became very angry at me and cursed me severely. Because I refused her request, she said that I would not be able to stay in one place for a long time.

Text 23
ततो विहतसङ्कल्पा कन्यका यवनेश्वरम् ।
मयोपदिष्टमासाद्य वव्रे नाम्ना भयं पतिम् ॥ २३ ॥
tato vihata-saṅkalpā
kanyakā yavaneśvaram
mayopadiṣṭam āsādya
vavre nāmnā bhayaṁ patim
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; vihata-saṅkalpā — being disappointed in her determination; kanyakā — the daughter of Time; yavana-īśvaram — unto the king of the untouchables; mayā upadiṣṭam — indicated by me; āsādya — having approached; vavre — accepted; nāmnā — of the name; bhayam — Fear; patim — as her husband.

Translation
After she was thus disappointed by me, with my permission she approached the King of the Yavanas, whose name was Bhaya, or Fear, and she accepted him as her husband.

Text 24
ऋषभं यवनानां त्वां वृणे वीरेप्सितं पतिम् ।
सङ्कल्पस्त्वयि भूतानां कृत: किल न रिष्यति ॥ २४ ॥
ṛṣabhaṁ yavanānāṁ tvāṁ
vṛṇe vīrepsitaṁ patim
saṅkalpas tvayi bhūtānāṁ
kṛtaḥ kila na riṣyati
Synonyms
ṛṣabham — the best; yavanānām — of the untouchables; tvām — you; vṛṇe — I accept; vīra — O great hero; īpsitam — desired; patim — husband; saṅkalpaḥ — the determination; tvayi — unto you; bhūtānām — of all living entities; kṛtaḥ — if done; kila — certainly; na — never; riṣyati — becomes baffled.

Translation
Approaching the King of the Yavanas, Kālakanyā addressed him as a great hero, saying: My dear sir, you are the best of the untouchables. I am in love with you, and I want you as my husband. I know that no one is baffled if he makes friends with you.

Text 25
द्वाविमावनुशोचन्ति बालावसदवग्रहौ ।
यल्लोकशास्त्रोपनतं न राति न तदिच्छति ॥ २५ ॥
dvāv imāv anuśocanti
bālāv asad-avagrahau
yal loka-śāstropanataṁ
na rāti na tad icchati
Synonyms
dvau — two kinds; imau — these; anuśocanti — they lament; bālau — ignorant; asat — the foolish; avagrahau — taking the path of; yat — that which; loka — by custom; śāstra — by scriptures; upanatam — presented; na — never; rāti — follows; na — neither; tat — that; icchati — desires.

Translation
One who does not give charity according to the customs or injunctions of the scriptures and one who does not accept charity in that way are considered to be in the mode of ignorance. Such persons follow the path of the foolish. Surely they must lament at the end.

Text 26
अथो भजस्व मां भद्र भजन्तीं मे दयां कुरु ।
एतावान् पौरुषो धर्मो यदार्ताननुकम्पते ॥ २६ ॥
atho bhajasva māṁ bhadra
bhajantīṁ me dayāṁ kuru
etāvān pauruṣo dharmo
yad ārtān anukampate
Synonyms
atho — therefore; bhajasva — accept; mām — me; bhadra — O gentle one; bhajantīm — willing to serve; me — to me; dayām — mercy; kuru — do; etāvān — such a measure; pauruṣaḥ — for any gentleman; dharmaḥ — religious principle; yat — that; ārtān — to the distressed; anukampate — is compassionate.

Translation
Kālakanyā continued: O gentle one, I am now present before you to serve you. Please accept me and thus show me mercy. It is a gentleman’s greatest duty to be compassionate upon a person who is distressed.

Text 27
कालकन्योदितवचो निशम्य यवनेश्वर: ।
चिकीर्षुर्देवगुह्यं स सस्मितं तामभाषत ॥ २७ ॥
kāla-kanyodita-vaco
niśamya yavaneśvaraḥ
cikīrṣur deva-guhyaṁ sa
sasmitaṁ tām abhāṣata
Synonyms
kāla-kanyā — by the daughter of Time; udita — expressed; vacaḥ — words; niśamya — hearing; yavana-īśvaraḥ — the King of the Yavanas; cikīrṣuḥ — desiring to execute; deva — of providence; guhyam — confidential duty; saḥ — he; sa-smitam — smilingly; tām — her; abhāṣata — addressed.

Translation
After hearing the statement of Kālakanyā, daughter of Time, the King of the Yavanas began to smile and devise a means for executing his confidential duty on behalf of providence. He then addressed Kālakanyā as follows.

Text 28
मया निरूपितस्तुभ्यं पतिरात्मसमाधिना ।
नाभिनन्दति लोकोऽयं त्वामभद्रामसम्मताम् ॥ २८ ॥
mayā nirūpitas tubhyaṁ
patir ātma-samādhinā
nābhinandati loko ’yaṁ
tvām abhadrām asammatām
Synonyms
mayā — by me; nirūpitaḥ — settled; tubhyam — for you; patiḥ — husband; ātma — of the mind; samādhinā — by meditation; na — never; abhinandati — welcome; lokaḥ — the people; ayam — these; tvām — you; abhadrām — inauspicious; asammatām — unacceptable.

Translation
The King of the Yavanas replied: After much consideration, I have arrived at a husband for you. Actually, as far as everyone is concerned, you are inauspicious and mischievous. Since no one likes you, how can anyone accept you as his wife?

Text 29
त्वमव्यक्तगतिर्भुङ्‌क्ष्व लोकं कर्मविनिर्मितम् ।
या हि मे पृतनायुक्ता प्रजानाशं प्रणेष्यसि ॥ २९ ॥
tvam avyakta-gatir bhuṅkṣva
lokaṁ karma-vinirmitam
yā hi me pṛtanā-yuktā
prajā-nāśaṁ praṇeṣyasi
Synonyms
tvam — you; avyakta-gatiḥ — whose movement is imperceptible; bhuṅkṣva — enjoy; lokam — this world; karma-vinirmitam — manufactured by fruitive activities; yā — one who; hi — certainly; me — my; pṛtanā — soldiers; yuktā — helped by; prajā-nāśam — annihilation of the living entities; praṇeṣyasi — you shall carry out without any hindrance.

Translation
This world is a product of fruitive activities. Therefore you may imperceptibly attack people in general. Helped by my soldiers, you can kill them without opposition.

Text 30
प्रज्वारोऽयं मम भ्राता त्वं च मे भगिनी भव ।
चराम्युभाभ्यां लोकेऽस्मिन्नव्यक्तो भीमसैनिक: ॥ ३० ॥
prajvāro ’yaṁ mama bhrātā
tvaṁ ca me bhaginī bhava
carāmy ubhābhyāṁ loke ’sminn
avyakto bhīma-sainikaḥ
Synonyms
prajvāraḥ — named Prajvāra; ayam — this; mama — my; bhrātā — brother; tvam — you; ca — also; me — my; bhaginī — sister; bhava — become; carāmi — I shall go about; ubhābhyām — by both of you; loke — in the world; asmin — this; avyaktaḥ — without being manifest; bhīma — dangerous; sainikaḥ — with soldiers.

Translation
The King of the Yavanas continued: Here is my brother Prajvāra. I now accept you as my sister. I shall employ both of you, as well as my dangerous soldiers, to act imperceptibly within this world.