Text 1
नारद उवाच
सैनिका भयनाम्नो ये बर्हिष्मन् दिष्टकारिण: ।
प्रज्वारकालकन्याभ्यां
विचेरुरवनीमिमाम् ॥ १ ॥
nārada uvāca
sainikā bhaya-nāmno ye
barhiṣman diṣṭa-kāriṇaḥ
prajvāra-kāla-kanyābhyāṁ
vicerur avanīm imām
Synonyms
nāradaḥ uvāca — the great sage Nārada continued to speak; sainikāḥ — the soldiers; bhaya-nāmnaḥ — of Bhaya (Fear); ye — all of them who; barhiṣman — O King Prācīnabarhiṣat; diṣṭa-kāriṇaḥ — the order carriers of death; prajvāra — with Prajvāra; kāla-kanyābhyām — and with Kālakanyā; viceruḥ — traveled; avanīm — on earth; imām — this.

Translation
The great sage Nārada continued: My dear King Prācīnabarhiṣat, afterward the King of the Yavanas, whose name is fear itself, as well as Prajvāra, Kālakanyā, and his soldiers, began to travel all over the world.

Text 2
त एकदा तु रभसा पुरञ्जनपुरीं नृप ।
रुरुधुर्भौमभोगाढ्यां
जरत्पन्नगपालिताम् ॥ २ ॥
ta ekadā tu rabhasā
purañjana-purīṁ nṛpa
rurudhur bhauma-bhogāḍhyāṁ
jarat-pannaga-pālitām
Synonyms
te — they; ekadā — once upon a time; tu — then; rabhasā — with great force; purañjana-purīm — the city of Purañjana; nṛpa — O King; rurudhuḥ — encircled; bhauma-bhoga-āḍhyām — full of sense enjoyments; jarat — old; pannaga — by the serpent; pālitām — protected.

Translation
Once the dangerous soldiers attacked the city of Purañjana with great force. Although the city was full of paraphernalia for sense gratification, it was being protected by the old serpent.

Text 3
कालकन्यापि बुभुजे पुरञ्जनपुरं बलात् ।
ययाभिभूत: पुरुष: सद्यो नि:सारतामियात् ॥ ३ ॥
kāla-kanyāpi bubhuje
purañjana-puraṁ balāt
yayābhibhūtaḥ puruṣaḥ
sadyo niḥsāratām iyāt
Synonyms
kāla-kanyā — the daughter of Kāla; api — also; bubhuje — took possession of; purañjana-puram — the city of Purañjana; balāt — by force; yayā — by whom; abhibhūtaḥ — being overwhelmed; puruṣaḥ — a person; sadyaḥ — immediately; niḥsāratām — uselessness; iyāt — gets.

Translation
Gradually Kālakanyā, with the help of dangerous soldiers, attacked all the inhabitants of Purañjana’s city and thus rendered them useless for all purposes.

Text 4
तयोपभुज्यमानां वै यवना: सर्वतोदिशम् ।
द्वार्भि: प्रविश्य सुभृशं प्रार्दयन् सकलां पुरीम् ॥ ४ ॥
tayopabhujyamānāṁ vai
yavanāḥ sarvato-diśam
dvārbhiḥ praviśya subhṛśaṁ
prārdayan sakalāṁ purīm
Synonyms
tayā — by Kālakanyā; upabhujyamānām — being taken possession of; vai — certainly; yavanāḥ — the Yavanas; sarvataḥ-diśam — from all sides; dvārbhiḥ — through the gates; praviśya — having entered; su-bhṛśam — greatly; prārdayan — giving trouble; sakalām — all over; purīm — the city.

Translation
When Kālakanyā, daughter of Time, attacked the body, the dangerous soldiers of the King of the Yavanas entered the city through different gates. They then began to give severe trouble to all the citizens.

Text 5
तस्यां प्रपीड्यमानायामभिमानी पुरञ्जन: ।
अवापोरुविधांस्तापान् कुटुम्बी ममताकुल: ॥ ५ ॥
tasyāṁ prapīḍyamānāyām
abhimānī purañjanaḥ
avāporu-vidhāṁs tāpān
kuṭumbī mamatākulaḥ
Synonyms
tasyām — when the city; prapīḍyamānāyām — was put into different difficulties; abhimānī — too much absorbed; purañjanaḥ — King Purañjana; avāpa — achieved; uru — many; vidhān — varieties; tāpān — pains; kuṭumbī — family man; mamatā-ākulaḥ — too much affected by attachment to family.

Translation
When the city was thus endangered by the soldiers and Kālakanyā, King Purañjana, being overly absorbed in affection for his family, was placed in difficulty by the attack of Yavana-rāja and Kālakanyā.

Text 6
कन्योपगूढो नष्टश्री: कृपणो विषयात्मक: ।
नष्टप्रज्ञो हृतैश्वर्यो गन्धर्वयवनैर्बलात् ॥ ६ ॥
kanyopagūḍho naṣṭa-śrīḥ
kṛpaṇo viṣayātmakaḥ
naṣṭa-prajño hṛtaiśvaryo
gandharva-yavanair balāt
Synonyms
kanyā — by the daughter of Time; upagūḍhaḥ — being embraced; naṣṭa-śrīḥ — bereft of all beauty; kṛpaṇaḥ — miser; viṣaya-ātmakaḥ — addicted to sense gratification; naṣṭa-prajñaḥ — bereft of intelligence; hṛta-aiśvaryaḥ — bereft of opulence; gandharva — by the Gandharvas; yavanaiḥ — and by the Yavanas; balāt — by force.

Translation
When King Purañjana was embraced by Kālakanyā, he gradually lost all his beauty. Having been too much addicted to sex, he became very poor in intelligence and lost all his opulence. Being bereft of all possessions, he was conquered forcibly by the Gandharvas and the Yavanas.

Text 7
विशीर्णां स्वपुरीं वीक्ष्य प्रतिकूलाननाद‍ृतान् ।
पुत्रान् पौत्रानुगामात्याञ्जायां च गतसौहृदाम् ॥ ७ ॥
viśīrṇāṁ sva-purīṁ vīkṣya
pratikūlān anādṛtān
putrān pautrānugāmātyāñ
jāyāṁ ca gata-sauhṛdām
Synonyms
viśīrṇām — scattered; sva-purīm — his own town; vīkṣya — seeing; pratikūlān — opposing elements; anādṛtān — being disrespectful; putrān — sons; pautra — grandsons; anuga — servants; amātyān — ministers; jāyām — wife; ca — and; gata-sauhṛdām — indifferent.

Translation
King Purañjana then saw that everything in his town was scattered and that his sons, grandsons, servants and ministers were all gradually opposing him. He also noted that his wife was becoming cold and indifferent.

Text 8
आत्मानं कन्यया ग्रस्तं पञ्चालानरिदूषितान् ।
दुरन्तचिन्तामापन्नो न लेभे तत्प्रतिक्रियाम् ॥ ८ ॥
ātmānaṁ kanyayā grastaṁ
pañcālān ari-dūṣitān
duranta-cintām āpanno
na lebhe tat-pratikriyām
Synonyms
ātmānam — himself; kanyayā — by Kālakanyā; grastam — being embraced; pañcālān — Pañcāla; ari-dūṣitān — infected by the enemies; duranta — insurmountable; cintām — anxiety; āpannaḥ — having obtained; na — not; lebhe — achieved; tat — of that; pratikriyām — counteraction.

Translation
When King Purañjana saw that all his family members, relatives, followers, servants, secretaries and everyone else had turned against him, he certainly became very anxious. But he could not counteract the situation because he was thoroughly overwhelmed by Kālakanyā.

Text 9
कामानभिलषन्दीनो यातयामांश्च कन्यया ।
विगतात्मगतिस्‍नेह: पुत्रदारांश्च लालयन् ॥ ९ ॥
kāmān abhilaṣan dīno
yāta-yāmāṁś ca kanyayā
vigatātma-gati-snehaḥ
putra-dārāṁś ca lālayan
Synonyms
kāmān — objects of enjoyment; abhilaṣan — always lusting after; dīnaḥ — the poor man; yāta-yāmān — stale; ca — also; kanyayā — by the influence of Kālakanyā; vigata — lost; ātma-gati — real purpose of life; snehaḥ — attachment to; putra — sons; dārān — wife; ca — and; lālayan — affectionately maintaining.

Translation
The objects of enjoyment became stale by the influence of Kālakanyā. Due to the continuance of his lusty desires, King Purañjana became very poor in everything. Thus he did not understand the aim of life. He was still very affectionate toward his wife and children, and he worried about maintaining them.

Text 10
गन्धर्वयवनाक्रान्तां कालकन्योपमर्दिताम् ।
हातुं प्रचक्रमे राजा तां पुरीमनिकामत: ॥ १० ॥
gandharva-yavanākrāntāṁ
kāla-kanyopamarditām
hātuṁ pracakrame rājā
tāṁ purīm anikāmataḥ
Synonyms
gandharva — by the Gandharva soldiers; yavana — and by the Yavana soldiers; ākrāntām — overcome; kāla-kanyā — by Kālakanyā (the daughter of Time); upamarditām — being smashed; hātum — to give up; pracakrame — proceeded; rājā — King Purañjana; tām — that; purīm — the city; anikāmataḥ — unwilling.

Translation
The city of King Purañjana was overcome by the Gandharva and Yavana soldiers, and although the King had no desire to leave the city, he was circumstantially forced to do so, for it was smashed by Kālakanyā.

Text 11
भयनाम्नोऽग्रजो भ्राता प्रज्वार: प्रत्युपस्थित: ।
ददाह तां पुरीं कृत्‍स्‍नां भ्रातु: प्रियचिकीर्षया ॥ ११ ॥
bhaya-nāmno ’grajo bhrātā
prajvāraḥ pratyupasthitaḥ
dadāha tāṁ purīṁ kṛtsnāṁ
bhrātuḥ priya-cikīrṣayā
Synonyms
bhaya-nāmnaḥ — of Bhaya (Fear); agra-jaḥ — elder; bhrātā — brother; prajvāraḥ — named Prajvāra; pratyupasthitaḥ — being present there; dadāha — set fire; tām — to that; purīm — city; kṛtsnām — wholesale; bhrātuḥ — his brother; priya-cikīrṣayā — in order to please.

Translation
Under the circumstances, the elder brother of Yavana-rāja, known as Prajvāra, set fire to the city to please his younger brother, whose other name is fear itself.

Text 12
तस्यां सन्दह्यमानायां सपौर: सपरिच्छद: ।
कौटुम्बिक: कुटुम्बिन्या उपातप्यत सान्वय: ॥ १२ ॥
tasyāṁ sandahyamānāyāṁ
sapauraḥ saparicchadaḥ
kauṭumbikaḥ kuṭumbinyā
upātapyata sānvayaḥ
Synonyms
tasyām — when that city; sandahyamānāyām — was ablaze; sa-pauraḥ — along with all the citizens; sa-paricchadaḥ — along with all servants and followers; kauṭumbikaḥ — the King, having so many relatives; kuṭumbinyā — along with his wife; upātapyata — began to suffer the heat of the fire; sa-anvayaḥ — along with descendants.

Translation
When the city was set ablaze, all the citizens and servants of the King, as well as all family members, sons, grandsons, wives and other relatives, were within the fire. King Purañjana thus became very unhappy.

Text 13
यवनोपरुद्धायतनो ग्रस्तायां कालकन्यया ।
पुर्यां प्रज्वारसंसृष्ट:
पुरपालोऽन्वतप्यत ॥ १३ ॥
yavanoparuddhāyatano
grastāyāṁ kāla-kanyayā
puryāṁ prajvāra-saṁsṛṣṭaḥ
pura-pālo ’nvatapyata
Synonyms
yavana — by the Yavanas; uparuddha — attacked; āyatanaḥ — his abode; grastāyām — when seized; kāla-kanyayā — by the daughter of Time; puryām — the city; prajvāra-saṁsṛṣṭaḥ — being approached by Prajvāra; pura-pālaḥ — the city superintendent; anvatapyata — became also very much aggrieved.

Translation
The city’s superintendent of police, the serpent, saw that the citizens were being attacked by Kālakanyā, and he became very aggrieved to see his own residence set ablaze after being attacked by the Yavanas.

Text 14
न शेके सोऽवितुं तत्र पुरुकृच्छ्रोरुवेपथु: ।
गन्तुमैच्छत्ततो वृक्षकोटरादिव सानलात् ॥ १४ ॥
na śeke so ’vituṁ tatra
puru-kṛcchroru-vepathuḥ
gantum aicchat tato vṛkṣa-
koṭarād iva sānalāt
Synonyms
na — not; śeke — was able; saḥ — he; avitum — to protect; tatra — there; puru — very much; kṛcchra — difficulty; uru — great; vepathuḥ — suffering; gantum — to go out; aicchat — desired; tataḥ — from there; vṛkṣa — of a tree; koṭarāt — from the hollow; iva — like; sa-analāt — on fire.

Translation
As a serpent living within the cavity of a tree wishes to leave when there is a forest fire, so the city’s police superintendent, the snake, wished to leave the city due to the fire’s severe heat.

Text 15
शिथिलावयवो यर्हि गन्धर्वैर्हृतपौरुष: ।
यवनैररिभी राजन्नुपरुद्धो रुरोद ह ॥ १५ ॥
śithilāvayavo yarhi
gandharvair hṛta-pauruṣaḥ
yavanair aribhī rājann
uparuddho ruroda ha
Synonyms
śithila — slackened; avayavaḥ — his limbs; yarhi — when; gandharvaiḥ — by the Gandharvas; hṛta — defeated; pauruṣaḥ — his bodily strength; yavanaiḥ — by the Yavanas; aribhiḥ — by the enemies; rājan — O King Prācīnabarhiṣat; uparuddhaḥ — being checked; ruroda — cried loudly; ha — indeed.

Translation
The limbs of the serpent’s body were slackened by the Gandharvas and Yavana soldiers, who had thoroughly defeated his bodily strength. When he attempted to leave the body, he was checked by his enemies. Being thus baffled in his attempt, he began to cry loudly.

Text 16
दुहितृ: पुत्रपौत्रांश्च जामिजामातृपार्षदान् ।
स्वत्वावशिष्टं यत्किञ्चिद् गृहकोशपरिच्छदम् ॥ १६ ॥
duhitṝḥ putra-pautrāṁś ca
jāmi-jāmātṛ-pārṣadān
svatvāvaśiṣṭaṁ yat kiñcid
gṛha-kośa-paricchadam
Synonyms
duhitṝḥ — daughters; putra — sons; pautrān — grandsons; ca — and; jāmi — daughters-in-law; jāmātṛ — sons-in-law; pārṣadān — associates; svatva — property; avaśiṣṭam — remaining; yat kiñcit — whatever; gṛha — home; kośa — accumulation of wealth; paricchadam — household paraphernalia.

Translation
King Purañjana then began to think of his daughters, sons, grandsons, daughters-in-law, sons-in-law, servants and other associates, as well as his house, his household paraphernalia and his little accumulation of wealth.

Text 17
अहं ममेति स्वीकृत्य गृहेषु कुमतिर्गृही ।
दध्यौ प्रमदया दीनो विप्रयोग उपस्थिते ॥ १७ ॥
ahaṁ mameti svīkṛtya
gṛheṣu kumatir gṛhī
dadhyau pramadayā dīno
viprayoga upasthite
Synonyms
aham — I; mama — mine; iti — thus; svī-kṛtya — accepting; gṛheṣu — in the home; ku-matiḥ — whose mind is full of obnoxious thoughts; gṛhī — the householder; dadhyau — turns his attention to; pramadayā — with his wife; dīnaḥ — very poor; viprayoge — when separation; upasthite — occurred.

Translation
King Purañjana was overly attached to his family and conceptions of “I” and “mine.” Because he was overly attracted to his wife, he was already quite poverty-stricken. At the time of separation, he became very sorry.

Text 18
लोकान्तरं गतवति मय्यनाथा कुटुम्बिनी ।
वर्तिष्यते कथं त्वेषा बालकाननुशोचती ॥ १८ ॥
lokāntaraṁ gatavati
mayy anāthā kuṭumbinī
vartiṣyate kathaṁ tv eṣā
bālakān anuśocatī
Synonyms
loka-antaram — into a different life; gatavati mayi — when I am gone; anāthā — bereft of husband; kuṭumbinī — surrounded by all family members; vartiṣyate — will exist; katham — how; tu — then; eṣā — this woman; bālakān — children; anuśocatī — lamenting about.

Translation
King Purañjana was anxiously thinking, “Alas, my wife is encumbered by so many children. When I pass from this body, how will she be able to maintain all these family members? Alas, she will be greatly harassed by thoughts of family maintenance.”

Text 19
न मय्यनाशिते भुङ्क्ते नास्‍नाते स्‍नाति मत्परा ।
मयि रुष्टे सुसन्त्रस्ता भर्त्सिते यतवाग्भयात् ॥ १९ ॥
na mayy anāśite bhuṅkte
nāsnāte snāti mat-parā
mayi ruṣṭe susantrastā
bhartsite yata-vāg bhayāt
Synonyms
na — never; mayi — when I; anāśite — had not eaten; bhuṅkte — she would eat; na — never; asnāte — had not taken bath; snāti — she would take her bath; mat-parā — always devoted to me; mayi — when I; ruṣṭe — was angry; su-santrastā — very much frightened; bhartsite — when I chastised; yata-vāk — fully controlled of words; bhayāt — out of fear.

Translation
King Purañjana then began to think of his past dealings with his wife. He recalled that his wife would not take her dinner until he had finished his, that she would not take her bath until he had finished his, and that she was always very much attached to him, so much so that if he would sometimes become angry and chastise her, she would simply remain silent and tolerate his misbehavior.

Text 20
प्रबोधयति माविज्ञं व्युषिते शोककर्शिता ।
वर्त्मैतद् गृहमेधीयं वीरसूरपि नेष्यति ॥ २० ॥
prabodhayati māvijñaṁ
vyuṣite śoka-karśitā
vartmaitad gṛha-medhīyaṁ
vīra-sūr api neṣyati
Synonyms
prabodhayati — gives good counsel; mā — unto me; avijñam — foolish; vyuṣite — at the time of my being away; śoka — by aggrievement; karśitā — being aggrieved and thus dried up; vartma — path; etat — this; gṛha-medhīyam — of household responsibilities; vīra-sūḥ — the mother of great heroes; api — although; neṣyati — will she be able to execute.

Translation
King Purañjana continued thinking how, when he was in a state of bewilderment, his wife would give him good counsel and how she would become aggrieved when he was away from home. Although she was the mother of so many sons and heroes, the King still feared that she would not be able to maintain the responsibility of household affairs.

Text 21
कथं नु दारका दीना दारकीर्वापरायणा: ।
वर्तिष्यन्ते मयि गते भिन्ननाव इवोदधौ ॥ २१ ॥
kathaṁ nu dārakā dīnā
dārakīr vāparāyaṇāḥ
vartiṣyante mayi gate
bhinna-nāva ivodadhau
Synonyms
katham — how; nu — indeed; dārakāḥ — sons; dīnāḥ — poor; dārakīḥ — daughters; vā — or; aparāyaṇāḥ — having no one else to depend on; vartiṣyante — will live; mayi — when I; gate — gone from this world; bhinna — broken; nāvaḥ — boat; iva — like; udadhau — in the ocean.

Translation
King Purañjana continued worrying: “After I pass from this world, how will my sons and daughters, who are now fully dependent on me, live and continue their lives? Their position will be similar to that of passengers aboard a ship wrecked in the midst of the ocean.”

Text 22
एवं कृपणया बुद्ध्या शोचन्तमतदर्हणम् ।
ग्रहीतुं कृतधीरेनं भयनामाभ्यपद्यत ॥ २२ ॥
evaṁ kṛpaṇayā buddhyā
śocantam atad-arhaṇam
grahītuṁ kṛta-dhīr enaṁ
bhaya-nāmābhyapadyata
Synonyms
evam — thus; kṛpaṇayā — by miserly; buddhyā — intelligence; śocantam — lamenting; a-tat-arhaṇam — on which he should not have lamented; grahītum — in order to arrest; kṛta-dhīḥ — the determined King of the Yavanas; enam — him; bhaya-nāmā — whose name was fear; abhyapadyata — came there immediately.

Translation
Although King Purañjana should not have lamented over the fate of his wife and children, he nonetheless did so due to his miserly intelligence. In the meantime, Yavana-rāja, whose name was fear itself, immediately drew near to arrest him.

Text 23
पशुवद्यवनैरेष नीयमान: स्वकं क्षयम् ।
अन्वद्रवन्ननुपथा: शोचन्तो भृशमातुरा: ॥ २३ ॥
paśuvad yavanair eṣa
nīyamānaḥ svakaṁ kṣayam
anvadravann anupathāḥ
śocanto bhṛśam āturāḥ
Synonyms
paśu-vat — like an animal; yavanaiḥ — by the Yavanas; eṣaḥ — Purañjana; nīyamānaḥ — being arrested and taken away; svakam — to their own; kṣayam — abode; anvadravan — followed; anupathāḥ — his attendants; śocantaḥ — lamenting; bhṛśam — greatly; āturāḥ — being distressed.

Translation
When the Yavanas were taking King Purañjana away to their place, binding him like an animal, the King’s followers became greatly aggrieved. While they lamented, they were forced to go along with him.

Text 24
पुरीं विहायोपगत उपरुद्धो भुजङ्गम: ।
यदा तमेवानु पुरी विशीर्णा प्रकृतिं गता ॥ २४ ॥
purīṁ vihāyopagata
uparuddho bhujaṅgamaḥ
yadā tam evānu purī
viśīrṇā prakṛtiṁ gatā
Synonyms
purīm — the city; vihāya — having given up; upagataḥ — gone out; uparuddhaḥ — arrested; bhujaṅgamaḥ — the serpent; yadā — when; tam — him; eva — certainly; anu — after; purī — the city; viśīrṇā — scattered; prakṛtim — matter; gatā — turned into.

Translation
The serpent, who had already been arrested by the soldiers of Yavana-rāja and was out of the city, began to follow his master along with the others. As soon as they all left the city, it was immediately dismantled and smashed to dust.

Text 25
विकृष्यमाण: प्रसभं यवनेन बलीयसा ।
नाविन्दत्तमसाविष्ट: सखायं सुहृदं पुर: ॥ २५ ॥
vikṛṣyamāṇaḥ prasabhaṁ
yavanena balīyasā
nāvindat tamasāviṣṭaḥ
sakhāyaṁ suhṛdaṁ puraḥ
Synonyms
vikṛṣyamāṇaḥ — being dragged; prasabham — forcibly; yavanena — by the Yavana; balīyasā — who was very powerful; na avindat — could not remember; tamasā — by darkness of ignorance; āviṣṭaḥ — being covered; sakhāyam — his friend; suhṛdam — always a well-wisher; puraḥ — from the very beginning.

Translation
When King Purañjana was being dragged with great force by the powerful Yavana, out of his gross ignorance he still could not remember his friend and well-wisher, the Supersoul.

Text 26
तं यज्ञपशवोऽनेन संज्ञप्ता येऽदयालुना ।
कुठारैश्चिच्छिदु: क्रुद्धा: स्मरन्तोऽमीवमस्य तत् ॥ २६ ॥
taṁ yajña-paśavo ’nena
saṁjñaptā ye ’dayālunā
kuṭhāraiś cicchiduḥ kruddhāḥ
smaranto ’mīvam asya tat
Synonyms
tam — him; yajña-paśavaḥ — the sacrificial animals; anena — by him; saṁjñaptāḥ — killed; ye — all of them who; adayālunā — by the most unkind; kuṭhāraiḥ — by axes; cicchiduḥ — pierced to pieces; kruddhāḥ — being very angry; smarantaḥ — remembering; amīvam — sinful activity; asya — of him; tat — that.

Translation
That most unkind king, Purañjana, had killed many animals in various sacrifices. Now, taking advantage of this opportunity, all these animals began to pierce him with their horns. It was as though he were being cut to pieces by axes.

Text 27
अनन्तपारे तमसि मग्नो नष्टस्मृति: समा: ।
शाश्वतीरनुभूयार्तिं प्रमदासङ्गदूषित: ॥ २७ ॥
ananta-pāre tamasi
magno naṣṭa-smṛtiḥ samāḥ
śāśvatīr anubhūyārtiṁ
pramadā-saṅga-dūṣitaḥ
Synonyms
ananta-pāre — unlimitedly expanded; tamasi — in the material existence of darkness; magnaḥ — being merged; naṣṭa-smṛtiḥ — bereft of all intelligence; samāḥ — for many years; śāśvatīḥ — practically eternally; anubhūya — experiencing; ārtim — the threefold miseries; pramadā — of women; saṅga — by association; dūṣitaḥ — being contaminated.

Translation
Due to his contaminated association with women, a living entity like King Purañjana eternally suffers all the pangs of material existence and remains in the dark region of material life, bereft of all remembrance for many, many years.

Text 28
तामेव मनसा गृह्णन् बभूव प्रमदोत्तमा ।
अनन्तरं विदर्भस्य राजसिंहस्य वेश्मनि ॥ २८ ॥
tām eva manasā gṛhṇan
babhūva pramadottamā
anantaraṁ vidarbhasya
rāja-siṁhasya veśmani
Synonyms
tām — her; eva — certainly; manasā — by the mind; gṛhṇan — accepting; babhūva — became; pramadā — woman; uttamā — highly situated; anantaram — after death; vidarbhasya — of Vidarbha; rāja-siṁhasya — of the most powerful king; veśmani — at the house.

Translation
King Purañjana gave up his body while remembering his wife, and consequently in his next life he became a very beautiful and well-situated woman. He took his next birth as the daughter of King Vidarbha in the very house of the King.

Text 29
उपयेमे वीर्यपणां वैदर्भीं मलयध्वज: ।
युधि निर्जित्य राजन्यान् पाण्ड्य: परपुरञ्जय: ॥ २९ ॥
upayeme vīrya-paṇāṁ
vaidarbhīṁ malayadhvajaḥ
yudhi nirjitya rājanyān
pāṇḍyaḥ para-purañjayaḥ
Synonyms
upayeme — married; vīrya — of valor or prowess; paṇām — the prize; vaidarbhīm — daughter of Vidarbha; malaya-dhvajaḥ — Malayadhvaja; yudhi — in the fight; nirjitya — after conquering; rājanyān — other princes; pāṇḍyaḥ — best of the learned, or born in the country known as Pāṇḍu; para — transcendental; puram — city; jayaḥ — conqueror.

Translation
It was fixed that Vaidarbhī, daughter of King Vidarbha, was to be married to a very powerful man, Malayadhvaja, an inhabitant of the Pāṇḍu country. After conquering other princes, he married the daughter of King Vidarbha.

Text 30
तस्यां स जनयां चक्र आत्मजामसितेक्षणाम् ।
यवीयस: सप्त सुतान् सप्त द्रविडभूभृत: ॥ ३० ॥
tasyāṁ sa janayāṁ cakra
ātmajām asitekṣaṇām
yavīyasaḥ sapta sutān
sapta draviḍa-bhūbhṛtaḥ
Synonyms
tasyām — through her; saḥ — the King; janayām cakre — begot; ātmajām — daughter; asita — blue or black; īkṣaṇām — whose eyes; yavīyasaḥ — younger, very powerful; sapta — seven; sutān — sons; sapta — seven; draviḍa — province of Draviḍa, or South India; bhū — of the land; bhṛtaḥ — kings.

Translation
King Malayadhvaja fathered one daughter, who had very black eyes. He also had seven sons, who later became rulers of that tract of land known as Draviḍa. Thus there were seven kings in that land.

Text 31
एकैकस्याभवत्तेषां राजन्नर्बुदमर्बुदम् ।
भोक्ष्यते यद्वंशधरैर्मही मन्वन्तरं परम् ॥ ३१ ॥
ekaikasyābhavat teṣāṁ
rājann arbudam arbudam
bhokṣyate yad-vaṁśa-dharair
mahī manvantaraṁ param
Synonyms
eka-ekasya — of each one; abhavat — there became; teṣām — of them; rājan — O King; arbudam — ten million; arbudam — ten million; bhokṣyate — is ruled; yat — whose; vaṁśa-dharaiḥ — by descendants; mahī — the whole world; manu-antaram — up to the end of one Manu; param — and afterward.

Translation
My dear King Prācīnabarhiṣat, the sons of Malayadhvaja gave birth to many thousands and thousands of sons, and all of these have been protecting the entire world up to the end of one Manu’s life span and even afterward.

Text 32
अगस्त्य: प्राग्दुहितरमुपयेमे धृतव्रताम् ।
यस्यां द‍ृढच्युतो जात इध्मवाहात्मजो मुनि: ॥ ३२ ॥
agastyaḥ prāg duhitaram
upayeme dhṛta-vratām
yasyāṁ dṛḍhacyuto jāta
idhmavāhātmajo muniḥ
Synonyms
agastyaḥ — the great sage Agastya; prāk — first; duhitaram — daughter; upayeme — married; dhṛta-vratām — taken to vows; yasyām — through whom; dṛḍhacyutaḥ — named Dṛḍhacyuta; jātaḥ — was born; idhmavāha — named Idhmavāha; ātma-jaḥ — son; muniḥ — the great sage.

Translation
The great sage named Agastya married the first-born daughter of Malayadhvaja, the avowed devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa. From her one son was born, whose name was Dṛḍhacyuta, and from him another son was born, whose name was Idhmavāha.

Text 33
विभज्य तनयेभ्य: क्ष्मां राजर्षिर्मलयध्वज: ।
आरिराधयिषु: कृष्णं स जगाम कुलाचलम् ॥ ३३ ॥
vibhajya tanayebhyaḥ kṣmāṁ
rājarṣir malayadhvajaḥ
ārirādhayiṣuḥ kṛṣṇaṁ
sa jagāma kulācalam
Synonyms
vibhajya — having divided; tanayebhyaḥ — among his sons; kṣmām — the whole world; rāja-ṛṣiḥ — the great saintly king; malayadhvajaḥ — named Malayadhvaja; ārirādhayiṣuḥ — desiring to worship; kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; saḥ — he; jagāma — went; kulācalam — unto Kulācala.

Translation
After this, the great saintly King Malayadhvaja divided his entire kingdom among his sons. Then, in order to worship Lord Kṛṣṇa with full attention, he went to a solitary place known as Kulācala.

Text 34
हित्वा गृहान् सुतान् भोगान् वैदर्भी मदिरेक्षणा ।
अन्वधावत पाण्ड्येशं ज्योत्‍स्‍नेव रजनीकरम् ॥ ३४ ॥
hitvā gṛhān sutān bhogān
vaidarbhī madirekṣaṇā
anvadhāvata pāṇḍyeśaṁ
jyotsneva rajanī-karam
Synonyms
hitvā — giving up; gṛhān — home; sutān — children; bhogān — material happiness; vaidarbhī — the daughter of King Vidarbha; madira-īkṣaṇā — with enchanting eyes; anvadhāvata — followed; pāṇḍya-īśam — King Malayadhvaja; jyotsnā iva — like the moonshine; rajanī-karam — the moon.

Translation
Just as the moonshine follows the moon at night, immediately after King Malayadhvaja departed for Kulācala, his devoted wife, whose eyes were very enchanting, followed him, giving up all homely happiness, despite family and children.

Texts 35-36
तत्र चन्द्रवसा नाम ताम्रपर्णी वटोदका ।
तत्पुण्यसलिलैर्नित्यमुभयत्रात्मनो मृजन् ॥ ३५ ॥
कन्दाष्टिभिर्मूलफलै: पुष्पपर्णैस्तृणोदकै: ।
वर्तमान: शनैर्गात्रकर्शनं तप आस्थित: ॥ ३६ ॥
tatra candravasā nāma
tāmraparṇī vaṭodakā
tat-puṇya-salilair nityam
ubhayatrātmano mṛjan
kandāṣṭibhir mūla-phalaiḥ
puṣpa-parṇais tṛṇodakaiḥ
vartamānaḥ śanair gātra-
karśanaṁ tapa āsthitaḥ
Synonyms
tatra — there; candravasā — the Candravasā River; nāma — named; tāmraparṇī — the Tāmraparṇī River; vaṭodakā — the Vaṭodakā River; tat — of those rivers; puṇya — pious; salilaiḥ — with the waters; nityam — daily; ubhayatra — in both ways; ātmanaḥ — of himself; mṛjan — washing; kanda — bulbs; aṣṭibhiḥ — and by seeds; mūla — roots; phalaiḥ — and by fruits; puṣpa — flowers; parṇaiḥ — and by leaves; tṛṇā — grass; udakaiḥ — and by water; vartamānaḥ — subsisting; śanaiḥ — gradually; gātra — his body; karśanam — rendering thin; tapaḥ — austerity; āsthitaḥ — he underwent.

Translation
In the province of Kulācala, there were rivers named Candravasā, Tāmraparṇī and Vaṭodakā. King Malayadhvaja used to go to those pious rivers regularly and take his bath there. Thus he purified himself externally and internally. He took his bath and ate bulbs, seeds, leaves, flowers, roots, fruits and grasses and drank water. In this way he underwent severe austerities. Eventually he became very skinny.

Text 37
शीतोष्णवातवर्षाणि क्षुत्पिपासे प्रियाप्रिये ।
सुखदु:खे इति द्वन्द्वान्यजयत्समदर्शन: ॥ ३७ ॥
śītoṣṇa-vāta-varṣāṇi
kṣut-pipāse priyāpriye
sukha-duḥkhe iti dvandvāny
ajayat sama-darśanaḥ
Synonyms
śīta — cold; uṣṇa — heat; vāta — wind; varṣāṇi — and rainy seasons; kṣut — hunger; pipāse — and thirst; priya — pleasant; apriye — and unpleasant; sukha — happiness; duḥkhe — and distress; iti — thus; dvandvāni — dualities; ajayat — he conquered; sama-darśanaḥ — equipoised.

Translation
Through austerity, King Malayadhvaja in body and mind gradually became equal to the dualities of cold and heat, happiness and distress, wind and rain, hunger and thirst, the pleasant and the unpleasant. In this way he conquered all relativities.

Text 38
तपसा विद्यया पक्‍वकषायो नियमैर्यमै: ।
युयुजे ब्रह्मण्यात्मानं विजिताक्षानिलाशय: ॥ ३८ ॥
tapasā vidyayā pakva-
kaṣāyo niyamair yamaiḥ
yuyuje brahmaṇy ātmānaṁ
vijitākṣānilāśayaḥ
Synonyms
tapasā — by austerity; vidyayā — by education; pakva — burned up; kaṣāyaḥ — all dirty things; niyamaiḥ — by regulative principles; yamaiḥ — by self-control; yuyuje — he fixed; brahmaṇi — in spiritual realization; ātmānam — his self; vijita — completely controlled; akṣa — senses; anila — life; āśayaḥ — consciousness.

Translation
By worshiping, executing austerities and following the regulative principles, King Malayadhvaja conquered his senses, his life and his consciousness. Thus he fixed everything on the central point of the Supreme Brahman [Kṛṣṇa].

Text 39
आस्ते स्थाणुरिवैकत्र दिव्यं वर्षशतं स्थिर: ।
वासुदेवे भगवति नान्यद्वेदोद्वहन् रतिम् ॥ ३९ ॥
āste sthāṇur ivaikatra
divyaṁ varṣa-śataṁ sthiraḥ
vāsudeve bhagavati
nānyad vedodvahan ratim
Synonyms
āste — remains; sthāṇuḥ — immovable; iva — like; ekatra — in one place; divyam — of the demigods; varṣa — years; śatam — one hundred; sthiraḥ — steady; vāsudeve — unto Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhagavati — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; na — not; anyat — anything else; veda — did know; udvahan — possessing; ratim — attraction.

Translation
In this way he stayed immovable in one place for one hundred years by the calculation of the demigods. After this time, he developed pure devotional attraction for Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and remained fixed in that position.

Text 40
स व्यापकतयात्मानं व्यतिरिक्ततयात्मनि ।
विद्वान् स्वप्न इवामर्शसाक्षिणं विरराम ह ॥ ४० ॥
sa vyāpakatayātmānaṁ
vyatiriktatayātmani
vidvān svapna ivāmarśa-
sākṣiṇaṁ virarāma ha
Synonyms
saḥ — King Malayadhvaja; vyāpakatayā — by all-pervasiveness; ātmānam — the Supersoul; vyatiriktatayā — by differentiation; ātmani — in his own self; vidvān — perfectly educated; svapne — in a dream; iva — like; amarśa — of deliberation; sākṣiṇam — the witness; virarāma — became indifferent; ha — certainly.

Translation
King Malayadhvaja attained perfect knowledge by being able to distinguish the Supersoul from the individual soul. The individual soul is localized, whereas the Supersoul is all-pervasive. He became perfect in knowledge that the material body is not the soul but that the soul is the witness of the material body.

Text 41
साक्षाद्भगवतोक्तेन गुरुणा हरिणा नृप ।
विशुद्धज्ञानदीपेन स्फुरता विश्वतोमुखम् ॥ ४१ ॥
sākṣād bhagavatoktena
guruṇā hariṇā nṛpa
viśuddha-jñāna-dīpena
sphuratā viśvato-mukham
Synonyms
sākṣāt — directly; bhagavatā — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; uktena — instructed; guruṇā — the spiritual master; hariṇā — by Lord Hari; nṛpa — O King; viśuddha — pure; jñāna — knowledge; dīpena — by the light of; sphuratā — enlightening; viśvataḥ-mukham — all angles of vision.

Translation
In this way King Malayadhvaja attained perfect knowledge because in his pure state he was directly instructed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By means of such enlightening transcendental knowledge, he could understand everything from all angles of vision.

Text 42
परे ब्रह्मणि चात्मानं परं ब्रह्म तथात्मनि ।
वीक्षमाणो
विहायेक्षामस्मादुपरराम ह ॥ ४२ ॥
pare brahmaṇi cātmānaṁ
paraṁ brahma tathātmani
vīkṣamāṇo vihāyekṣām
asmād upararāma ha
Synonyms
pare — transcendental; brahmaṇi — in the Absolute; ca — and; ātmānam — the self; param — the supreme; brahma — Absolute; tathā — also; ātmani — in himself; vīkṣamāṇaḥ — thus observing; vihāya — giving up; īkṣām — reservation; asmāt — from this process; upararāma — retired; ha — certainly.

Translation
King Malayadhvaja could thus observe that the Supersoul was sitting by his side, and that he, as the individual soul, was sitting by the side of the Supersoul. Since both were together, there was no need for separate interests; thus he ceased from such activities.

Text 43
पतिं परमधर्मज्ञं वैदर्भी मलयध्वजम् ।
प्रेम्णा पर्यचरद्धित्वा भोगान् सा
पतिदेवता ॥ ४३ ॥
patiṁ parama-dharma-jñaṁ
vaidarbhī malayadhvajam
premṇā paryacarad dhitvā
bhogān sā pati-devatā
Synonyms
patim — her husband; parama — supreme; dharma-jñam — knower of religious principles; vaidarbhī — the daughter of Vidarbha; malaya-dhvajam — named Malayadhvaja; premṇā — with love and affection; paryacarat — served in devotion; hitvā — giving up; bhogān — sense enjoyments; sā — she; pati-devatā — accepting her husband as the Supreme Lord.

Translation
The daughter of King Vidarbha accepted her husband all in all as the Supreme. She gave up all sensual enjoyment and in complete renunciation followed the principles of her husband, who was so advanced. Thus she remained engaged in his service.

Text 44
चीरवासा व्रतक्षामा वेणीभूतशिरोरुहा ।
बभावुप पतिं शान्ता शिखा शान्तमिवानलम् ॥ ४४ ॥
cīra-vāsā vrata-kṣāmā
veṇī-bhūta-śiroruhā
babhāv upa patiṁ śāntā
śikhā śāntam ivānalam
Synonyms
cīra-vāsā — wearing old garments; vrata-kṣāmā — lean and thin on account of austerities; veṇī-bhūta — entangled; śiroruhā — her hair; babhau — she shone; upa patim — near the husband; śāntā — peaceful; śikhā — flames; śāntam — without being agitated; iva — like; analam — fire.

Translation
The daughter of King Vidarbha wore old garments, and she was lean and thin because of her vows of austerity. Since she did not arrange her hair, it became entangled and twisted in locks. Although she remained always near her husband, she was as silent and unagitated as the flame of an undisturbed fire.

Text 45
अजानती प्रियतमं यदोपरतमङ्गना ।
सुस्थिरासनमासाद्य यथापूर्वमुपाचरत् ॥ ४५ ॥
ajānatī priyatamaṁ
yadoparatam aṅganā
susthirāsanam āsādya
yathā-pūrvam upācarat
Synonyms
ajānatī — without any knowledge; priya-tamam — her dearmost husband; yadā — when; uparatam — passed away; aṅganā — the woman; susthira — fixed up; āsanam — on the seat; āsādya — going up to; yathā — as; pūrvam — before; upācarat — went on serving him.

Translation
The daughter of King Vidarbha continued as usual to serve her husband, who was seated in a steady posture, until she could ascertain that he had passed away from the body.

Text 46
यदा नोपलभेताङ्‌घ्रावूष्माणं पत्युरर्चती ।
आसीत्संविग्नहृदया यूथभ्रष्टा मृगी यथा ॥ ४६ ॥
yadā nopalabhetāṅghrāv
ūṣmāṇaṁ patyur arcatī
āsīt saṁvigna-hṛdayā
yūtha-bhraṣṭā mṛgī yathā
Synonyms
yadā — when; na — not; upalabheta — could feel; aṅghrau — in the feet; ūṣmāṇam — heat; patyuḥ — of her husband; arcatī — while serving; āsīt — she became; saṁvigna — anxious; hṛdayā — at heart; yūtha-bhraṣṭā — bereft of her husband; mṛgī — the she-deer; yathā — as.

Translation
While she was serving her husband by massaging his legs, she could feel that his feet were no longer warm and could thus understand that he had already passed from the body. She felt great anxiety upon being left alone. Bereft of her husband’s company, she felt exactly as the deer feels upon being separated from its mate.

Text 47
आत्मानं शोचती दीनमबन्धुं विक्लवाश्रुभि: ।
स्तनावासिच्य विपिने सुस्वरं प्ररुरोद सा ॥ ४७ ॥
ātmānaṁ śocatī dīnam
abandhuṁ viklavāśrubhiḥ
stanāv āsicya vipine
susvaraṁ praruroda sā
Synonyms
ātmānam — about herself; śocatī — lamenting; dīnam — wretched; abandhum — without a friend; viklava — brokenhearted; aśrubhiḥ — by tears; stanau — her breasts; āsicya — wetting; vipine — in the forest; susvaram — loudly; praruroda — began to cry; sā — she.

Translation
Being now alone and a widow in that forest, the daughter of Vidarbha began to lament, incessantly shedding tears, which soaked her breasts, and crying very loudly.

Text 48
उत्तिष्ठोत्तिष्ठ राजर्षे इमामुदधिमेखलाम् ।
दस्युभ्य: क्षत्रबन्धुभ्यो बिभ्यतीं पातुमर्हसि ॥ ४८ ॥
uttiṣṭhottiṣṭha rājarṣe
imām udadhi-mekhalām
dasyubhyaḥ kṣatra-bandhubhyo
bibhyatīṁ pātum arhasi
Synonyms
uttiṣṭha — please get up; uttiṣṭha — please get up; rāja-ṛṣe — O saintly king; imām — this earth; udadhi — by the ocean; mekhalām — surrounded; dasyubhyaḥ — from the rogues; kṣatra-bandhubhyaḥ — from the unclean kings; bibhyatīm — very much afraid; pātum — to protect; arhasi — you ought.

Translation
O best of kings, please get up! Get up! Just see this world surrounded by water and infested with rogues and so-called kings. This world is very much afraid, and it is your duty to protect her.

Text 49
एवं विलपन्ती बाला विपिनेऽनुगता पतिम् ।
पतिता पादयोर्भर्तू रुदत्यश्रूण्यवर्तयत् ॥ ४९ ॥
evaṁ vilapantī bālā
vipine ’nugatā patim
patitā pādayor bhartū
rudaty aśrūṇy avartayat
Synonyms
evam — thus; vilapantī — lamenting; bālā — the innocent woman; vipine — in the solitary forest; anugatā — strictly adherent; patim — unto her husband; patitā — fallen down; pādayoḥ — at the feet; bhartuḥ — of her husband; rudatī — while crying; aśrūṇi — tears; avartayat — she shed.

Translation
That most obedient wife thus fell down at the feet of her dead husband and began to cry pitifully in that solitary forest. Thus the tears rolled down from her eyes.

Text 50
चितिं दारुमयीं चित्वा तस्यां पत्यु: कलेवरम् ।
आदीप्य चानुमरणे विलपन्ती मनो दधे ॥ ५० ॥
citiṁ dārumayīṁ citvā
tasyāṁ patyuḥ kalevaram
ādīpya cānumaraṇe
vilapantī mano dadhe
Synonyms
citim — funeral pyre; dāru-mayīm — made with wood; citvā — having piled up; tasyām — on that; patyuḥ — of the husband; kalevaram — body; ādīpya — after igniting; ca — also; anumaraṇe — to die along with him; vilapantī — lamenting; manaḥ — her mind; dadhe — fixed.

Translation
She then prepared a blazing fire with firewood and placed the dead body of her husband upon it. When this was finished, she lamented severely and prepared herself to perish in the fire with her husband.

Text 51
तत्र पूर्वतर: कश्चित्सखा ब्राह्मण आत्मवान् ।
सान्‍त्वयन् वल्गुना साम्ना तामाह रुदतीं प्रभो ॥ ५१ ॥
tatra pūrvataraḥ kaścit
sakhā brāhmaṇa ātmavān
sāntvayan valgunā sāmnā
tām āha rudatīṁ prabho
Synonyms
tatra — in that place; pūrvataraḥ — previous; kaścit — someone; sakhā — friend; brāhmaṇaḥ — a brāhmaṇa; ātmavān — very learned scholar; sāntvayan — pacifying; valgunā — by very nice; sāmnā — mitigating words; tām — unto her; āha — he said; rudatīm — while she was crying; prabho — my dear King.

Translation
My dear King, one brāhmaṇa, who was an old friend of King Purañjana, came to that place and began to pacify the Queen with sweet words.

Text 52
ब्राह्मण उवाच
का त्वं कस्यासि को वायं शयानो यस्य शोचसि ।
जानासि किं सखायं मां येनाग्रे विचचर्थ ह ॥ ५२ ॥
brāhmaṇa uvāca
kā tvaṁ kasyāsi ko vāyaṁ
śayāno yasya śocasi
jānāsi kiṁ sakhāyaṁ māṁ
yenāgre vicacartha ha
Synonyms
brāhmaṇaḥ uvāca — the learned brāhmaṇa said; kā — who; tvam — you; kasya — whose; asi — are you; kaḥ — who; vā — or; ayam — this man; śayānaḥ — lying down; yasya — for whom; śocasi — you are lamenting; jānāsi kim — do you know; sakhāyam — friend; mām — Me; yena — with whom; agre — formerly; vicacartha — you consulted; ha — certainly.

Translation
The brāhmaṇa inquired as follows: Who are you? Whose wife or daughter are you? Who is the man lying here? It appears you are lamenting for this dead body. Don’t you recognize Me? I am your eternal friend. You may remember that many times in the past you have consulted Me.

Text 53
अपि स्मरसि चात्मानमविज्ञातसखं सखे ।
हित्वा मां पदमन्विच्छन् भौमभोगरतो गत: ॥ ५३ ॥
api smarasi cātmānam
avijñāta-sakhaṁ sakhe
hitvā māṁ padam anvicchan
bhauma-bhoga-rato gataḥ
Synonyms
api smarasi — do you remember; ca — also; ātmānam — the Supersoul; avijñāta — unknown; sakham — friend; sakhe — O friend; hitvā — giving up; mām — Me; padam — position; anvicchan — desiring; bhauma — material; bhoga — enjoyment; rataḥ — attached to; gataḥ — you became.

Translation
The brāhmaṇa continued: My dear friend, even though you cannot immediately recognize Me, can’t you remember that in the past you had a very intimate friend? Unfortunately, you gave up My company and accepted a position as enjoyer of this material world.

Text 54
हंसावहं च त्वं चार्य सखायौ मानसायनौ ।
अभूतामन्तरा वौक: सहस्रपरिवत्सरान् ॥ ५४ ॥
haṁsāv ahaṁ ca tvaṁ cārya
sakhāyau mānasāyanau
abhūtām antarā vaukaḥ
sahasra-parivatsarān
Synonyms
haṁsau — two swans; aham — I; ca — and; tvam — you; ca — also; ārya — O great soul; sakhāyau — friends; mānasa-ayanau — together in the Mānasa Lake; abhūtām — became; antarā — separated; vā — indeed; okaḥ — from the original home; sahasra — thousands; pari — successively; vatsarān — years.

Translation
My dear gentle friend, both you and I are exactly like two swans. We live together in the same heart, which is just like the Mānasa Lake. Although we have been living together for many thousands of years, we are still far away from our original home.

Text 55
स त्वं विहाय मां बन्धो गतो ग्राम्यमतिर्महीम् ।
विचरन् पदमद्राक्षी: कयाचिन्निर्मितं स्त्रिया ॥ ५५ ॥
sa tvaṁ vihāya māṁ bandho
gato grāmya-matir mahīm
vicaran padam adrākṣīḥ
kayācin nirmitaṁ striyā
Synonyms
saḥ — that swan; tvam — yourself; vihāya — leaving; mām — Me; bandho — O friend; gataḥ — went; grāmya — material; matiḥ — whose consciousness; mahīm — to earth; vicaran — traveling; padam — position; adrākṣīḥ — you saw; kayācit — by someone; nirmitam — manufactured; striyā — by a woman.

Translation
My dear friend, you are now My very same friend. Since you left Me, you have become more and more materialistic, and not seeing Me, you have been traveling in different forms throughout this material world, which was created by some woman.

Text 56
पञ्चारामं नवद्वारमेकपालं त्रिकोष्ठकम् ।
षट्कुलं पञ्चविपणं पञ्चप्रकृति स्त्रीधवम् ॥ ५६ ॥
pañcārāmaṁ nava-dvāram
eka-pālaṁ tri-koṣṭhakam
ṣaṭ-kulaṁ pañca-vipaṇaṁ
pañca-prakṛti strī-dhavam
Synonyms
pañca-ārāmam — five gardens; nava-dvāram — nine gates; eka — one; pālam — protector; tri — three; koṣṭhakam — apartments; ṣaṭ — six; kulam — families; pañca — five; vipaṇam — stores; pañca — five; prakṛti — material elements; strī — woman; dhavam — master.

Translation
In that city [the material body] there are five gardens, nine gates, one protector, three apartments, six families, five stores, five material elements, and one woman who is lord of the house.

Text 57
पञ्चेन्द्रियार्था आरामा द्वार: प्राणा नव प्रभो ।
तेजोऽबन्नानि कोष्ठानि कुलमिन्द्रियसङ्ग्रह: ॥ ५७ ॥
pañcendriyārthā ārāmā
dvāraḥ prāṇā nava prabho
tejo-’b-annāni koṣṭhāni
kulam indriya-saṅgrahaḥ
Synonyms
pañca — five; indriya-arthāḥ — sense objects; ārāmāḥ — the gardens; dvāraḥ — gates; prāṇāḥ — apertures of the senses; nava — nine; prabho — O King; tejaḥ-ap — fire, water; annāni — food grains or earth; koṣṭhāni — apartments; kulam — families; indriya-saṅgrahaḥ — five senses and the mind.

Translation
My dear friend, the five gardens are the five objects of sense enjoyment, and the protector is the life air, which passes through the nine gates. The three apartments are the chief ingredients — fire, water and earth. The six families are the aggregate total of the mind and five senses.

Text 58
विपणस्तु क्रियाशक्तिर्भूतप्रकृतिरव्यया ।
शक्त्यधीश: पुमांस्त्वत्र प्रविष्टो नावबुध्यते ॥ ५८ ॥
vipaṇas tu kriyā-śaktir
bhūta-prakṛtir avyayā
śakty-adhīśaḥ pumāṁs tv atra
praviṣṭo nāvabudhyate
Synonyms
vipaṇaḥ — stores; tu — then; kriyā-śaktiḥ — the energy for activities, or the working senses; bhūta — the five gross elements; prakṛtiḥ — the material elements; avyayā — eternal; śakti — the energy; adhīśaḥ — controller; pumān — man; tu — then; atra — here; praviṣṭaḥ — entered; na — does not; avabudhyate — become subjected to knowledge.

Translation
The five stores are the five working sensory organs. They transact their business through the combined forces of the five elements, which are eternal. Behind all this activity is the soul. The soul is a person and an enjoyer in reality. However, because he is now hidden within the city of the body, he is devoid of knowledge.

Text 59
तस्मिंस्त्वं रामया स्पृष्टो रममाणोऽश्रुतस्मृति: ।
तत्सङ्गादीद‍ृशीं प्राप्तो दशां पापीयसीं प्रभो ॥ ५९ ॥
tasmiṁs tvaṁ rāmayā spṛṣṭo
ramamāṇo ’śruta-smṛtiḥ
tat-saṅgād īdṛśīṁ prāpto
daśāṁ pāpīyasīṁ prabho
Synonyms
tasmin — in that situation; tvam — you; rāmayā — with the woman; spṛṣṭaḥ — being in contact; ramamāṇaḥ — enjoying; aśruta-smṛtiḥ — without remembrance of spiritual existence; tat — with her; saṅgāt — by association; īdṛśīm — like this; prāptaḥ — you have attained; daśām — a state; pāpīyasīm — full of sinful activities; prabho — My dear friend.

Translation
My dear friend, when you enter such a body along with the woman of material desires, you become overly absorbed in sense enjoyment. Because of this, you have forgotten your spiritual life. Due to your material conceptions, you are placed in various miserable conditions.

Text 60
न त्वं विदर्भदुहिता नायं वीर: सुहृत्तव ।
न पतिस्त्वं पुरञ्जन्या रुद्धो नवमुखे यया ॥ ६० ॥
na tvaṁ vidarbha-duhitā
nāyaṁ vīraḥ suhṛt tava
na patis tvaṁ purañjanyā
ruddho nava-mukhe yayā
Synonyms
na — not; tvam — you; vidarbha-duhitā — daughter of Vidarbha; na — not; ayam — this; vīraḥ — hero; su-hṛt — well-wishing husband; tava — your; na — not; patiḥ — husband; tvam — you; purañjanyāḥ — of Purañjanī; ruddhaḥ — captured; nava-mukhe — in the body having nine gates; yayā — by the material energy.

Translation
Actually, you are not the daughter of Vidarbha, nor is this man, Malayadhvaja, your well-wishing husband. Nor were you the actual husband of Purañjanī. You were simply captivated in this body of nine gates.

Text 61
माया ह्येषा मया सृष्टा यत्पुमांसं स्त्रियं सतीम् ।
मन्यसे नोभयं यद्वै हंसौ पश्यावयोर्गतिम् ॥ ६१ ॥
māyā hy eṣā mayā sṛṣṭā
yat pumāṁsaṁ striyaṁ satīm
manyase nobhayaṁ yad vai
haṁsau paśyāvayor gatim
Synonyms
māyā — illusory energy; hi — certainly; eṣā — this; mayā — by Me; sṛṣṭā — created; yat — from which; pumāṁsam — a male; striyam — a female; satīm — chaste; manyase — you think; na — not; ubhayam — both; yat — because; vai — certainly; haṁsau — freed from material contamination; paśya — just see; āvayoḥ — our; gatim — factual position.

Translation
Sometimes you think yourself a man, sometimes a chaste woman and sometimes a neutral eunuch. This is all because of the body, which is created by the illusory energy. This illusory energy is My potency, and actually both of us — you and I — are pure spiritual identities. Now just try to understand this. I am trying to explain our factual position.

Text 62
अहं भवान्न चान्यस्त्वं त्वमेवाहं विचक्ष्व भो: ।
न नौ पश्यन्ति कवयश्छिद्रं जातु मनागपि ॥ ६२ ॥
ahaṁ bhavān na cānyas tvaṁ
tvam evāhaṁ vicakṣva bhoḥ
na nau paśyanti kavayaś
chidraṁ jātu manāg api
Synonyms
aham — I; bhavān — you; na — not; ca — also; anyaḥ — different; tvam — you; tvam — you; eva — certainly; aham — as I am; vicakṣva — just observe; bhoḥ — My dear friend; na — not; nau — of us; paśyanti — do observe; kavayaḥ — learned scholars; chidram — faulty differentiation; jātu — at any time; manāk — in a small degree; api — even.

Translation
My dear friend, I, the Supersoul, and you, the individual soul, are not different in quality, for we are both spiritual. In fact, My dear friend, you are qualitatively not different from Me in your constitutional position. Just try to consider this subject. Those who are actually advanced scholars, who are in knowledge, do not find any qualitative difference between you and Me.

Text 63
यथा पुरुष आत्मानमेकमादर्शचक्षुषो: ।
द्विधाभूतमवेक्षेत तथैवान्तरमावयो: ॥ ६३ ॥
yathā puruṣa ātmānam
ekam ādarśa-cakṣuṣoḥ
dvidhābhūtam avekṣeta
tathaivāntaram āvayoḥ
Synonyms
yathā — as; puruṣaḥ — the living entity; ātmānam — his body; ekam — one; ādarśa — in a mirror; cakṣuṣoḥ — by the eyes; dvidhā-ābhūtam — existing as two; avekṣeta — sees; tathā — similarly; eva — certainly; antaram — difference; āvayoḥ — between ourselves.

Translation
As a person sees the reflection of his body in a mirror to be one with himself and not different, whereas others actually see two bodies, so in our material condition, in which the living being is affected and yet not affected, there is a difference between God and the living entity.

Text 64
एवं स मानसो हंसो हंसेन प्रतिबोधित: ।
स्वस्थस्तद्वय‍‌भिचारेण नष्टामाप पुन: स्मृतिम् ॥ ६४ ॥
evaṁ sa mānaso haṁso
haṁsena pratibodhitaḥ
sva-sthas tad-vyabhicāreṇa
naṣṭām āpa punaḥ smṛtim
Synonyms
evam — thus; saḥ — he (the individual soul); mānasaḥ — living together within the heart; haṁsaḥ — like the swan; haṁsena — by the other swan; pratibodhitaḥ — being instructed; sva-sthaḥ — situated in self-realization; tat-vyabhicāreṇa — by being separated from the Supersoul; naṣṭām — which was lost; āpa — gained; punaḥ — again; smṛtim — real memory.

Translation
In this way both swans live together in the heart. When the one swan is instructed by the other, he is situated in his constitutional position. This means he regains his original Kṛṣṇa consciousness, which was lost because of his material attraction.

Text 65
बर्हिष्मन्नेतदध्यात्मं पारोक्ष्येण प्रदर्शितम् ।
यत्परोक्षप्रियो देवो भगवान् विश्वभावन: ॥ ६५ ॥
barhiṣmann etad adhyātmaṁ
pārokṣyeṇa pradarśitam
yat parokṣa-priyo devo
bhagavān viśva-bhāvanaḥ
Synonyms
barhiṣman — O King Prācīnabarhi; etat — this; adhyātmam — narration of self-realization; pārokṣyeṇa — indirectly; pradarśitam — instructed; yat — because; parokṣa-priyaḥ — interesting by indirect description; devaḥ — the Supreme Lord; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; viśva-bhāvanaḥ — the cause of all causes.

Translation
My dear King Prācīnabarhi, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the cause of all causes, is celebrated to be known indirectly. Thus I have described the story of Purañjana to you. Actually it is an instruction for self-realization.