Text 1
विदुर उवाच
ये त्वयाभिहिता ब्रह्मन् सुता: प्राचीनबर्हिष: ।
ते रुद्रगीतेन हरिं सिद्धिमापु: प्रतोष्य काम् ॥ १ ॥
vidura uvāca
ye tvayābhihitā brahman
sutāḥ prācīnabarhiṣaḥ
te rudra-gītena hariṁ
siddhim āpuḥ pratoṣya kām
Synonyms
viduraḥ uvāca — Vidura said; ye — those who; tvayā — by you; abhihitāḥ — were spoken about; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; sutāḥ — sons; prācīnabarhiṣaḥ — of King Prācīnabarhi; te — all of them; rudra-gītena — by the song composed by Lord Śiva; harim — the Lord; siddhim — success; āpuḥ — achieved; pratoṣya — having satisfied; kām — what.

Translation
Vidura inquired from Maitreya: O brāhmaṇa, you formerly spoke about the sons of Prācīnabarhi and informed me that they satisfied the Supreme Personality of Godhead by chanting a song composed by Lord Śiva. What did they achieve in this way?

Text 2
किं बार्हस्पत्येह परत्र वाथ
कैवल्यनाथप्रियपार्श्ववर्तिन: ।
आसाद्य देवं गिरिशं यद‍ृच्छया
प्रापु: परं नूनमथ प्रचेतस: ॥ २ ॥
kiṁ bārhaspatyeha paratra vātha
kaivalya-nātha-priya-pārśva-vartinaḥ
āsādya devaṁ giriśaṁ yadṛcchayā
prāpuḥ paraṁ nūnam atha pracetasaḥ
Synonyms
kim — what; bārhaspatya — O disciple of Bṛhaspati; iha — here; paratra — in different planets; vā — or; atha — as such; kaivalya-nātha — to the bestower of liberation; priya — dear; pārśva-vartinaḥ — being associated with; āsādya — after meeting; devam — the great demigod; giri-śam — the lord of the Kailāsa Hill; yadṛcchayā — by providence; prāpuḥ — achieved; param — the Supreme; nūnam — certainly; atha — therefore; pracetasaḥ — the sons of Barhiṣat.

Translation
My dear Bārhaspatya, what did the sons of King Barhiṣat, known as the Pracetās, obtain after meeting Lord Śiva, who is very dear to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the bestower of liberation? Certainly they were transferred to the spiritual world, but apart from that, what did they obtain within this material world, either in this life or in other lives?

Text 3
मैत्रेय उवाच
प्रचेतसोऽन्तरुदधौ पितुरादेशकारिण: ।
जपयज्ञेन तपसा पुरञ्जनमतोषयन् ॥ ३ ॥
maitreya uvāca
pracetaso ’ntar udadhau
pitur ādeśa-kāriṇaḥ
japa-yajñena tapasā
purañjanam atoṣayan
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; pracetasaḥ — the Pracetās; antaḥ — within; udadhau — the sea; pituḥ — of their father; ādeśa-kāriṇaḥ — the order carriers; japa-yajñena — by chanting mantras; tapasā — under severe austerities; puram-janam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; atoṣayan — satisfied.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya said: The sons of King Prācīnabarhi, known as the Pracetās, underwent severe austerities within the seawater to carry out the order of their father. By chanting and repeating the mantras given by Lord Śiva, they were able to satisfy Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 4
दशवर्षसहस्रान्ते पुरुषस्तु सनातन: ।
तेषामाविरभूत्कृच्छ्रं शान्तेन शमयन् रुचा ॥ ४ ॥
daśa-varṣa-sahasrānte
puruṣas tu sanātanaḥ
teṣām āvirabhūt kṛcchraṁ
śāntena śamayan rucā
Synonyms
daśa-varṣa — ten years; sahasra-ante — at the end of a thousand; puruṣaḥ — the Supreme Person; tu — then; sanātanaḥ — eternal; teṣām — of the Pracetās; āvirabhūt — appeared; kṛcchram — the severe austerity; śāntena — satisfying; śamayan — mitigating; rucā — by His beauty.

Translation
At the end of ten thousand years of severe austerities performed by the Pracetās, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, to reward their austerities, appeared before them in His very pleasing form. This appealed to the Pracetās and satisfied the labor of their austerities.

Text 5
सुपर्णस्कन्धमारूढो मेरुश‍ृङ्गमिवाम्बुद: ।
पीतवासा मणिग्रीव: कुर्वन्वितिमिरा दिश: ॥ ५ ॥
suparṇa-skandham ārūḍho
meru-śṛṅgam ivāmbudaḥ
pīta-vāsā maṇi-grīvaḥ
kurvan vitimirā diśaḥ
Synonyms
suparṇa — of Garuḍa, the carrier of Lord Viṣṇu; skandham — the shoulder; ārūḍhaḥ — sitting on; meru — of the mountain named Meru; śṛṅgam — on the summit; iva — like; ambudaḥ — a cloud; pīta-vāsāḥ — wearing yellow garments; maṇi-grīvaḥ — His neck decorated with the Kaustubha jewel; kurvan — making; vitimirāḥ — free from darkness; diśaḥ — all directions.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead, appearing on the shoulder of Garuḍa, seemed like a cloud resting on the summit of the mountain known as Meru. The transcendental body of the Personality of Godhead was covered by attractive yellow garments, and His neck was decorated with the jewel known as Kaustubha-maṇi. The bodily effulgence of the Lord dissipated all the darkness of the universe.

Text 6
काशिष्णुना कनकवर्णविभूषणेन
भ्राजत्कपोलवदनो विलसत्किरीट: ।
अष्टायुधैरनुचरैर्मुनिभि: सुरेन्द्रै-
रासेवितो गरुडकिन्नरगीतकीर्ति: ॥ ६ ॥
kāśiṣṇunā kanaka-varṇa-vibhūṣaṇena
bhrājat-kapola-vadano vilasat-kirīṭaḥ
aṣṭāyudhair anucarair munibhiḥ surendrair
āsevito garuḍa-kinnara-gīta-kīrtiḥ
Synonyms
kāśiṣṇunā — shining; kanaka — gold; varṇa — colored; vibhūṣaṇena — with ornaments; bhrājat — shining; kapola — forehead; vadanaḥ — His face; vilasat — dazzling; kirīṭaḥ — His helmet; aṣṭa — eight; āyudhaiḥ — with weapons; anucaraiḥ — by followers; munibhiḥ — by great sages; sura-indraiḥ — by demigods; āsevitaḥ — served; garuḍa — by Garuḍa; kinnara — inhabitant of the Kinnara planet; gīta — sung; kīrtiḥ — His glories.

Translation
The Lord’s face was very beautiful, and His head was decorated with a shining helmet and golden ornaments. The helmet was dazzling and was very beautifully situated on His head. The Lord had eight arms, which each held a particular weapon. The Lord was surrounded by demigods, great sages and other associates. These were all engaged in His service. Garuḍa, the carrier of the Lord, glorified the Lord with Vedic hymns by flapping his wings. Garuḍa appeared to be an inhabitant of the planet known as Kinnaraloka.

Text 7
पीनायताष्टभुजमण्डलमध्यलक्ष्म्या
स्पर्धच्छ्रिया परिवृतो वनमालयाद्य: ।
बर्हिष्मत: पुरुष आह सुतान् प्रपन्नान्
पर्जन्यनादरुतया सघृणावलोक: ॥ ७ ॥
pīnāyatāṣṭa-bhuja-maṇḍala-madhya-lakṣmyā
spardhac-chriyā parivṛto vana-mālayādyaḥ
barhiṣmataḥ puruṣa āha sutān prapannān
parjanya-nāda-rutayā saghṛṇāvalokaḥ
Synonyms
pīna — stout; āyata — long; aṣṭa — eight; bhuja — arms; maṇḍala — encirclement; madhya — in the midst of; lakṣmyā — with the goddess of fortune; spardhat — contending; śriyā — whose beauty; parivṛtaḥ — encircled; vana-mālayā — by a flower garland; ādyaḥ — the original Personality of Godhead; barhiṣmataḥ — of King Prācīnabarhi; puruṣaḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; āha — addressed; sutān — the sons; prapannān — surrendered; parjanya — like a cloud; nāda — whose sound; rutayā — by a voice; sa-ghṛṇa — with mercy; avalokaḥ — His glancing.

Translation
Around the neck of the Personality of Godhead hung a flower garland that reached to His knees. His eight stout and elongated arms were decorated with that garland, which challenged the beauty of the goddess of fortune. With a merciful glance and a voice like thunder, the Lord addressed the sons of King Prācīnabarhiṣat, who were very much surrendered unto Him.

Text 8
श्रीभगवानुवाच
वरं वृणीध्वं भद्रं वो यूयं मे नृपनन्दना: ।
सौहार्देनापृथग्धर्मास्तुष्टोऽहं सौहृदेन व: ॥ ८ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
varaṁ vṛṇīdhvaṁ bhadraṁ vo
yūyaṁ me nṛpa-nandanāḥ
sauhārdenāpṛthag-dharmās
tuṣṭo ’haṁ sauhṛdena vaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; varam — benediction; vṛṇīdhvam — ask; bhadram — good fortune; vaḥ — of you; yūyam — you; me — from Me; nṛpa-nandanāḥ — O sons of the King; sauhārdena — by friendship; apṛthak — nondifferent; dharmāḥ — occupation; tuṣṭaḥ — pleased; aham — I; sauhṛdena — by friendship; vaḥ — of you.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear sons of the King, I am very much pleased by the friendly relationships among you. All of you are engaged in one occupation — devotional service. I am so pleased with your mutual friendship that I wish you all good fortune. Now you may ask a benediction of Me.

Text 9
योऽनुस्मरति सन्ध्यायां युष्माननुदिनं नर: ।
तस्य भ्रातृष्वात्मसाम्यं तथा भूतेषु सौहृदम् ॥ ९ ॥
yo ’nusmarati sandhyāyāṁ
yuṣmān anudinaṁ naraḥ
tasya bhrātṛṣv ātma-sāmyaṁ
tathā bhūteṣu sauhṛdam
Synonyms
yaḥ — one who; anusmarati — always remembers; sandhyāyām — in the evening; yuṣmān — you; anudinam — every day; naraḥ — human being; tasya bhrātṛṣu — with his brothers; ātma-sāmyam — personal equality; tathā — as also; bhūteṣu — with all living beings; sauhṛdam — friendship.

Translation
The Lord continued: Those who remember you every evening of every day will become friendly with their brothers and with all other living entities.

Text 10
ये तु मां रुद्रगीतेन सायं प्रात: समाहिता: ।
स्तुवन्त्यहं कामवरान्दास्ये प्रज्ञां च शोभनाम् ॥ १० ॥
ye tu māṁ rudra-gītena
sāyaṁ prātaḥ samāhitāḥ
stuvanty ahaṁ kāma-varān
dāsye prajñāṁ ca śobhanām
Synonyms
ye — those persons who; tu — but; mām — unto Me; rudra-gītena — by the song sung by Lord Śiva; sāyam — in the evening; prātaḥ — in the morning; samāhitāḥ — being attentive; stuvanti — offer prayers; aham — I; kāma-varān — all benedictions to fulfill desires; dāsye — shall award; prajñām — intelligence; ca — also; śobhanām — transcendental.

Translation
Those who will offer Me the prayers composed by Lord Śiva, both in the morning and in the evening, will be given benedictions by Me. In this way they can both fulfill their desires and attain good intelligence.

Text 11
यद्यूयं पितुरादेशमग्रहीष्ट मुदान्विता: ।
अथो व उशती कीर्तिर्लोकाननु भविष्यति ॥ ११ ॥
yad yūyaṁ pitur ādeśam
agrahīṣṭa mudānvitāḥ
atho va uśatī kīrtir
lokān anu bhaviṣyati
Synonyms
yat — because; yūyam — you; pituḥ — of your father; ādeśam — the order; agrahīṣṭa — accepted; mudā-anvitāḥ — in great happiness; atho — therefore; vaḥ — your; uśatī — attractive; kīrtiḥ — glories; lokān anu — throughout the universe; bhaviṣyati — will become possible.

Translation
Because you have with pleasure accepted within your hearts the orders of your father and have executed those orders very faithfully, your attractive qualities will be celebrated all over the world.

Text 12
भविता विश्रुत: पुत्रोऽनवमो ब्रह्मणो गुणै: ।
य एतामात्मवीर्येण त्रिलोकीं पूरयिष्यति ॥ १२ ॥
bhavitā viśrutaḥ putro
’navamo brahmaṇo guṇaiḥ
ya etām ātma-vīryeṇa
tri-lokīṁ pūrayiṣyati
Synonyms
bhavitā — there will be; viśrutaḥ — very famous; putraḥ — son; anavamaḥ — not inferior; brahmaṇaḥ — to Lord Brahmā; guṇaiḥ — by qualifications; yaḥ — who; etām — all this; ātma-vīryeṇa — by his progeny; tri-lokīm — the three worlds; pūrayiṣyati — will fill.

Translation
You will have a nice son, who will be in no way inferior to Lord Brahmā. Consequently, he will be very famous all over the universe, and the sons and grandsons generated by him will fill the three worlds.

Text 13
कण्डो: प्रम्‍लोचया लब्धा कन्या कमललोचना ।
तां चापविद्धां जगृहुर्भूरुहा नृपनन्दना: ॥ १३ ॥
kaṇḍoḥ pramlocayā labdhā
kanyā kamala-locanā
tāṁ cāpaviddhāṁ jagṛhur
bhūruhā nṛpa-nandanāḥ
Synonyms
kaṇḍoḥ — of the sage Kaṇḍu; pramlocayā — by a heavenly society girl named Pramlocā; labdhā — obtained; kanyā — daughter; kamala-locanā — lotus-eyed; tām — her; ca — also; apaviddhām — given up; jagṛhuḥ — accepted; bhūruhāḥ — the trees; nṛpa-nandanāḥ — O sons of King Prācīnabarhiṣat.

Translation
O sons of King Prācīnabarhiṣat, the heavenly society girl named Pramlocā kept the lotus-eyed daughter of Kaṇḍu in the care of the forest trees. Then she went back to the heavenly planet. This daughter was born by the coupling of the Apsarā named Pramlocā with the sage Kaṇḍu.

Text 14
क्षुत्क्षामाया मुखे राजा सोम: पीयूषवर्षिणीम् ।
देशिनीं रोदमानाया निदधे स दयान्वित: ॥ १४ ॥
kṣut-kṣāmāyā mukhe rājā
somaḥ pīyūṣa-varṣiṇīm
deśinīṁ rodamānāyā
nidadhe sa dayānvitaḥ
Synonyms
kṣut — by hunger; kṣāmāyāḥ — when she was distressed; mukhe — within the mouth; rājā — the king; somaḥ — the moon; pīyūṣa — nectar; varṣiṇīm — pouring; deśinīm — forefinger; rodamānāyāḥ — while she was crying; nidadhe — placed; saḥ — he; dayā-anvitaḥ — being compassionate.

Translation
Thereafter the child, who was left to the care of the trees, began to cry in hunger. At that time the king of the forest, namely the king of the moon planet, out of compassion placed his finger, which poured forth nectar, within the child’s mouth. Thus the child was raised by the mercy of the king of the moon.

Text 15
प्रजाविसर्ग आदिष्टा: पित्रा मामनुवर्तता ।
तत्र कन्यां वरारोहां तामुद्वहत मा चिरम् ॥ १५ ॥
prajā-visarga ādiṣṭāḥ
pitrā mām anuvartatā
tatra kanyāṁ varārohāṁ
tām udvahata mā ciram
Synonyms
prajā-visarge — to create progeny; ādiṣṭāḥ — being ordered; pitrā — by your father; mām — My direction; anuvartatā — following; tatra — there; kanyām — the daughter; vara-ārohām — highly qualified and exquisitely beautiful; tām — her; udvahata — marry; mā — without; ciram — wasting time.

Translation
Since all of you are very much obedient to My orders, I ask you to immediately marry that girl, who is so well qualified with beauty and good qualities. According to the order of your father, create progeny through her.

Text 16
अपृथग्धर्मशीलानां सर्वेषां व: सुमध्यमा ।
अपृथग्धर्मशीलेयं भूयात्पत्‍न्यर्पिताशया ॥ १६ ॥
apṛthag-dharma-śīlānāṁ
sarveṣāṁ vaḥ sumadhyamā
apṛthag-dharma-śīleyaṁ
bhūyāt patny arpitāśayā
Synonyms
apṛthak — without differences; dharma — occupation; śīlānām — whose character; sarveṣām — all; vaḥ — of you; su-madhyamā — a girl whose waist is slender; apṛthak — without differences; dharma — occupation; śīlā — well-behaved; iyam — this; bhūyāt — may she become; patnī — wife; arpita-āśayā — fully surrendered.

Translation
You brothers are all of the same nature, being My devotees and obedient sons of your father. Similarly, that girl is also of the same type and is dedicated to all of you. Thus both the girl and you, the sons of Prācīnabarhiṣat, are on the same platform, being united on a common principle.

Text 17
दिव्यवर्षसहस्राणां सहस्रमहतौजस: ।
भौमान् भोक्ष्यथ भोगान् वै दिव्यांश्चानुग्रहान्मम ॥ १७ ॥
divya-varṣa-sahasrāṇāṁ
sahasram ahataujasaḥ
bhaumān bhokṣyatha bhogān vai
divyāṁś cānugrahān mama
Synonyms
divya — of the heavenly planets; varṣa — years; sahasrāṇām — of thousands; sahasram — a thousand; ahata — without being defeated; ojasaḥ — your power; bhaumān — of this world; bhokṣyatha — you will enjoy; bhogān — enjoyments; vai — certainly; divyān — of the heavenly world; ca — also; anugrahāt — by mercy; mama — My.

Translation
The Lord then blessed all the Pracetās, saying: My dear princes, by My mercy you can enjoy all the facilities of this world as well as the heavenly world. Indeed, you can enjoy all of them without hindrance and with full strength for one million celestial years.

Text 18
अथ मय्यनपायिन्या भक्त्या पक्‍वगुणाशया: ।
उपयास्यथ मद्धाम निर्विद्य निरयादत: ॥ १८ ॥
atha mayy anapāyinyā
bhaktyā pakva-guṇāśayāḥ
upayāsyatha mad-dhāma
nirvidya nirayād ataḥ
Synonyms
atha — therefore; mayi — unto Me; anapāyinyā — without any deviation; bhaktyā — by devotional service; pakva-guṇa — free from material contamination; āśayāḥ — your mind; upayāsyatha — you will attain; mat-dhāma — My abode; nirvidya — being completely detached; nirayāt — from material existence; ataḥ — thus.

Translation
Thereafter you will develop unadulterated devotional service unto Me and be freed from all material contamination. At that time, being completely unattached to material enjoyment in the so-called heavenly planets as well as in hellish planets, you will return home, back to Godhead.

Text 19
गृहेष्वाविशतां चापि पुंसां कुशलकर्मणाम् ।
मद्वार्तायातयामानां न बन्धाय गृहा मता: ॥ १९ ॥
gṛheṣv āviśatāṁ cāpi
puṁsāṁ kuśala-karmaṇām
mad-vārtā-yāta-yāmānāṁ
na bandhāya gṛhā matāḥ
Synonyms
gṛheṣu — in family life; āviśatām — who have entered; ca — also; api — even; puṁsām — of persons; kuśala-karmaṇām — engaged in auspicious activities; mat-vārtā — in topics about Me; yāta — is expended; yāmānām — whose every moment; na — not; bandhāya — for bondage; gṛhāḥ — household life; matāḥ — considered.

Translation
Those who are engaged in auspicious activities in devotional service certainly understand that the ultimate enjoyer or beneficiary of all activities is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus when one acts, he offers the results to the Supreme Personality of Godhead and passes life always engaged in the topics of the Lord. Even though such a person may be participating in family life, he is not affected by the results of his actions.

Text 20
नव्यवद्धृदये यज्ज्ञो ब्रह्मैतद्ब्रह्मवादिभि: ।
न मुह्यन्ति न शोचन्ति न हृष्यन्ति यतो गता: ॥ २० ॥
navyavad dhṛdaye yaj jño
brahmaitad brahma-vādibhiḥ
na muhyanti na śocanti
na hṛṣyanti yato gatāḥ
Synonyms
navya-vat — ever-increasingly fresh; hṛdaye — in the heart; yat — as; jñaḥ — the supreme knower, Paramātmā; brahma — Brahman; etat — this; brahma-vādibhiḥ — by the advocates of the Absolute Truth; na — never; muhyanti — are bewildered; na — never; śocanti — lament; na — never; hṛṣyanti — are jubilant; yataḥ — when; gatāḥ — have attained.

Translation
Always engaging in the activities of devotional service, devotees feel ever-increasingly fresh and new in all their activities. The all-knower, the Supersoul within the heart of the devotee, makes everything increasingly fresh. This is known as the Brahman position by the advocates of the Absolute Truth. In such a liberated stage [brahma-bhūta], one is never bewildered. Nor does one lament or become unnecessarily jubilant. This is due to the brahma-bhūta situation.

Text 21
मैत्रेय उवाच
एवं ब्रुवाणं पुरुषार्थभाजनं
जनार्दनं प्राञ्जलय: प्रचेतस: ।
तद्दर्शनध्वस्ततमोरजोमला
गिरागृणन् गद्गदया सुहृत्तमम् ॥ २१ ॥
maitreya uvāca
evaṁ bruvāṇaṁ puruṣārtha-bhājanaṁ
janārdanaṁ prāñjalayaḥ pracetasaḥ
tad-darśana-dhvasta-tamo-rajo-malā
girāgṛṇan gadgadayā suhṛttamam
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; evam — thus; bruvāṇam — speaking; puruṣa-artha — of the ultimate goal of life; bhājanam — the bestower; jana-ardanam — who takes away all the disadvantages of the devotee; prāñjalayaḥ — with folded hands; pracetasaḥ — the Pracetā brothers; tat — Him; darśana — by seeing; dhvasta — dissipated; tamaḥ — of darkness; rajaḥ — of passion; malāḥ — whose contamination; girā — with a voice; agṛṇan — offered prayers; gadgadayā — faltering; suhṛt-tamam — unto the greatest of all friends.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya said: After the Personality of Godhead spoke thus, the Pracetās began to offer Him prayers. The Lord is the bestower of all success in life and is the supreme benefactor. He is also the supreme friend who takes away all miserable conditions experienced by a devotee. In a faltering voice, due to ecstasy, the Pracetās began to offer prayers. They were purified by the presence of the Lord, who was before them face to face.

Text 22
pracetasa ūcuḥ
namo namaḥ kleśa-vināśanāya
nirūpitodāra-guṇāhvayāya
mano-vaco-vega-puro-javāya
sarvākṣa-mārgair agatādhvane namaḥ
Synonyms
pracetasaḥ ūcuḥ — the Pracetās said; namaḥ — obeisances; namaḥ — obeisances; kleśa — material distress; vināśanāya — unto one who destroys; nirūpita — settled; udāra — magnanimous; guṇa — qualities; āhvayāya — whose name; manaḥ — of the mind; vacaḥ — of speech; vega — the speed; puraḥ — before; javāya — whose speed; sarva-akṣa — of all material senses; mārgaiḥ — by the paths; agata — not perceivable; adhvane — whose course; namaḥ — we offer our respects.

Translation
The Pracetās spoke as follows: Dear Lord, You relieve all kinds of material distress. Your magnanimous transcendental qualities and holy name are all-auspicious. This conclusion is already settled. You can go faster than the speed of mind and words. You cannot be perceived by material senses. We therefore offer You respectful obeisances again and again.

Text 23
शुद्धाय शान्ताय नम: स्वनिष्ठया
मनस्यपार्थं विलसद्‌द्वयाय ।
नमो जगत्स्थानलयोदयेषु
गृहीतमायागुणविग्रहाय ॥ २३ ॥
śuddhāya śāntāya namaḥ sva-niṣṭhayā
manasy apārthaṁ vilasad-dvayāya
namo jagat-sthāna-layodayeṣu
gṛhīta-māyā-guṇa-vigrahāya
Synonyms
śuddhāya — unto the unadulterated; śāntāya — unto the most peaceful; namaḥ — we offer our obeisances; sva-niṣṭhayā — by being situated in one’s position; manasi — in the mind; apārtham — without any meaning; vilasat — appearing; dvayāya — in whom the dual world; namaḥ — obeisances; jagat — of the cosmic manifestation; sthāna — maintenance; laya — annihilation; udayeṣu — and for creation; gṛhīta — accepted; māyā — material; guṇa — of the modes of nature; vigrahāya — the forms.

Translation
Dear Lord, we beg to offer our obeisances unto You. When the mind is fixed upon You, the world of duality, although a place for material enjoyment, appears meaningless. Your transcendental form is full of transcendental bliss. We therefore offer our respects unto You. Your appearances as Lord Brahmā, Lord Viṣṇu and Lord Śiva are meant for the purpose of creating, maintaining and annihilating this cosmic manifestation.

Text 24
नमो विशुद्धसत्त्वाय हरये हरिमेधसे ।
वासुदेवाय कृष्णाय प्रभवे सर्वसात्वताम् ॥ २४ ॥
namo viśuddha-sattvāya
haraye hari-medhase
vāsudevāya kṛṣṇāya
prabhave sarva-sātvatām
Synonyms
namaḥ — obeisances; viśuddha-sattvāya — unto You, whose existence is free from all material influence; haraye — who takes away all miserable conditions of devotees; hari-medhase — whose brain works only for the deliverance of the conditioned soul; vāsudevāya — the all-pervading Supreme Personality of Godhead; kṛṣṇāya — unto Kṛṣṇa; prabhave — who increases the influence; sarva-sātvatām — of all kinds of devotees.

Translation
Dear Lord, we offer our respectful obeisances unto You because Your existence is completely independent of all material influences. Your Lordship always takes away the devotee’s miserable conditions, for Your brain plans how to do so. You live everywhere as Paramātmā; therefore You are known as Vāsudeva. You also accept Vasudeva as Your father, and You are celebrated by the name Kṛṣṇa. You are so kind that You always increase the influence of all kinds of devotees.

Text 25
नम: कमलनाभाय नम: कमलमालिने ।
नम: कमलपादाय नमस्ते कमलेक्षण ॥ २५ ॥
namaḥ kamala-nābhāya
namaḥ kamala-māline
namaḥ kamala-pādāya
namas te kamalekṣaṇa
Synonyms
namaḥ — we offer our respectful obeisances; kamala-nābhāya — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, from whose abdomen the original lotus flower originated; namaḥ — obeisances; kamala-māline — who is always decorated with a garland of lotus flowers; namaḥ — obeisances; kamala-pādāya — whose feet are as beautiful and fragrant as the lotus flower; namaḥ te — obeisances unto You; kamala-īkṣaṇa — whose eyes are exactly like the petals of the lotus flower.

Translation
Dear Lord, we offer our respectful obeisances unto You because from Your abdomen sprouts the lotus flower, the origin of all living entities. You are always decorated with a lotus garland, and Your feet resemble the lotus flower with all its fragrance. Your eyes are also like the petals of a lotus flower. Therefore we always offer our respectful obeisances unto You.

Text 26
नम: कमलकिञ्जल्कपिशङ्गामलवाससे ।
सर्वभूतनिवासाय नमोऽयुङ्‌क्ष्महि साक्षिणे ॥ २६ ॥
namaḥ kamala-kiñjalka-
piśaṅgāmala-vāsase
sarva-bhūta-nivāsāya
namo ’yuṅkṣmahi sākṣiṇe
Synonyms
namaḥ — obeisances; kamala-kiñjalka — like the saffron in a lotus flower; piśaṅga — yellowish; amala — spotless; vāsase — unto Him whose garment; sarva-bhūta — of all living entities; nivāsāya — the shelter; namaḥ — obeisances; ayuṅkṣmahi — let us offer; sākṣiṇe — unto the supreme witness.

Translation
Dear Lord, the garment You have put on is yellowish in color, like the saffron of a lotus flower, but it is not made of anything material. Since You live in everyone’s heart, You are the direct witness of all the activities of all living entities. We offer our respectful obeisances unto You again and again.

Text 27
रूपं भगवता त्वेतदशेषक्लेशसङ्‌क्षयम् ।
आविष्कृतं न: क्लिष्टानां किमन्यदनुकम्पितम् ॥ २७ ॥
rūpaṁ bhagavatā tv etad
aśeṣa-kleśa-saṅkṣayam
āviṣkṛtaṁ naḥ kliṣṭānāṁ
kim anyad anukampitam
Synonyms
rūpam — form; bhagavatā — by Your Lordship; tu — but; etat — this; aśeṣa — unlimited; kleśa — miseries; saṅkṣayam — which dissipates; āviṣkṛtam — revealed; naḥ — of us; kliṣṭānām — who are suffering from material conditions; kim anyat — what to speak of; anukampitam — those to whom You are always favorably disposed.

Translation
Dear Lord, we conditioned souls are always covered by ignorance in the bodily conception of life. We therefore always prefer the miserable conditions of material existence. To deliver us from these miserable conditions, You have advented Yourself in this transcendental form. This is evidence of Your unlimited causeless mercy upon those of us who are suffering in this way. Then what to speak of the devotees to whom You are always so favorably disposed?

Text 28
एतावत्त्वं हि विभुभिर्भाव्यं दीनेषु वत्सलै: ।
यदनुस्मर्यते काले स्वबुद्ध्याभद्ररन्धन ॥ २८ ॥
etāvat tvaṁ hi vibhubhir
bhāvyaṁ dīneṣu vatsalaiḥ
yad anusmaryate kāle
sva-buddhyābhadra-randhana
Synonyms
etāvat — thus; tvam — Your Lordship; hi — certainly; vibhubhiḥ — by expansions; bhāvyam — to be conceived; dīneṣu — unto the humble devotees; vatsalaiḥ — compassionate; yat — which; anusmaryate — is always remembered; kāle — in due course of time; sva-buddhyā — by one’s devotional service; abhadra-randhana — O killer of all inauspiciousness.

Translation
Dear Lord, You are the killer of all inauspicious things. You are compassionate upon Your poor devotees through the expansion of Your arcā-vigraha. You should certainly think of us as Your eternal servants.

Text 29
येनोपशान्तिर्भूतानां क्षुल्लकानामपीहताम् । अन्तर्हितोऽन्तर्हृदये कस्मान्नो वेद नाशिष: ॥ २९ ॥
yenopaśāntir bhūtānāṁ
kṣullakānām apīhatām
antarhito ’ntar-hṛdaye
kasmān no veda nāśiṣaḥ
Synonyms
yena — by which process; upaśāntiḥ — satisfaction of all desires; bhūtānām — of the living entities; kṣullakānām — very much fallen; api — although; īhatām — desiring many things; antarhitaḥ — hidden; antaḥ-hṛdaye — in the core of the heart; kasmāt — why; naḥ — our; veda — He knows; na — not; āśiṣaḥ — desires.

Translation
When the Lord, out of His natural compassion, thinks of His devotee, by that process only are all desires of the neophyte devotee fulfilled. The Lord is situated in every living entity’s heart, although the living entity may be very insignificant. The Lord knows everything about the living entity, including all his desires. Although we are very insignificant, why should the Lord not know our desires?

Text 30
असावेव वरोऽस्माकमीप्सितो जगत: पते ।
प्रसन्नो भगवान् येषामपवर्गगुरुर्गति: ॥ ३० ॥
asāv eva varo ’smākam
īpsito jagataḥ pate
prasanno bhagavān yeṣām
apavarga-gurur gatiḥ
Synonyms
asau — that; eva — certainly; varaḥ — benediction; asmākam — our; īpsitaḥ — desired; jagataḥ — of the universe; pate — O Lord; prasannaḥ — satisfied; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yeṣām — with whom; apavarga — of transcendental loving service; guruḥ — the teacher; gatiḥ — the ultimate goal of life.

Translation
O Lord of the universe, You are the actual teacher of the science of devotional service. We are satisfied that Your Lordship is the ultimate goal of our life, and we pray that You will be satisfied with us. That is our benediction. We do not desire anything other than Your full satisfaction.

Text 31
वरं वृणीमहेऽथापि नाथ त्वत्परत: परात् ।
न ह्यन्तस्त्वद्विभूतीनां सोऽनन्त इति गीयसे ॥ ३१ ॥
varaṁ vṛṇīmahe ’thāpi
nātha tvat parataḥ parāt
na hy antas tvad-vibhūtīnāṁ
so ’nanta iti gīyase
Synonyms
varam — benediction; vṛṇīmahe — we shall pray for; atha api — therefore; nātha — O Lord; tvat — from You; parataḥ parāt — beyond the transcendence; na — not; hi — certainly; antaḥ — end; tvat — Your; vibhūtīnām — of opulences; saḥ — You; anantaḥ — unlimited; iti — thus; gīyase — are celebrated.

Translation
Dear Lord, we shall therefore pray for Your benediction because You are the Supreme, beyond all transcendence, and because there is no end to Your opulences. Consequently, You are celebrated by the name Ananta.

Text 32
पारिजातेऽञ्जसा लब्धे सारङ्गोऽन्यन्न सेवते ।
त्वदङ्‌घ्रिमूलमासाद्य साक्षात्किं किं वृणीमहि ॥ ३२ ॥
pārijāte ’ñjasā labdhe
sāraṅgo ’nyan na sevate
tvad-aṅghri-mūlam āsādya
sākṣāt kiṁ kiṁ vṛṇīmahi
Synonyms
pārijāte — the celestial tree known as pārijāta; añjasā — completely; labdhe — having achieved; sāraṅgaḥ — a bee; anyat — other; na sevate — does not resort to; tvat-aṅghri — Your lotus feet; mūlam — the root of everything; āsādya — having approached; sākṣāt — directly; kim — what; kim — what; vṛṇīmahi — may we ask.

Translation
Dear Lord, when the bee approaches the celestial tree called the pārijāta, it certainly does not leave the tree, because there is no need for such action. Similarly, when we have approached Your lotus feet and taken shelter of them, what further benediction may we ask of You?

Text 33
यावत्ते मायया स्पृष्टा भ्रमाम इह कर्मभि: ।
तावद्भवत्प्रसङ्गानां सङ्ग: स्यान्नो भवे भवे ॥ ३३ ॥
yāvat te māyayā spṛṣṭā
bhramāma iha karmabhiḥ
tāvad bhavat-prasaṅgānāṁ
saṅgaḥ syān no bhave bhave
Synonyms
yāvat — as long as; te — Your; māyayā — by the illusory energy; spṛṣṭāḥ — contaminated; bhramāmaḥ — we wander; iha — in this material world; karmabhiḥ — by the reaction of fruitive activities; tāvat — so long; bhavat-prasaṅgānām — of Your loving devotees; saṅgaḥ — association; syāt — let there be; naḥ — our; bhave bhave — in every species of life.

Translation
Dear Lord, as long as we have to remain within this material world due to our material contamination and wander from one type of body to another and from one planet to another, we pray that we may associate with those who are engaged in discussing Your pastimes. We pray for this benediction life after life, in different bodily forms and on different planets.

Text 34
तुलयाम लवेनापि न स्वर्गं नापुनर्भवम् ।
भगवत्सङ्गिसङ्गस्य मर्त्यानां किमुताशिष: ॥ ३४ ॥
tulayāma lavenāpi
na svargaṁ nāpunar-bhavam
bhagavat-saṅgi-saṅgasya
martyānāṁ kim utāśiṣaḥ
Synonyms
tulayāma — we compare; lavena — with a moment; api — even; na — not; svargam — attainment of the heavenly planets; na — not; apunaḥ-bhavam — merging into the Brahman effulgence; bhagavat — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; saṅgi — with associates; saṅgasya — of association; martyānām — of persons who are destined to die; kim uta — how much less; āśiṣaḥ — benedictions.

Translation
Even a moment’s association with a pure devotee cannot be compared to being transferred to heavenly planets or even merging into the Brahman effulgence in complete liberation. For living entities who are destined to give up the body and die, association with pure devotees is the highest benediction.

Text 35
यत्रेड्यन्ते कथा मृष्टास्तृष्णाया: प्रशमो यत: ।
निर्वैरं यत्र भूतेषु नोद्वेगो यत्र कश्चन ॥ ३५ ॥
yatreḍyante kathā mṛṣṭās
tṛṣṇāyāḥ praśamo yataḥ
nirvairaṁ yatra bhūteṣu
nodvego yatra kaścana
Synonyms
yatra — where; īḍyante — are worshiped or discussed; kathāḥ — words; mṛṣṭāḥ — pure; tṛṣṇāyāḥ — of material hankerings; praśamaḥ — satisfaction; yataḥ — by which; nirvairam — nonenviousness; yatra — where; bhūteṣu — among living entities; na — not; udvegaḥ — fear; yatra — where; kaścana — any.

Translation
Whenever pure topics of the transcendental world are discussed, the members of the audience forget all kinds of material hankerings, at least for the time being. Not only that, but they are no longer envious of one another, nor do they suffer from anxiety or fear.

Text 36
यत्र नारायण: साक्षाद्भगवान्न्यासिनां गति: ।
संस्तूयते सत्कथासु मुक्तसङ्गै: पुन: पुन: ॥ ३६ ॥
yatra nārāyaṇaḥ sākṣād
bhagavān nyāsināṁ gatiḥ
saṁstūyate sat-kathāsu
mukta-saṅgaiḥ punaḥ punaḥ
Synonyms
yatra — where; nārāyaṇaḥ — Lord Nārāyaṇa; sākṣāt — directly; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nyāsinām — of persons in the renounced order of life; gatiḥ — the ultimate goal; saṁstūyate — is worshiped; sat-kathāsu — by discussing the transcendental vibration; mukta-saṅgaiḥ — by those who are liberated from material contamination; punaḥ punaḥ — again and again.

Translation
The Supreme Lord, Nārāyaṇa, is present among devotees who are engaged in hearing and chanting the holy name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Lord Nārāyaṇa is the ultimate goal of sannyāsīs, those in the renounced order of life, and Nārāyaṇa is worshiped through this saṅkīrtana movement by those who are liberated from material contamination. Indeed, they recite the holy name again and again.

Text 37
तेषां विचरतां पद्‌भ्यां तीर्थानां पावनेच्छया ।
भीतस्य किं न रोचेत तावकानां समागम: ॥ ३७ ॥
teṣāṁ vicaratāṁ padbhyāṁ
tīrthānāṁ pāvanecchayā
bhītasya kiṁ na roceta
tāvakānāṁ samāgamaḥ
Synonyms
teṣām — of them; vicaratām — who travel; padbhyām — by their feet; tīrthānām — the holy places; pāvana-icchayā — with a desire to purify; bhītasya — to the materialistic person who is always fearful; kim — why; na — not; roceta — becomes pleasing; tāvakānām — of Your devotees; samāgamaḥ — meeting.

Translation
Dear Lord, Your personal associates, devotees, wander all over the world to purify even the holy places of pilgrimage. Is not such activity pleasing to those who are actually afraid of material existence?

Text 38
वयं तु साक्षाद्भगवन् भवस्य
प्रियस्य सख्यु: क्षणसङ्गमेन ।
सुदुश्चिकित्स्यस्य भवस्य मृत्यो-
र्भिषक्तमं त्वाद्य गतिं गता: स्म ॥ ३८ ॥
vayaṁ tu sākṣād bhagavan bhavasya
priyasya sakhyuḥ kṣaṇa-saṅgamena
suduścikitsyasya bhavasya mṛtyor
bhiṣaktamaṁ tvādya gatiṁ gatāḥ sma
Synonyms
vayam — we; tu — then; sākṣāt — directly; bhagavan — O Lord; bhavasya — of Lord Śiva; priyasya — very dear; sakhyuḥ — Your friend; kṣaṇa — for a moment; saṅgamena — by association; suduścikitsyasya — very difficult to cure; bhavasya — of material existence; mṛtyoḥ — of death; bhiṣak-tamam — the most expert physician; tvā — You; adya — today; gatim — destination; gatāḥ — have achieved; sma — certainly.

Translation
Dear Lord, by virtue of a moment’s association with Lord Śiva, who is very dear to You and who is Your most intimate friend, we were fortunate to attain You. You are the most expert physician, capable of treating the incurable disease of material existence. On account of our great fortune, we have been able to take shelter at Your lotus feet.

Texts 39-40
यन्न: स्वधीतं गुरव: प्रसादिता
विप्राश्च वृद्धाश्च सदानुवृत्त्या ।
आर्या नता: सुहृदो भ्रातरश्च
सर्वाणि भूतान्यनसूययैव ॥ ३९ ॥
यन्न: सुतप्तं तप एतदीश
निरन्धसां कालमदभ्रमप्सु ।
सर्वं तदेतत्पुरुषस्य भूम्नो
वृणीमहे ते परितोषणाय ॥ ४० ॥
yan naḥ svadhītaṁ guravaḥ prasāditā
viprāś ca vṛddhāś ca sad-ānuvṛttyā
āryā natāḥ suhṛdo bhrātaraś ca
sarvāṇi bhūtāny anasūyayaiva
yan naḥ sutaptaṁ tapa etad īśa
nirandhasāṁ kālam adabhram apsu
sarvaṁ tad etat puruṣasya bhūmno
vṛṇīmahe te paritoṣaṇāya
Synonyms
yat — what; naḥ — by us; svadhītam — studied; guravaḥ — superior persons, spiritual masters; prasāditāḥ — satisfied; viprāḥ — the brāhmaṇas; ca — and; vṛddhāḥ — those who are elderly; ca — and; sat-ānuvṛttyā — by our gentle behavior; āryāḥ — those who are advanced in spiritual knowledge; natāḥ — were offered obeisances; su-hṛdaḥ — friends; bhrātaraḥ — brothers; ca — and; sarvāṇi — all; bhūtāni — living entities; anasūyayā — without envy; eva — certainly; yat — what; naḥ — of us; su-taptam — severe; tapaḥ — penance; etat — this; īśa — O Lord; nirandhasām — without taking any food; kālam — time; adabhram — for a long duration; apsu — within the water; sarvam — all; tat — that; etat — this; puruṣasya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhūmnaḥ — the most exalted; vṛṇīmahe — we want this benediction; te — of You; paritoṣaṇāya — for the satisfaction.

Translation
Dear Lord, we have studied the Vedas, accepted a spiritual master and offered respect to brāhmaṇas, advanced devotees and aged personalities who are spiritually very advanced. We have offered our respects to them, and we have not been envious of any brother, friends or anyone else. We have also undergone severe austerities within the water and have not taken food for a long time. All these spiritual assets of ours are simply offered for Your satisfaction. We pray for this benediction only, and nothing more.

Text 41
मनु: स्वयम्भूर्भगवान् भवश्च
येऽन्ये तपोज्ञानविशुद्धसत्त्वा: ।
अद‍ृष्टपारा अपि यन्महिम्न:
स्तुवन्त्यथो त्वात्मसमं गृणीम: ॥ ४१ ॥
manuḥ svayambhūr bhagavān bhavaś ca
ye ’nye tapo-jñāna-viśuddha-sattvāḥ
adṛṣṭa-pārā api yan-mahimnaḥ
stuvanty atho tvātma-samaṁ gṛṇīmaḥ
Synonyms
manuḥ — Svāyambhuva Manu; svayambhūḥ — Lord Brahmā; bhagavān — the most powerful; bhavaḥ — Lord Śiva; ca — also; ye — who; anye — others; tapaḥ — by austerity; jñāna — by knowledge; viśuddha — pure; sattvāḥ — whose existence; adṛṣṭa-pārāḥ — who cannot see the end; api — although; yat — Your; mahimnaḥ — of glories; stuvanti — they offer prayers; atho — therefore; tvā — unto You; ātma-samam — according to capacity; gṛṇīmaḥ — we offered prayers.

Translation
Dear Lord, even great yogīs and mystics who are very much advanced by virtue of austerities and knowledge and who have completely situated themselves in pure existence, as well as great personalities like Manu, Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, cannot fully understand Your glories and potencies. Nonetheless they have offered their prayers according to their own capacities. In the same way, we, although much lower than these personalities, also offer our prayers according to our own capability.

Text 42
नम: समाय शुद्धाय पुरुषाय पराय च ।
वासुदेवाय सत्त्वाय तुभ्यं भगवते नम: ॥ ४२ ॥
namaḥ samāya śuddhāya
puruṣāya parāya ca
vāsudevāya sattvāya
tubhyaṁ bhagavate namaḥ
Synonyms
namaḥ — we offer our respectful obeisances; samāya — who is equal to everyone; śuddhāya — who is never contaminated by sinful activities; puruṣāya — unto the Supreme Person; parāya — transcendental; ca — also; vāsudevāya — living everywhere; sattvāya — who is in the transcendental position; tubhyam — unto You; bhagavate — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaḥ — obeisances.

Translation
Dear Lord, You have no enemies or friends. Therefore You are equal to everyone. You cannot be contaminated by sinful activities, and Your transcendental form is always beyond the material creation. You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead because You remain everywhere within all existence. You are consequently known as Vāsudeva. We offer You our respectful obeisances.

Text 43
मैत्रेय उवाच
इति प्रचेतोभिरभिष्टुतो हरि:
प्रीतस्तथेत्याह शरण्यवत्सल: ।
अनिच्छतां यानमतृप्तचक्षुषां
ययौ स्वधामानपवर्गवीर्य: ॥ ४३ ॥
maitreya uvāca
iti pracetobhir abhiṣṭuto hariḥ
prītas tathety āha śaraṇya-vatsalaḥ
anicchatāṁ yānam atṛpta-cakṣuṣāṁ
yayau sva-dhāmānapavarga-vīryaḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; iti — thus; pracetobhiḥ — by the Pracetās; abhiṣṭutaḥ — being praised; hariḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prītaḥ — being pleased; tathā — so; iti — thus; āha — said; śaraṇya — to the surrendered souls; vatsalaḥ — affectionate; anicchatām — not desiring; yānam — His departure; atṛpta — not satisfied; cakṣuṣām — their eyes; yayau — He left; sva-dhāma — to His own abode; anapavarga-vīryaḥ — whose prowess is never defeated.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the protector of surrendered souls, being thus addressed by the Pracetās and worshiped by them, replied, “May whatever you have prayed for be fulfilled.” After saying this, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose prowess is never defeated, left. The Pracetās were unwilling to be separated from Him because they had not seen Him to their full satisfaction.

Text 44
अथ निर्याय सलिलात्प्रचेतस उदन्वत: ।
वीक्ष्याकुप्यन्द्रुमैश्छन्नां गां गां रोद्धुमिवोच्छ्रितै: ॥ ४४ ॥
atha niryāya salilāt
pracetasa udanvataḥ
vīkṣyākupyan drumaiś channāṁ
gāṁ gāṁ roddhum ivocchritaiḥ
Synonyms
atha — thereafter; niryāya — after coming out; salilāt — from the water; pracetasaḥ — all the Pracetās; udanvataḥ — of the sea; vīkṣya — having observed; akupyan — became very angry; drumaiḥ — by trees; channām — covered; gām — the world; gām — the heavenly planets; roddhum — to obstruct; iva — as if; ucchritaiḥ — very tall.

Translation
Thereafter all the Pracetās emerged from the waters of the sea. They then saw that all the trees on land had grown very tall, as if to obstruct the path to the heavenly planets. These trees had covered the entire surface of the world. At this time the Pracetās became very angry.

Text 45
ततोऽग्निमारुतौ राजन्नमुञ्चन्मुखतो रुषा ।
महीं निर्वीरुधं कर्तुं संवर्तक इवात्यये ॥ ४५ ॥
tato ’gni-mārutau rājann
amuñcan mukhato ruṣā
mahīṁ nirvīrudhaṁ kartuṁ
saṁvartaka ivātyaye
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; agni — fire; mārutau — and air; rājan — O King; amuñcan — they emitted; mukhataḥ — from their mouths; ruṣā — out of anger; mahīm — the earth; nirvīrudham — treeless; kartum — to make; saṁvartakaḥ — the fire of devastation; iva — like; atyaye — at the time of devastation.

Translation
My dear King, at the time of devastation, Lord Śiva emits fire and air from his mouth out of anger. To make the surface of the earth completely treeless, the Pracetās also emitted fire and air from their mouths.

Text 46
भस्मसात्क्रियमाणांस्तान् द्रुमान्वीक्ष्य पितामह: ।
आगत: शमयामास पुत्रान् बर्हिष्मतो नयै: ॥ ४६ ॥
bhasmasāt kriyamāṇāṁs tān
drumān vīkṣya pitāmahaḥ
āgataḥ śamayām āsa
putrān barhiṣmato nayaiḥ
Synonyms
bhasmasāt — into ashes; kriyamāṇān — being made; tān — all of them; drumān — the trees; vīkṣya — seeing; pitāmahaḥ — Lord Brahmā; āgataḥ — came there; śamayām āsa — pacified; putrān — the sons; barhiṣmataḥ — of King Barhiṣmān; nayaiḥ — by logic.

Translation
After seeing that all the trees on the surface of the earth were being turned to ashes, Lord Brahmā immediately came to the sons of King Barhiṣmān and pacified them with words of logic.

Text 47
तत्रावशिष्टा ये वृक्षा भीता दुहितरं तदा ।
उज्जह्रुस्ते प्रचेतोभ्य उपदिष्टा: स्वयम्भुवा ॥ ४७ ॥
tatrāvaśiṣṭā ye vṛkṣā
bhītā duhitaraṁ tadā
ujjahrus te pracetobhya
upadiṣṭāḥ svayambhuvā
Synonyms
tatra — there; avaśiṣṭāḥ — remaining; ye — which; vṛkṣāḥ — trees; bhītāḥ — being afraid; duhitaram — their daughter; tadā — at that time; ujjahruḥ — delivered; te — they; pracetobhyaḥ — unto the Pracetās; upadiṣṭāḥ — being advised; svayambhuvā — by Lord Brahmā.

Translation
The remaining trees, being very much afraid of the Pracetās, immediately delivered their daughter at the advice of Lord Brahmā.

Text 48
ते च ब्रह्मण आदेशान्मारिषामुपयेमिरे ।
यस्यां महदवज्ञानादजन्यजनयोनिज: ॥ ४८ ॥
te ca brahmaṇa ādeśān
māriṣām upayemire
yasyāṁ mahad-avajñānād
ajany ajana-yonijaḥ
Synonyms
te — all the Pracetās; ca — also; brahmaṇaḥ — of Lord Brahmā; ādeśāt — by the order; māriṣām — Māriṣā; upayemire — married; yasyām — in whom; mahat — to a great personality; avajñānāt — on account of disrespect; ajani — took birth; ajana-yoni-jaḥ — the son of Lord Brahmā, Dakṣa.

Translation
Following the order of Lord Brahmā, all the Pracetās accepted the girl as their wife. From the womb of this girl, the son of Lord Brahmā named Dakṣa took birth. Dakṣa had to take birth from the womb of Māriṣā due to his disobeying and disrespecting Lord Mahādeva [Śiva]. Consequently he had to give up his body twice.

Text 49
चाक्षुषे त्वन्तरे प्राप्ते प्राक्सर्गे कालविद्रुते ।
य: ससर्ज प्रजा इष्टा: स दक्षो दैवचोदित: ॥ ४९ ॥
cākṣuṣe tv antare prāpte
prāk-sarge kāla-vidrute
yaḥ sasarja prajā iṣṭāḥ
sa dakṣo daiva-coditaḥ
Synonyms
cākṣuṣe — named Cākṣuṣa; tu — but; antare — the manvantara; prāpte — when it happened; prāk — previous; sarge — creation; kāla-vidrute — destroyed in due course of time; yaḥ — one who; sasarja — created; prajāḥ — living entities; iṣṭāḥ — desirable; saḥ — he; dakṣaḥ — Dakṣa; daiva — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; coditaḥ — inspired.

Translation
His previous body had been destroyed, but he, the same Dakṣa, inspired by the supreme will, created all the desired living entities in the Cākṣuṣa manvantara.

Texts 50-51
यो जायमान: सर्वेषां तेजस्तेजस्विनां रुचा ।
स्वयोपादत्त दाक्ष्याच्च कर्मणां दक्षमब्रुवन् ॥ ५० ॥
तं प्रजासर्गरक्षायामनादिरभिषिच्य च ।
युयोज युयुजेऽन्यांश्च स वै सर्वप्रजापतीन् ॥ ५१ ॥
yo jāyamānaḥ sarveṣāṁ
tejas tejasvināṁ rucā
svayopādatta dākṣyāc ca
karmaṇāṁ dakṣam abruvan
taṁ prajā-sarga-rakṣāyām
anādir abhiṣicya ca
yuyoja yuyuje ’nyāṁś ca
sa vai sarva-prajāpatīn
Synonyms
yaḥ — one who; jāyamānaḥ — just after his birth; sarveṣām — of all; tejaḥ — the brilliance; tejasvinām — brilliant; rucā — by effulgence; svayā — his; upādatta — covered; dākṣyāt — from being expert; ca — and; karmaṇām — in fruitive activities; dakṣam — Dakṣa; abruvan — was called; tam — him; prajā — living beings; sarga — generating; rakṣāyām — in the matter of maintaining; anādiḥ — the firstborn, Lord Brahmā; abhiṣicya — having appointed; ca — also; yuyoja — engaged; yuyuje — engaged; anyān — others; ca — and; saḥ — he; vai — certainly; sarva — all; prajā-patīn — progenitors of living entities.

Translation
After being born, Dakṣa, by the superexcellence of his bodily luster, covered all others’ bodily opulence. Because he was very expert in performing fruitive activity, he was called by the name Dakṣa, meaning “the very expert.” Lord Brahmā therefore engaged Dakṣa in the work of generating living entities and maintaining them. In due course of time, Dakṣa also engaged other Prajāpatis [progenitors] in the process of generation and maintenance.