Text 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
भवो भवान्या निधनं प्रजापते-
रसत्कृताया अवगम्य नारदात् ।
स्वपार्षदसैन्यं च तदध्वरर्भुभि-
र्विद्रावितं क्रोधमपारमादधे ॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvāca
bhavo bhavānyā nidhanaṁ prajāpater
asat-kṛtāyā avagamya nāradāt
sva-pārṣada-sainyaṁ ca tad-adhvararbhubhir
vidrāvitaṁ krodham apāram ādadhe
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; bhavaḥ — Lord Śiva; bhavānyāḥ — of Satī; nidhanam — the death; prajāpateḥ — because of Prajāpati Dakṣa; asat-kṛtāyāḥ — having been insulted; avagamya — hearing about; nāradāt — from Nārada; sva-pārṣada-sainyam — the soldiers of his own associates; ca — and; tat-adhvara — (produced from) his (Dakṣa’s) sacrifice; ṛbhubhiḥ — by the Ṛbhus; vidrāvitam — were driven away; krodham — anger; apāram — unbounded; ādadhe — showed.

Translation
Maitreya said: When Lord Śiva heard from Nārada that Satī, his wife, was now dead because of Prajāpati Dakṣa’s insult to her and that his soldiers had been driven away by the Ṛbhu demigods, he became greatly angry.

Text 2
क्रुद्ध: सुदष्टौष्ठपुट: स धूर्जटि-
र्जटां तडिद्वह्निसटोग्ररोचिषम् ।
उत्कृत्य रुद्र: सहसोत्थितो हसन्
गम्भीरनादो विससर्ज तां भुवि ॥ २ ॥
kruddhaḥ sudaṣṭauṣṭha-puṭaḥ sa dhūr-jaṭir
jaṭāṁ taḍid-vahni-saṭogra-rociṣam
utkṛtya rudraḥ sahasotthito hasan
gambhīra-nādo visasarja tāṁ bhuvi
Synonyms
kruddhaḥ — very angry; su-daṣṭa-oṣṭha-puṭaḥ — pressing his lips with his teeth; saḥ — he (Lord Śiva); dhūḥ-jaṭiḥ — having a cluster of hair on his head; jaṭām — one hair; taḍit — of electricity; vahni — of fire; saṭā — a flame; ugra — terrible; rociṣam — blazing; utkṛtya — snatching; rudraḥ — Lord Śiva; sahasā — at once; utthitaḥ — stood up; hasan — laughing; gambhīra — deep; nādaḥ — sound; visasarja — dashed; tām — that (hair); bhuvi — on the ground.

Translation
Thus Lord Śiva, being extremely angry, pressed his lips with his teeth and immediately snatched from his head a strand of hair which blazed like electricity or fire. He stood up at once, laughing like a madman, and dashed the hair to the ground.

Text 3
ततोऽतिकायस्तनुवा स्पृशन्दिवं
सहस्रबाहुर्घनरुक् त्रिसूर्यद‍ृक् ।
करालदंष्ट्रो ज्वलदग्निमूर्धज:
कपालमाली विविधोद्यतायुध: ॥ ३ ॥
tato ’tikāyas tanuvā spṛśan divaṁ
sahasra-bāhur ghana-ruk tri-sūrya-dṛk
karāla-daṁṣṭro jvalad-agni-mūrdhajaḥ
kapāla-mālī vividhodyatāyudhaḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — at this time; atikāyaḥ — a great personality (Vīrabhadra); tanuvā — with his body; spṛśan — touching; divam — the sky; sahasra — a thousand; bāhuḥ — arms; ghana-ruk — of black color; tri-sūrya-dṛk — as bright as three suns combined; karāla-daṁṣṭraḥ — having very fearful teeth; jvalat-agni — (like) burning fire; mūrdhajaḥ — having hair on his head; kapāla-mālī — garlanded with men’s heads; vividha — various kinds; udyata — upraised; āyudhaḥ — equipped with weapons.

Translation
A fearful black demon as high as the sky and as bright as three suns combined was thereby created, his teeth very fearful and the hairs on his head like burning fire. He had thousands of arms, equipped with various weapons, and he was garlanded with the heads of men.

Text 4
तं किं करोमीति गृणन्तमाह
बद्धाञ्जलिं भगवान् भूतनाथ: ।
दक्षं सयज्ञं जहि मद्भटानां
त्वमग्रणी रुद्र भटांशको मे ॥ ४ ॥
taṁ kiṁ karomīti gṛṇantam āha
baddhāñjaliṁ bhagavān bhūta-nāthaḥ
dakṣaṁ sa-yajñaṁ jahi mad-bhaṭānāṁ
tvam agraṇī rudra bhaṭāṁśako me
Synonyms
tam — to him (Vīrabhadra); kim — what; karomi — shall I do; iti — thus; gṛṇantam — asking; āha — ordered; baddha-añjalim — with folded hands; bhagavān — the possessor of all opulences (Lord Śiva); bhūta-nāthaḥ — the lord of the ghosts; dakṣam — Dakṣa; sa-yajñam — along with his sacrifice; jahi — kill; mat-bhaṭānām — of all my associates; tvam — you; agraṇīḥ — the chief; rudra — O Rudra; bhaṭa — O expert in battle; aṁśakaḥ — born of my body; me — my.

Translation
When that gigantic demon asked with folded hands, “What shall I do, my lord?” Lord Śiva, who is known as Bhūtanātha, directly ordered, “Because you are born from my body, you are the chief of all my associates. Therefore, kill Dakṣa and his soldiers at the sacrifice.”

Text 5
आज्ञप्त एवं कुपितेन मन्युना
स देवदेवं परिचक्रमे विभुम् ।
मेने तदात्मानमसङ्गरंहसा
महीयसां तात सह: सहिष्णुम् ॥ ५ ॥
ājñapta evaṁ kupitena manyunā
sa deva-devaṁ paricakrame vibhum
mene tadātmānam asaṅga-raṁhasā
mahīyasāṁ tāta sahaḥ sahiṣṇum
Synonyms
ājñaptaḥ — being ordered; evam — in this manner; kupitena — angry; manyunā — by Lord Śiva (who is anger personified); saḥ — he (Vīrabhadra); deva-devam — he who is worshiped by the demigods; paricakrame — circumambulated; vibhum — Lord Śiva; mene — considered; tadā — at that time; ātmānam — himself; asaṅga-raṁhasā — with the power of Lord Śiva that cannot be opposed; mahīyasām — of the most powerful; tāta — my dear Vidura; sahaḥ — strength; sahiṣṇum — capable of coping with.

Translation
Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, that black person was the personified anger of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and he was prepared to execute the orders of Lord Śiva. Thus, considering himself capable of coping with any power offered against him, he circumambulated Lord Śiva.

Text 6
अन्वीयमान: स तु रुद्रपार्षदै-
र्भृशं नदद्‌भिर्व्यनदत्सुभैरवम् ।
उद्यम्य शूलं जगदन्तकान्तकं
सम्प्राद्रवद् घोषणभूषणाङ्‌घ्रि: ॥ ६ ॥
anvīyamānaḥ sa tu rudra-pārṣadair
bhṛśaṁ nadadbhir vyanadat subhairavam
udyamya śūlaṁ jagad-antakāntakaṁ
samprādravad ghoṣaṇa-bhūṣaṇāṅghriḥ
Synonyms
anvīyamānaḥ — being followed; saḥ — he (Vīrabhadra); tu — but; rudra-pārṣadaiḥ — by the soldiers of Lord Śiva; bhṛśam — tumultuously; nadadbhiḥ — roaring; vyanadat — sounded; su-bhairavam — very fearful; udyamya — carrying; śūlam — a trident; jagat-antaka — death; antakam — killing; samprādravat — hurried towards (the sacrifice of Dakṣa); ghoṣaṇa — roaring; bhūṣaṇa-aṅghriḥ — with bangles on his legs.

Translation
Many other soldiers of Lord Śiva followed the fierce personality in a tumultuous uproar. He carried a great trident, fearful enough to kill even death, and on his legs he wore bangles which seemed to roar.

Text 7
अथर्त्विजो यजमान: सदस्या:
ककुभ्युदीच्यां प्रसमीक्ष्य रेणुम् ।
तम: किमेतत्कुत एतद्रजोऽभू-
दिति द्विजा द्विजपत्‍न्यश्च दध्यु: ॥ ७ ॥
athartvijo yajamānaḥ sadasyāḥ
kakubhy udīcyāṁ prasamīkṣya reṇum
tamaḥ kim etat kuta etad rajo ’bhūd
iti dvijā dvija-patnyaś ca dadhyuḥ
Synonyms
atha — at that time; ṛtvijaḥ — the priests; yajamānaḥ — the chief person performing the sacrifice (Dakṣa); sadasyāḥ — all the persons assembled in the sacrificial arena; kakubhi udīcyām — in the northern direction; prasamīkṣya — seeing; reṇum — the dust storm; tamaḥ — darkness; kim — what; etat — this; kutaḥ — from where; etat — this; rajaḥ — dust; abhūt — has come; iti — thus; dvijāḥ — the brāhmaṇas; dvija-patnyaḥ — the wives of the brāhmaṇas; ca — and; dadhyuḥ — began to speculate.

Translation
At that time, all the persons assembled in the sacrificial arena — the priests, the chief of the sacrificial performance, and the brāhmaṇas and their wives — wondered where the darkness was coming from. Later they could understand that it was a dust storm, and all of them were full of anxiety.

Text 8
वाता न वान्ति न हि सन्ति दस्यव:
प्राचीनबर्हिर्जीवति होग्रदण्ड: ।
गावो न काल्यन्त इदं कुतो रजो
लोकोऽधुना किं प्रलयाय कल्पते ॥ ८ ॥
vātā na vānti na hi santi dasyavaḥ
prācīna-barhir jīvati hogra-daṇḍaḥ
gāvo na kālyanta idaṁ kuto rajo
loko ’dhunā kiṁ pralayāya kalpate
Synonyms
vātāḥ — the winds; na vānti — are not blowing; na — not; hi — because; santi — are possible; dasyavaḥ — plunderers; prācīna-barhiḥ — old King Barhi; jīvati — is living; ha — still; ugra-daṇḍaḥ — who would sternly punish; gāvaḥ — the cows; na kālyante — are not being driven; idam — this; kutaḥ — from where; rajaḥ — dust; lokaḥ — the planet; adhunā — now; kim — is it; pralayāya — for dissolution; kalpate — to be considered ready.

Translation
Conjecturing on the origin of the storm, they said: There is no wind blowing, and no cows are passing, nor is it possible that this dust storm could be raised by plunderers, for there is still the strong King Barhi, who would punish them. Where is this dust storm blowing from? Is the dissolution of the planet now to occur?

Text 9
प्रसूतिमिश्रा: स्त्रिय उद्विग्नचित्ता
ऊचुर्विपाको वृजिनस्यैव तस्य ।
यत्पश्यन्तीनां दुहितृणां प्रजेश:
सुतां सतीमवदध्यावनागाम् ॥ ९ ॥
prasūti-miśrāḥ striya udvigna-cittā
ūcur vipāko vṛjinasyaiva tasya
yat paśyantīnāṁ duhitṝṇāṁ prajeśaḥ
sutāṁ satīm avadadhyāv anāgām
Synonyms
prasūti-miśrāḥ — headed by Prasūti; striyaḥ — the women; udvigna-cittāḥ — being very anxious; ūcuḥ — said; vipākaḥ — the resultant danger; vṛjinasya — of the sinful activity; eva — indeed; tasya — his (Dakṣa’s); yat — because; paśyantīnām — who were looking on; duhitṝṇām — of her sisters; prajeśaḥ — the lord of the created beings (Dakṣa); sutām — his daughter; satīm — Satī; avadadhyau — insulted; anāgām — completely innocent.

Translation
Prasūti, the wife of Dakṣa, along with the other women assembled, became very anxious and said: This danger has been created by Dakṣa because of the death of Satī, who, even though completely innocent, quit her body as her sisters looked on.

Text 10
यस्त्वन्तकाले व्युप्तजटाकलाप:
स्वशूलसूच्यर्पितदिग्गजेन्द्र: ।
वितत्य नृत्यत्युदितास्त्रदोर्ध्वजान्
उच्चाट्टहासस्तनयित्नुभिन्नदिक् ॥ १० ॥
yas tv anta-kāle vyupta-jaṭā-kalāpaḥ
sva-śūla-sūcy-arpita-dig-gajendraḥ
vitatya nṛtyaty uditāstra-dor-dhvajān
uccāṭṭa-hāsa-stanayitnu-bhinna-dik
Synonyms
yaḥ — who (Lord Śiva); tu — but; anta-kāle — at the time of dissolution; vyupta — having scattered; jaṭā-kalāpaḥ — his bunch of hair; sva-śūla — his own trident; sūci — on the points; arpita — pierced; dik-gajendraḥ — the rulers of the different directions; vitatya — scattering; nṛtyati — dances; udita — upraised; astra — weapons; doḥ — hands; dhvajān — flags; ucca — loud; aṭṭa-hāsa — laughing; stanayitnu — by the thundering sound; bhinna — divided; dik — the directions.

Translation
At the time of dissolution, Lord Śiva’s hair is scattered, and he pierces the rulers of the different directions with his trident. He laughs and dances proudly, scattering their hands like flags, as thunder scatters the clouds all over the world.

Text 11
अमर्षयित्वा तमसह्यतेजसं
मन्युप्लुतं दुर्निरीक्ष्यं भ्रुकुट्या ।
करालदंष्ट्राभिरुदस्तभागणं
स्यात्स्वस्ति किं कोपयतो विधातु: ॥ ११ ॥
amarṣayitvā tam asahya-tejasaṁ
manyu-plutaṁ durnirīkṣyaṁ bhru-kuṭyā
karāla-daṁṣṭrābhir udasta-bhāgaṇaṁ
syāt svasti kiṁ kopayato vidhātuḥ
Synonyms
amarṣayitvā — after causing to become angry; tam — him (Lord Śiva); asahya-tejasam — with an unbearable effulgence; manyu-plutam — filled with anger; durnirīkṣyam — not able to be looked at; bhru-kuṭyā — by the movement of his brows; karāla-daṁṣṭrābhiḥ — by his fearful teeth; udasta-bhāgaṇam — having scattered the luminaries; syāt — there should be; svasti — good fortune; kim — how; kopayataḥ — causing (Lord Śiva) to be angry; vidhātuḥ — of Brahmā.

Translation
The gigantic black man bared his fearful teeth. By the movements of his brows he scattered the luminaries all over the sky, and he covered them with his strong, piercing effulgence. Because of the misbehavior of Dakṣa, even Lord Brahmā, Dakṣa’s father, could not have been saved from the great exhibition of anger.

Text 12
बह्वेवमुद्विग्नद‍ृशोच्यमाने
जनेन दक्षस्य मुहुर्महात्मन: ।
उत्पेतुरुत्पाततमा: सहस्रशो
भयावहा दिवि भूमौ च पर्यक् ॥ १२ ॥
bahv evam udvigna-dṛśocyamāne
janena dakṣasya muhur mahātmanaḥ
utpetur utpātatamāḥ sahasraśo
bhayāvahā divi bhūmau ca paryak
Synonyms
bahu — much; evam — in this manner; udvigna-dṛśā — with nervous glances; ucyamāne — while this was being said; janena — by the persons (assembled at the sacrifice); dakṣasya — of Dakṣa; muhuḥ — again and again; mahā-ātmanaḥ — stronghearted; utpetuḥ — appeared; utpāta-tamāḥ — very powerful symptoms; sahasraśaḥ — by the thousands; bhaya-āvahāḥ — producing fear; divi — in the sky; bhūmau — on the earth; ca — and; paryak — from all sides.

Translation
While all the people talked amongst themselves, Dakṣa saw dangerous omens from all sides, from the earth and from the sky.

Text 13
तावत्स रुद्रानुचरैर्महामखो
नानायुधैर्वामनकैरुदायुधै: ।
पिङ्गै: पिशङ्गैर्मकरोदराननै:
पर्याद्रवद्‌भिर्विदुरान्वरुध्यत ॥ १३ ॥
tāvat sa rudrānucarair mahā-makho
nānāyudhair vāmanakair udāyudhaiḥ
piṅgaiḥ piśaṅgair makarodarānanaiḥ
paryādravadbhir vidurānvarudhyata
Synonyms
tāvat — very quickly; saḥ — that; rudra-anucaraiḥ — by the followers of Lord Śiva; mahā-makhaḥ — the arena of the great sacrifice; nānā — various kinds; āyudhaiḥ — with weapons; vāmanakaiḥ — of short stature; udāyudhaiḥ — upraised; piṅgaiḥ — blackish; piśaṅgaiḥ — yellowish; makara-udara-ānanaiḥ — with bellies and faces like sharks’; paryādravadbhiḥ — running all around; vidura — O Vidura; anvarudhyata — was surrounded.

Translation
My dear Vidura, all the followers of Lord Śiva surrounded the arena of sacrifice. They were of short stature and were equipped with various kinds of weapons; their bodies appeared to be like those of sharks, blackish and yellowish. They ran all around the sacrificial arena and thus began to create disturbances.

Text 14
केचिद्बभञ्जु: प्राग्वंशं पत्नीशालां तथापरे ।
सद आग्नीध्रशालां च तद्विहारं महानसम् ॥ १४ ॥
kecid babhañjuḥ prāg-vaṁśaṁ
patnī-śālāṁ tathāpare
sada āgnīdhra-śālāṁ ca
tad-vihāraṁ mahānasam
Synonyms
kecit — some; babhañjuḥ — pulled down; prāk-vaṁśam — the pillars of the sacrificial pandal; patnī-śālām — the female quarters; tathā — also; apare — others; sadaḥ — the sacrificial arena; āgnīdhra-śālām — the house of the priests; ca — and; tat-vihāram — the house of the chief of the sacrifice; mahā-anasam — the house of the kitchen department.

Translation
Some of the soldiers pulled down the pillars which were supporting the pandal of sacrifice, some of them entered the female quarters, some began destroying the sacrificial arena, and some entered the kitchen and the residential quarters.

Text 15
रुरुजुर्यज्ञपात्राणि तथैकेऽग्नीननाशयन् ।
कुण्डेष्वमूत्रयन् केचिद्‌बिभिदुर्वेदिमेखला: ॥ १५ ॥
rurujur yajña-pātrāṇi
tathaike ’gnīn anāśayan
kuṇḍeṣv amūtrayan kecid
bibhidur vedi-mekhalāḥ
Synonyms
rurujuḥ — broke; yajña-pātrāṇi — the pots used in the sacrifice; tathā — so; eke — some; agnīn — the sacrificial fires; anāśayan — extinguished; kuṇḍeṣu — on the sacrificial arenas; amūtrayan — passed urine; kecit — some; bibhiduḥ — tore down; vedi-mekhalāḥ — the boundary lines of the sacrificial arena.

Translation
They broke all the pots made for use in the sacrifice, and some of them began to extinguish the sacrificial fire. Some tore down the boundary line of the sacrificial arena, and some passed urine on the arena.

Text 16
अबाधन्त मुनीनन्ये एके पत्नीरतर्जयन् ।
अपरे जगृहुर्देवान् प्रत्यासन्नान् पलायितान् ॥ १६ ॥
abādhanta munīn anye
eke patnīr atarjayan
apare jagṛhur devān
pratyāsannān palāyitān
Synonyms
abādhanta — blocked the way; munīn — the sages; anye — others; eke — some; patnīḥ — the women; atarjayan — threatened; apare — others; jagṛhuḥ — arrested; devān — the demigods; pratyāsannān — near at hand; palāyitān — who were fleeing.

Translation
Some blocked the way of the fleeing sages, some threatened the women assembled there, and some arrested the demigods who were fleeing the pandal.

Text 17
भृगुं बबन्ध मणिमान् वीरभद्र: प्रजापतिम् ।
चण्डेश: पूषणं देवं भगं नन्दीश्वरोऽग्रहीत् ॥ १७ ॥
bhṛguṁ babandha maṇimān
vīrabhadraḥ prajāpatim
caṇḍeśaḥ pūṣaṇaṁ devaṁ
bhagaṁ nandīśvaro ’grahīt
Synonyms
bhṛgum — Bhṛgu Muni; babandha — arrested; maṇimān — Maṇimān; vīrabhadraḥ — Vīrabhadra; prajāpatim — Prajāpati Dakṣa; caṇḍeśaḥ — Caṇḍeśa; pūṣaṇam — Pūṣā; devam — the demigod; bhagam — Bhaga; nandīśvaraḥ — Nandīśvara; agrahīt — arrested.

Translation
Maṇimān, one of the followers of Lord Śiva, arrested Bhṛgu Muni, and Vīrabhadra, the black demon, arrested Prajāpati Dakṣa. Another follower, who was named Caṇḍeśa, arrested Pūṣā. Nandīśvara arrested the demigod Bhaga.

Text 18
सर्व एवर्त्विजो दृष्ट्वा सदस्या: सदिवौकस: ।
तैरर्द्यमाना: सुभृशं ग्रावभिर्नैकधाद्रवन् ॥ १८ ॥
sarva evartvijo dṛṣṭvā
sadasyāḥ sa-divaukasaḥ
tair ardyamānāḥ subhṛśaṁ
grāvabhir naikadhā ’dravan
Synonyms
sarve — all; eva — certainly; ṛtvijaḥ — the priests; dṛṣṭvā — after seeing; sadasyāḥ — all the members assembled in the sacrifice; sa-divaukasaḥ — along with the demigods; taiḥ — by those (stones); ardyamānāḥ — being disturbed; su-bhṛśam — very greatly; grāvabhiḥ — by stones; na ekadhā — in different directions; adravan — began to disperse.

Translation
There was a continuous shower of stones, and all the priests and other members assembled at the sacrifice were put into immense misery. For fear of their lives, they dispersed in different directions.

Text 19
जुह्वत: स्रुवहस्तस्य श्मश्रूणि भगवान् भव: ।
भृगोर्लुलुञ्चे सदसि योऽहसच्छ्‌मश्रु दर्शयन् ॥ १९ ॥
juhvataḥ sruva-hastasya
śmaśrūṇi bhagavān bhavaḥ
bhṛgor luluñce sadasi
yo ’hasac chmaśru darśayan
Synonyms
juhvataḥ — offering sacrificial oblations; sruva-hastasya — with the sacrificial ladle in his hand; śmaśrūṇi — the mustache; bhagavān — the possessor of all opulences; bhavaḥ — Vīrabhadra; bhṛgoḥ — of Bhṛgu Muni; luluñce — tore out; sadasi — in the midst of the assembly; yaḥ — who (Bhṛgu Muni); ahasat — had smiled; śmaśru — his mustache; darśayan — showing.

Translation
Vīrabhadra tore off the mustache of Bhṛgu, who was offering the sacrificial oblations with his hands in the fire.

Text 20
भगस्य नेत्रे भगवान् पातितस्य रुषा भुवि ।
उज्जहार सदस्थोऽक्ष्णा य: शपन्तमसूसुचत् ॥ २० ॥
bhagasya netre bhagavān
pātitasya ruṣā bhuvi
ujjahāra sada-stho ’kṣṇā
yaḥ śapantam asūsucat
Synonyms
bhagasya — of Bhaga; netre — both eyes; bhagavān — Vīrabhadra; pātitasya — having been thrust; ruṣā — with great anger; bhuvi — on the ground; ujjahāra — plucked out; sada-sthaḥ — while situated in the assembly of the Viśvasṛks; akṣṇā — by the movement of his eyebrows; yaḥ — who (Bhaga); śapantam — (Dakṣa) who was cursing (Lord Śiva); asūsucat — encouraged.

Translation
Vīrabhadra immediately caught Bhaga, who had been moving his eyebrows during Bhṛgu’s cursing of Lord Śiva, and out of great anger thrust him to the ground and forcibly put out his eyes.

Text 21
पूष्णो ह्यपातयद्दन्तान् कालिङ्गस्य यथा बल: ।
शप्यमाने गरिमणि योऽहसद्दर्शयन्दत: ॥ २१ ॥
pūṣṇo hy apātayad dantān
kāliṅgasya yathā balaḥ
śapyamāne garimaṇi
yo ’hasad darśayan dataḥ
Synonyms
pūṣṇaḥ — of Pūṣā; hi — since; apātayat — extracted; dantān — the teeth; kāliṅgasya — of the King of Kaliṅga; yathā — as; balaḥ — Baladeva; śapyamāne — while being cursed; garimaṇi — Lord Śiva; yaḥ — who (Pūṣā); ahasat — smiled; darśayan — showing; dataḥ — his teeth.

Translation
Just as Baladeva knocked out the teeth of Dantavakra, the King of Kaliṅga, during the gambling match at the marriage ceremony of Aniruddha, Vīrabhadra knocked out the teeth of both Dakṣa, who had shown them while cursing Lord Śiva, and Pūṣā, who by smiling sympathetically had also shown his teeth.

Text 22
आक्रम्योरसि दक्षस्य शितधारेण हेतिना ।
छिन्दन्नपि तदुद्धर्तुं नाशक्नोत् त्र्यम्बकस्तदा ॥ २२ ॥
ākramyorasi dakṣasya
śita-dhāreṇa hetinā
chindann api tad uddhartuṁ
nāśaknot tryambakas tadā
Synonyms
ākramya — having sat; urasi — on the chest; dakṣasya — of Dakṣa; śita-dhāreṇa — having a sharp blade; hetinā — with a weapon; chindan — cutting; api — even though; tat — that (head); uddhartum — to separate; na aśaknot — was not able; tri-ambakaḥ — Vīrabhadra (who had three eyes); tadā — after this.

Translation
Then Vīrabhadra, the giantlike personality, sat on the chest of Dakṣa and tried to separate his head from his body with sharp weapons, but was unsuccessful.

Text 23
शस्त्रैरस्त्रान्वितैरेवमनिर्भिन्नत्वचं हर: ।
विस्मयं परमापन्नो दध्यौ पशुपतिश्चिरम् ॥ २३ ॥
śastrair astrānvitair evam
anirbhinna-tvacaṁ haraḥ
vismayaṁ param āpanno
dadhyau paśupatiś ciram
Synonyms
śastraiḥ — with weapons; astra-anvitaiḥ — with hymns (mantras); evam — thus; anirbhinna — not being cut; tvacam — the skin; haraḥ — Vīrabhadra; vismayam — bewilderment; param — greatest; āpannaḥ — was struck with; dadhyau — thought; paśupatiḥ — Vīrabhadra; ciram — for a long time.

Translation
He tried to cut the head of Dakṣa with hymns as well as weapons, but still it was hard to cut even the surface of the skin of Dakṣa’s head. Thus Vīrabhadra was exceedingly bewildered.

Text 24
दृष्ट्वा संज्ञपनं योगं पशूनां स पतिर्मखे ।
यजमानपशो: कस्य कायात्तेनाहरच्छिर: ॥ २४ ॥
dṛṣṭvā saṁjñapanaṁ yogaṁ
paśūnāṁ sa patir makhe
yajamāna-paśoḥ kasya
kāyāt tenāharac chiraḥ
Synonyms
dṛṣṭvā — having seen; saṁjñapanam — for the killing of the animals in the sacrifice; yogam — the device; paśūnām — of the animals; saḥ — he (Vīrabhadra); patiḥ — the lord; makhe — in the sacrifice; yajamāna-paśoḥ — who was an animal in the form of the chief of the sacrifice; kasya — of Dakṣa; kāyāt — from the body; tena — by that (device); aharat — severed; śiraḥ — his head.

Translation
Then Vīrabhadra saw the wooden device in the sacrificial arena by which the animals were to have been killed. He took the opportunity of this facility to behead Dakṣa.

Text 25
साधुवादस्तदा तेषां कर्म तत्तस्य पश्यताम् ।
भूतप्रेतपिशाचानां अन्येषां तद्विपर्यय: ॥ २५ ॥
sādhu-vādas tadā teṣāṁ
karma tat tasya paśyatām
bhūta-preta-piśācānāṁ
anyeṣāṁ tad-viparyayaḥ
Synonyms
sādhu-vādaḥ — joyful exclamation; tadā — at that time; teṣām — of those (followers of Lord Śiva); karma — action; tat — that; tasya — of him (Vīrabhadra); paśyatām — seeing; bhūta-preta-piśācānām — of the bhūtas (ghosts), pretas and piśācas; anyeṣām — of the others (in the party of Dakṣa); tat-viparyayaḥ — the opposite of that (an exclamation of grief).

Translation
Upon seeing the action of Vīrabhadra, the party of Lord Śiva was pleased and cried out joyfully, and all the bhūtas, ghosts and demons that had come made a tumultuous sound. On the other hand, the brāhmaṇas in charge of the sacrifice cried out in grief at the death of Dakṣa.

Text 26
जुहावैतच्छिरस्तस्मिन्दक्षिणाग्नावमर्षित: ।
तद्देवयजनं दग्ध्वा प्रातिष्ठद् गुह्यकालयम् ॥ २६ ॥
juhāvaitac chiras tasmin
dakṣiṇāgnāv amarṣitaḥ
tad-deva-yajanaṁ dagdhvā
prātiṣṭhad guhyakālayam
Synonyms
juhāva — sacrificed as an oblation; etat — that; śiraḥ — head; tasmin — in that; dakṣiṇa-agnau — in the sacrificial fire on the southern side; amarṣitaḥ — Vīrabhadra, being greatly angry; tat — of Dakṣa; deva-yajanam — the arrangements for the sacrifice to the demigods; dagdhvā — having set fire; prātiṣṭhat — departed; guhyaka-ālayam — to the abode of the Guhyakas (Kailāsa).

Translation
Vīrabhadra then took the head and with great anger threw it into the southern side of the sacrificial fire, offering it as an oblation. In this way the followers of Lord Śiva devastated all the arrangements for sacrifice. After setting fire to the whole arena, they departed for their master’s abode, Kailāsa.