Texts 1-2
मैत्रेय उवाच
अथ देवगणा: सर्वे रुद्रानीकै: पराजिता: ।
शूलपट्टिशनिस्त्रिंशगदापरिघमुद्गरै: ॥ १ ॥
सञ्छिन्नभिन्नसर्वाङ्गा: सर्त्विक्सभ्या भयाकुला: ।
स्वयम्भुवे नमस्कृत्य कार्त्स्‍न्येनैतन्न्यवेदयन् ॥ २ ॥
maitreya uvāca
atha deva-gaṇāḥ sarve
rudrānīkaiḥ parājitāḥ
śūla-paṭṭiśa-nistriṁśa-
gadā-parigha-mudgaraiḥ
sañchinna-bhinna-sarvāṅgāḥ
sartvik-sabhyā bhayākulāḥ
svayambhuve namaskṛtya
kārtsnyenaitan nyavedayan
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; atha — after this; deva-gaṇāḥ — the demigods; sarve — all; rudra-anīkaiḥ — by the soldiers of Lord Śiva; parājitāḥ — having been defeated; śūla — trident; paṭṭiśa — a sharp-edged spear; nistriṁśa — a sword; gadā — mace; parigha — an iron bludgeon; mudgaraiḥ — a hammerlike weapon; sañchinna-bhinna-sarva-aṅgāḥ — all the limbs wounded; sa-ṛtvik-sabhyāḥ — with all the priests and members of the sacrificial assembly; bhaya-ākulāḥ — with great fear; svayambhuve — unto Lord Brahmā; namaskṛtya — after offering obeisances; kārtsnyena — in detail; etat — the events of Dakṣa’s sacrifice; nyavedayan — reported.

Translation
All the priests and other members of the sacrificial assembly and all the demigods, having been defeated by the soldiers of Lord Śiva and injured by weapons like tridents and swords, approached Lord Brahmā with great fear. After offering him obeisances, they began to speak in detail of all the events which had taken place.

Text 3
उपलभ्य पुरैवैतद्भगवानब्जसम्भव: ।
नारायणश्च विश्वात्मा न कस्याध्वरमीयतु: ॥ ३ ॥
upalabhya puraivaitad
bhagavān abja-sambhavaḥ
nārāyaṇaś ca viśvātmā
na kasyādhvaram īyatuḥ
Synonyms
upalabhya — knowing; purā — beforehand; eva — certainly; etat — all these events of Dakṣa’s sacrifice; bhagavān — the possessor of all opulences; abja-sambhavaḥ — born from a lotus flower (Lord Brahmā); nārāyaṇaḥ — Nārāyaṇa; ca — and; viśva-ātmā — the Supersoul of the entire universe; na — not; kasya — of Dakṣa; adhvaram — to the sacrifice; īyatuḥ — did go.

Translation
Both Lord Brahmā and Viṣṇu had already known that such events would occur in the sacrificial arena of Dakṣa, and knowing beforehand, they did not go to the sacrifice.

Text 4
तदाकर्ण्य विभु: प्राह तेजीयसि कृतागसि ।
क्षेमाय तत्र सा भूयान्न प्रायेण बुभूषताम् ॥ ४ ॥
tad ākarṇya vibhuḥ prāha
tejīyasi kṛtāgasi
kṣemāya tatra sā bhūyān
na prāyeṇa bubhūṣatām
Synonyms
tat — the events related by the demigods and the others; ākarṇya — after hearing; vibhuḥ — Lord Brahmā; prāha — replied; tejīyasi — a great personality; kṛta-āgasi — has been offended; kṣemāya — for your happiness; tatra — in that way; sā — that; bhūyāt na — is not conducive; prāyeṇa — generally; bubhūṣatām — desire to exist.

Translation
When Lord Brahmā heard everything from the demigods and the members who had attended the sacrifice, he replied: You cannot be happy in executing a sacrifice if you blaspheme a great personality and thereby offend his lotus feet. You cannot have happiness in that way.

Text 5
अथापि यूयं कृतकिल्बिषा भवं
ये बर्हिषो भागभाजं परादु: ।
प्रसादयध्वं परिशुद्धचेतसा
क्षिप्रप्रसादं प्रगृहीताङ्‌घ्रि:पद्मम् ॥ ५ ॥
athāpi yūyaṁ kṛta-kilbiṣā bhavaṁ
ye barhiṣo bhāga-bhājaṁ parāduḥ
prasādayadhvaṁ pariśuddha-cetasā
kṣipra-prasādaṁ pragṛhītāṅghri-padmam
Synonyms
atha api — still; yūyam — all of you; kṛta-kilbiṣāḥ — having committed offenses; bhavam — Lord Śiva; ye — all of you; barhiṣaḥ — of the sacrifice; bhāga-bhājam — entitled to a share; parāduḥ — have excluded; prasādayadhvam — all of you should satisfy; pariśuddha-cetasā — without mental reservations; kṣipra-prasādam — quick mercy; pragṛhīta-aṅghri-padmam — his lotus feet having been taken shelter of.

Translation
You have excluded Lord Śiva from taking part in the sacrificial results, and therefore you are all offenders at his lotus feet. Still, if you go without mental reservations and surrender unto him and fall down at his lotus feet, he will be very pleased.

Text 6
आशासाना जीवितमध्वरस्य
लोक: सपाल: कुपिते न यस्मिन् ।
तमाशु देवं प्रियया विहीनं
क्षमापयध्वं हृदि विद्धं दुरुक्तै: ॥ ६ ॥
āśāsānā jīvitam adhvarasya
lokaḥ sa-pālaḥ kupite na yasmin
tam āśu devaṁ priyayā vihīnaṁ
kṣamāpayadhvaṁ hṛdi viddhaṁ duruktaiḥ
Synonyms
āśāsānāḥ — wishing to ask; jīvitam — for the duration; adhvarasya — of the sacrifice; lokaḥ — all the planets; sa-pālaḥ — with their controllers; kupite — when angered; na — not; yasmin — whom; tam — that; āśu — at once; devam — Lord Śiva; priyayā — of his dear wife; vihīnam — having been deprived; kṣamāpayadhvam — beg his pardon; hṛdi — in his heart; viddham — very much afflicted; duruktaiḥ — by unkind words.

Translation
Lord Brahmā also advised them that Lord Śiva is so powerful that by his anger all the planets and their chief controllers can be destroyed immediately. Also, he said that Lord Śiva was especially sorry because he had recently lost his dear wife and was also very much afflicted by the unkind words of Dakṣa. Under the circumstances, Lord Brahmā suggested, it would behoove them to go at once and beg his pardon.

Text 7
नाहं न यज्ञो न च यूयमन्ये
ये देहभाजो मुनयश्च तत्त्वम् ।
विदु: प्रमाणं बलवीर्ययोर्वा
यस्यात्मतन्त्रस्य क उपायं विधित्सेत् ॥ ७ ॥
nāhaṁ na yajño na ca yūyam anye
ye deha-bhājo munayaś ca tattvam
viduḥ pramāṇaṁ bala-vīryayor vā
yasyātma-tantrasya ka upāyaṁ vidhitset
Synonyms
na — not; aham — I; na — nor; yajñaḥ — Indra; na — nor; ca — and; yūyam — all of you; anye — others; ye — who; deha-bhājaḥ — of those who bear material bodies; munayaḥ — the sages; ca — and; tattvam — the truth; viduḥ — know; pramāṇam — the extent; bala-vīryayoḥ — of the strength and power; vā — or; yasya — of Lord Śiva; ātma-tantrasya — of Lord Śiva, who is self-dependent; kaḥ — what; upāyam — means; vidhitset — should wish to devise.

Translation
Lord Brahmā said that no one — not even himself, Indra, all the members assembled in the sacrificial arena or all the sages — could know how powerful Lord Śiva is. Under the circumstances, who would dare to commit an offense at his lotus feet?

Text 8
स इत्थमादिश्य सुरानजस्तु तै:
समन्वित: पितृभि: सप्रजेशै: ।
ययौ स्वधिष्ण्यान्निलयं पुरद्विष:
कैलासमद्रिप्रवरं प्रियं प्रभो: ॥ ८ ॥
sa ittham ādiśya surān ajas tu taiḥ
samanvitaḥ pitṛbhiḥ sa-prajeśaiḥ
yayau sva-dhiṣṇyān nilayaṁ pura-dviṣaḥ
kailāsam adri-pravaraṁ priyaṁ prabhoḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Brahmā); ittham — thus; ādiśya — after instructing; surān — the demigods; ajaḥ — Lord Brahmā; tu — then; taiḥ — those; samanvitaḥ — followed; pitṛbhiḥ — by the Pitās; sa-prajeśaiḥ — along with the lords of the living entities; yayau — went; sva-dhiṣṇyāt — from his own place; nilayam — the abode; pura-dviṣaḥ — of Lord Śiva; kailāsam — Kailāsa; adri-pravaram — the best among mountains; priyam — dear; prabhoḥ — of the lord (Śiva).

Translation
After thus instructing all the demigods, the Pitās and the lords of the living entities, Lord Brahmā took them with him and left for the abode of Lord Śiva, known as the Kailāsa Hill.

Text 9
जन्मौषधितपोमन्त्रयोगसिद्धैर्नरेतरै: ।
जुष्टं किन्नरगन्धर्वैरप्सरोभिर्वृतं सदा ॥ ९ ॥
janmauṣadhi-tapo-mantra-
yoga-siddhair naretaraiḥ
juṣṭaṁ kinnara-gandharvair
apsarobhir vṛtaṁ sadā
Synonyms
janma — birth; auṣadhi — herbs; tapaḥ — austerity; mantra — Vedic hymns; yoga — mystic yoga practices; siddhaiḥ — with perfected beings; nara-itaraiḥ — by demigods; juṣṭam — enjoyed; kinnara-gandharvaiḥ — by Kinnaras and Gandharvas; apsarobhiḥ — by Apsarās; vṛtam — full of; sadā — always.

Translation
The abode known as Kailāsa is full of different herbs and vegetables, and it is sanctified by Vedic hymns and mystic yoga practice. Thus the residents of that abode are demigods by birth and have all mystic powers. Besides them there are other human beings, who are known as Kinnaras and Gandharvas and are accompanied by their beautiful wives, who are known as Apsarās, or angels.

Text 10
नानामणिमयै: श‍ृङ्गैर्नानाधातुविचित्रितै: ।
नानाद्रुमलतागुल्मैर्नानामृगगणावृतै: ॥ १० ॥
nānā-maṇimayaiḥ śṛṅgair
nānā-dhātu-vicitritaiḥ
nānā-druma-latā-gulmair
nānā-mṛga-gaṇāvṛtaiḥ
Synonyms
nānā — different kinds; maṇi — jewels; mayaiḥ — made of; śṛṅgaiḥ — with the peaks; nānā-dhātu-vicitritaiḥ — decorated with various minerals; nānā — various; druma — trees; latā — creepers; gulmaiḥ — plants; nānā — various; mṛga-gaṇa — by groups of deer; āvṛtaiḥ — inhabited by.

Translation
Kailāsa is full of mountains filled with all kinds of valuable jewels and minerals and surrounded by all varieties of valuable trees and plants. The top of the hill is nicely decorated by various types of deer.

Text 11
नानामलप्रस्रवणैर्नानाकन्दरसानुभि: ।
रमणं विहरन्तीनां रमणै: सिद्धयोषिताम् ॥ ११ ॥
nānāmala-prasravaṇair
nānā-kandara-sānubhiḥ
ramaṇaṁ viharantīnāṁ
ramaṇaiḥ siddha-yoṣitām
Synonyms
nānā — various; amala — transparent; prasravaṇaiḥ — with waterfalls; nānā — various; kandara — caves; sānubhiḥ — with summits; ramaṇam — giving pleasure; viharantīnām — sporting; ramaṇaiḥ — with their lovers; siddha-yoṣitām — of the damsels of the mystics.

Translation
There are many waterfalls, and in the mountains there are many beautiful caves in which the very beautiful wives of the mystics are found.

Text 12
मयूरकेकाभिरुतं मदान्धालिविमूर्च्छितम् ।
प्लावितै रक्तकण्ठानां कूजितैश्च पतत्त्रिणाम् ॥ १२ ॥
mayūra-kekābhirutaṁ
madāndhāli-vimūrcchitam
plāvitai rakta-kaṇṭhānāṁ
kūjitaiś ca patattriṇām
Synonyms
mayūra — peacocks; kekā — with the cries; abhirutam — resounding; mada — by intoxication; andha — blinded; ali — by the bees; vimūrcchitam — resounded; plāvitaiḥ — with the singing; rakta-kaṇṭhānām — of the cuckoos; kūjitaiḥ — with the whispering; ca — and; patattriṇām — of other birds.

Translation
On Kailāsa Hill there is always the rhythmical sound of the peacocks’ sweet vibrations and the bees’ humming. Cuckoos are always singing, and other birds whisper amongst themselves.

Text 13
आह्वयन्तमिवोद्धस्तैर्द्विजान् कामदुघैर्द्रुमै: ।
व्रजन्तमिव मातङ्गैर्गृणन्तमिव निर्झरै: ॥ १३ ॥
āhvayantam ivoddhastair
dvijān kāma-dughair drumaiḥ
vrajantam iva mātaṅgair
gṛṇantam iva nirjharaiḥ
Synonyms
āhvayantam — calling; iva — as if; ut-hastaiḥ — with upraised hands (branches); dvijān — the birds; kāma-dughaiḥ — yielding desires; drumaiḥ — with trees; vrajantam — moving; iva — as if; mātaṅgaiḥ — by elephants; gṛṇantam — resounding; iva — as if; nirjharaiḥ — by the waterfalls.

Translation
There are tall trees with straight branches that appear to call the sweet birds, and when herds of elephants pass through the hills, it appears that the Kailāsa Hill moves with them. When the waterfalls resound, it appears that Kailāsa Hill does also.

Texts 14-15
मन्दारै: पारिजातैश्च सरलैश्चोपशोभितम् ।
तमालै: शालतालैश्च कोविदारासनार्जुनै: ॥ १४ ॥
चूतै: कदम्बैर्नीपैश्च नागपुन्नागचम्पकै: ।
पाटलाशोकबकुलै: कुन्दै: कुरबकैरपि ॥ १५ ॥
mandāraiḥ pārijātaiś ca
saralaiś copaśobhitam
tamālaiḥ śāla-tālaiś ca
kovidārāsanārjunaiḥ
cūtaiḥ kadambair nīpaiś ca
nāga-punnāga-campakaiḥ
pāṭalāśoka-bakulaiḥ
kundaiḥ kurabakair api
Synonyms
mandāraiḥ — with mandāras; pārijātaiḥ — with pārijātas; ca — and; saralaiḥ — with saralas; ca — and; upaśobhitam — decorated; tamālaiḥ — with tamāla trees; śāla-tālaiḥ — with śālas and tālas; ca — and; kovidāra-āsana-arjunaiḥ — kovidāras, āsanas (vijaya-sāras) and arjuna trees (kāñcanārakas); cūtaiḥ — with cūtas (a species of mango); kadambaiḥ — with kadambas; nīpaiḥ — with nīpas (dhūli-kadambas); ca — and; nāga-punnāga-campakaiḥ — with nāgas, punnāgas and campakas; pāṭala-aśoka-bakulaiḥ — with pāṭalas, aśokas and bakulas; kundaiḥ — with kundas; kurabakaiḥ — with kurabakas; api — also.

Translation
The whole of Kailāsa Hill is decorated with various kinds of trees, of which the following names may be mentioned: mandāra, pārijāta, sarala, tamāla, tāla, kovidāra, āsana, arjuna, āmra-jāti [mango], kadamba, dhūli-kadamba, nāga, punnāga, campaka, pāṭala, aśoka, bakula, kunda and kurabaka. The entire hill is decorated with such trees, which produce flowers with fragrant aromas.

Text 16
स्वर्णार्णशतपत्रैश्च वररेणुकजातिभि: ।
कुब्जकैर्मल्लिकाभिश्च माधवीभिश्च मण्डितम् ॥ १६ ॥
svarṇārṇa-śata-patraiś ca
vara-reṇuka-jātibhiḥ
kubjakair mallikābhiś ca
mādhavībhiś ca maṇḍitam
Synonyms
svarṇārṇa — golden-colored; śata-patraiḥ — with lotuses; ca — and; vara-reṇuka-jātibhiḥ — with varas, reṇukas and mālatīs; kubjakaiḥ — with kubjakas; mallikābhiḥ — with mallikās; ca — and; mādhavībhiḥ — with mādhavīs; ca — and; maṇḍitam — decorated.

Translation
There are other trees also which decorate the hill, such as the golden lotus flower, the cinnamon tree, mālatī, kubja, mallikā and mādhavī.

Text 17
पनसोदुम्बराश्वत्थप्लक्षन्यग्रोधहिङ्गुभि: ।
भूर्जैरोषधिभि: पूगै राजपूगैश्च जम्बुभि: ॥ १७ ॥
panasodumbarāśvattha-
plakṣa-nyagrodha-hiṅgubhiḥ
bhūrjair oṣadhibhiḥ pūgai
rājapūgaiś ca jambubhiḥ
Synonyms
panasa-udumbara-aśvattha-plakṣa-nyagrodha-hiṅgubhiḥ — with panasas (jackfruit trees), udumbaras, aśvatthas, plakṣas, nyagrodhas and trees producing asafetida; bhūrjaiḥ — with bhūrjas; oṣadhibhiḥ — with betel-nut trees; pūgaiḥ — with pūgas; rājapūgaiḥ — with rājapūgas; ca — and; jambubhiḥ — with jambus.

Translation
Kailāsa Hill is also decorated with such trees as kata, jackfruit, julara, banyan trees, plakṣas, nyagrodhas and trees producing asafetida. Also there are trees of betel nuts and bhūrja-patra, as well as rājapūga, blackberries and similar other trees.

Text 18
खर्जूराम्रातकाम्राद्यै: प्रियालमधुकेङ्गुदै: ।
द्रुमजातिभिरन्यैश्च राजितं वेणुकीचकै: ॥ १८ ॥
kharjūrāmrātakāmrādyaiḥ
priyāla-madhukeṅgudaiḥ
druma-jātibhir anyaiś ca
rājitaṁ veṇu-kīcakaiḥ
Synonyms
kharjūra-āmrātaka-āmra-ādyaiḥ — with kharjūras, āmrātakas, āmras and others; priyāla-madhuka-iṅgudaiḥ — with priyālas, madhukas and iṅgudas; druma-jātibhiḥ — with varieties of trees; anyaiḥ — other; ca — and; rājitam — decorated; veṇu-kīcakaiḥ — with veṇus (bamboos) and kīcakas (hollow bamboos).

Translation
There are mango trees, priyāla, madhuka and iṅguda. Besides these there are other trees, like thin bamboos, kīcaka and varieties of other bamboo trees, all decorating the tract of Kailāsa Hill.

Texts 19-20
कुमुदोत्पलकह्लारशतपत्रवनर्द्धिभि: ।
नलिनीषु कलं कूजत्खगवृन्दोपशोभितम् ॥ १९ ॥
मृगै: शाखामृगै: क्रोडैर्मृगेन्द्रैर्ऋ क्षशल्यकै: ।
गवयै: शरभैर्व्याघ्रै रुरुभिर्महिषादिभि: ॥ २० ॥
kumudotpala-kahlāra-
śatapatra-vanarddhibhiḥ
nalinīṣu kalaṁ kūjat-
khaga-vṛndopaśobhitam
mṛgaiḥ śākhāmṛgaiḥ kroḍair
mṛgendrair ṛkṣa-śalyakaiḥ
gavayaiḥ śarabhair vyāghrai
rurubhir mahiṣādibhiḥ
Synonyms
kumuda — kumuda; utpala — utpala; kahlāra — kahlāra; śatapatra — lotuses; vana — forest; ṛddhibhiḥ — being covered with; nalinīṣu — in the lakes; kalam — very sweetly; kūjat — whispering; khaga — of birds; vṛnda — groups; upaśobhitam — decorated with; mṛgaiḥ — with deer; śākhā-mṛgaiḥ — with monkeys; kroḍaiḥ — with boars; mṛga-indraiḥ — with lions; ṛkṣa-śalyakaiḥ — with ṛkṣas and śalyakas; gavayaiḥ — with forest cows; śarabhaiḥ — with forest asses; vyāghraiḥ — with tigers; rurubhiḥ — with small deer; mahiṣa-ādibhiḥ — with buffalo, etc.

Translation
There are different kinds of lotus flowers, such as kumuda, utpala and śatapatra. The forest appears to be a decorated garden, and the small lakes are full of various kinds of birds who whisper very sweetly. There are many kinds of other animals also, like deer, monkeys, boars, lions, ṛkṣas, śalyakas, forest cows, forest asses, tigers, small deer, buffalo and many other animals, who are fully enjoying their lives.

Text 21
कर्णान्त्रैकपदाश्वास्यैर्निर्जुष्टं वृकनाभिभि: ।
कदलीखण्डसंरुद्धनलिनीपुलिनश्रियम् ॥ २१ ॥
karṇāntraikapadāśvāsyair
nirjuṣṭaṁ vṛka-nābhibhiḥ
kadalī-khaṇḍa-saṁruddha-
nalinī-pulina-śriyam
Synonyms
karṇāntra — by the karṇāntra; ekapada — the ekapada; aśvāsyaiḥ — by the aśvāsya; nirjuṣṭam — fully enjoyed; vṛka-nābhibhiḥ — by the vṛka and nābhi, or kastūrī deer; kadalī — of banana trees; khaṇḍa — with groups; saṁruddha — covered; nalinī — of small lakes filled with lotus flowers; pulina — with the sandy banks; śriyam — very beautiful.

Translation
There are varieties of deer, such as karṇāntra, ekapada, aśvāsya, vṛka and kastūrī, the deer which bears musk. Besides the deer there are many banana trees which decorate the small hillside lakes very nicely.

Text 22
पर्यस्तं नन्दया सत्या: स्‍नानपुण्यतरोदया ।
विलोक्य भूतेशगिरिं विबुधा विस्मयं ययु: ॥ २२ ॥
paryastaṁ nandayā satyāḥ
snāna-puṇyatarodayā
vilokya bhūteśa-giriṁ
vibudhā vismayaṁ yayuḥ
Synonyms
paryastam — surrounded; nandayā — by the Nandā; satyāḥ — of Satī; snāna — by the bathing; puṇya-tara — especially favored; udayā — with water; vilokya — after seeing; bhūta-īśa — of Bhūteśa (the lord of the ghosts, Lord Śiva); girim — the mountain; vibudhāḥ — the demigods; vismayam — wonder; yayuḥ — obtained.

Translation
There is a small lake named Alakanandā in which Satī used to take her bath, and that lake is especially auspicious. All the demigods, after seeing the specific beauty of Kailāsa Hill, were struck with wonder at the great opulence to be found there.

Text 23
दद‍ृशुस्तत्र ते रम्यामलकां नाम वै पुरीम् ।
वनं सौगन्धिकं चापि यत्र तन्नाम पङ्कजम् ॥ २३ ॥
dadṛśus tatra te ramyām
alakāṁ nāma vai purīm
vanaṁ saugandhikaṁ cāpi
yatra tan-nāma paṅkajam
Synonyms
dadṛśuḥ — saw; tatra — there (in Kailāsa); te — they (the demigods); ramyām — very attractive; alakām — Alakā; nāma — known as; vai — indeed; purīm — abode; vanam — forest; saugandhikam — Saugandhika; ca — and; api — even; yatra — in which place; tat-nāma — known by that name; paṅkajam — species of lotus flowers.

Translation
Thus the demigods saw the wonderfully beautiful region known as Alakā in the forest known as Saugandhika, which means “full of fragrance.” The forest is known as Saugandhika because of its abundance of lotus flowers.

Text 24
नन्दा चालकनन्दा च सरितौ बाह्यत: पुर: ।
तीर्थपादपदाम्भोजरजसातीव पावने ॥ २४ ॥
nandā cālakanandā ca
saritau bāhyataḥ puraḥ
tīrthapāda-padāmbhoja-
rajasātīva pāvane
Synonyms
nandā — the Nandā; ca — and; alakanandā — the Alakanandā; ca — and; saritau — two rivers; bāhyataḥ — outside; puraḥ — from the city; tīrtha-pāda — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pada-ambhoja — of the lotus feet; rajasā — by the dust; atīva — exceedingly; pāvane — sanctified.

Translation
They also saw the two rivers named Nandā and Alakanandā. These two rivers are sanctified by the dust of the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Govinda.

Text 25
ययो: सुरस्त्रिय: क्षत्तरवरुह्य स्वधिष्ण्यत: ।
क्रीडन्ति पुंस: सिञ्चन्त्यो विगाह्य रतिकर्शिता: ॥ २५ ॥
yayoḥ sura-striyaḥ kṣattar
avaruhya sva-dhiṣṇyataḥ
krīḍanti puṁsaḥ siñcantyo
vigāhya rati-karśitāḥ
Synonyms
yayoḥ — in both of which (rivers); sura-striyaḥ — the celestial damsels along with their husbands; kṣattaḥ — O Vidura; avaruhya — descending; sva-dhiṣṇyataḥ — from their own airplanes; krīḍanti — they play; puṁsaḥ — their husbands; siñcantyaḥ — sprinkling with water; vigāhya — after entering (the water); rati-karśitāḥ — whose enjoyment has become diminished.

Translation
My dear Kṣattā, Vidura, the celestial damsels come down to those rivers in their airplanes with their husbands, and after sexual enjoyment, they enter the water and enjoy sprinkling their husbands with water.

Text 26
ययोस्तत्स्‍नानविभ्रष्टनवकुङ्कुमपिञ्जरम् ।
वितृषोऽपि पिबन्त्यम्भ: पाययन्तो गजा गजी: ॥ २६ ॥
yayos tat-snāna-vibhraṣṭa-
nava-kuṅkuma-piñjaram
vitṛṣo ’pi pibanty ambhaḥ
pāyayanto gajā gajīḥ
Synonyms
yayoḥ — in both of which rivers; tat-snāna — by the bathing of them (the damsels of the heavenly planets); vibhraṣṭa — fallen off; nava — fresh; kuṅkuma — with kuṅkuma powder; piñjaram — yellow; vitṛṣaḥ — not being thirsty; api — even; pibanti — drink; ambhaḥ — the water; pāyayantaḥ — causing to drink; gajāḥ — the elephants; gajīḥ — the female elephants.

Translation
After the damsels of the heavenly planets bathe in the water, it becomes yellowish and fragrant due to the kuṅkuma from their bodies. Thus the elephants come to bathe there with their wives, the she-elephants, and they also drink the water, although they are not thirsty.

Text 27
तारहेममहारत्नविमानशतसङ्कुलाम् ।
जुष्टां पुण्यजनस्त्रीभिर्यथा खं सतडिद्घनम् ॥ २७ ॥
tāra-hema-mahāratna-
vimāna-śata-saṅkulām
juṣṭāṁ puṇyajana-strībhir
yathā khaṁ sataḍid-ghanam
Synonyms
tāra-hema — of pearls and gold; mahā-ratna — valuable jewels; vimāna — of airplanes; śata — with hundreds; saṅkulām — crowded; juṣṭām — occupied, enjoyed; puṇyajana-strībhiḥ — by the wives of the Yakṣas; yathā — as; kham — the sky; sa-taḍit-ghanam — with the lightning and the clouds.

Translation
The airplanes of the heavenly denizens are bedecked with pearls, gold and many valuable jewels. The heavenly denizens are compared to clouds in the sky decorated with occasional flashes of electric lightning.

Text 28
हित्वा यक्षेश्वरपुरीं वनं सौगन्धिकं च तत् ।
द्रुमै: कामदुघैर्हृद्यं चित्रमाल्यफलच्छदै: ॥ २८ ॥
hitvā yakṣeśvara-purīṁ
vanaṁ saugandhikaṁ ca tat
drumaiḥ kāma-dughair hṛdyaṁ
citra-mālya-phala-cchadaiḥ
Synonyms
hitvā — passing over; yakṣa-īśvara — the lord of the Yakṣas (Kuvera); purīm — the abode; vanam — the forest; saugandhikam — named Saugandhika; ca — and; tat — that; drumaiḥ — with trees; kāma-dughaiḥ — yielding desires; hṛdyam — attractive; citra — variegated; mālya — flowers; phala — fruits; chadaiḥ — leaves.

Translation
While traveling, the demigods passed over the forest known as Saugandhika, which is full of varieties of flowers, fruits and desire trees. While passing over the forest, they also saw the regions of Yakṣeśvara.

Text 29
रक्तकण्ठखगानीकस्वरमण्डितषट्पदम् ।
कलहंसकुलप्रेष्ठं खरदण्डजलाशयम् ॥ २९ ॥
rakta-kaṇṭha-khagānīka-
svara-maṇḍita-ṣaṭpadam
kalahaṁsa-kula-preṣṭhaṁ
kharadaṇḍa-jalāśayam
Synonyms
rakta — reddish; kaṇṭha — necks; khaga-anīka — of many birds; svara — with the sweet sounds; maṇḍita — decorated; ṣaṭ-padam — bees; kalahaṁsa-kula — of groups of swans; preṣṭham — very dear; khara-daṇḍa — lotus flowers; jala-āśayam — lakes.

Translation
In that celestial forest there were many birds whose necks were colored reddish and whose sweet sounds mixed with the humming of the bees. The lakes were abundantly decorated with crying swans as well as strong-stemmed lotus flowers.

Text 30
वनकुञ्जरसङ्घृष्टहरिचन्दनवायुना ।
अधि पुण्यजनस्त्रीणां मुहुरुन्मथयन्मन: ॥ ३० ॥
vana-kuñjara-saṅghṛṣṭa-
haricandana-vāyunā
adhi puṇyajana-strīṇāṁ
muhur unmathayan manaḥ
Synonyms
vana-kuñjara — by wild elephants; saṅghṛṣṭa — rubbed against; haricandana — the sandalwood trees; vāyunā — by the breeze; adhi — further; puṇyajana-strīṇām — of the wives of the Yakṣas; muhuḥ — again and again; unmathayat — agitating; manaḥ — the minds.

Translation
All these atmospheric influences unsettled the forest elephants who flocked together in the sandalwood forest, and the blowing wind agitated the minds of the damsels there for further sexual enjoyment.

Text 31
वैदूर्यकृतसोपाना वाप्य उत्पलमालिनी: ।
प्राप्तं किम्पुरुषैर्दृष्ट्वा त आराद्दद‍ृशुर्वटम् ॥ ३१ ॥
vaidūrya-kṛta-sopānā
vāpya utpala-mālinīḥ
prāptaṁ kimpuruṣair dṛṣṭvā
ta ārād dadṛśur vaṭam
Synonyms
vaidūrya-kṛta — made of vaidūrya; sopānāḥ — staircases; vāpyaḥ — lakes; utpala — of lotus flowers; mālinīḥ — containing rows; prāptam — inhabited; kimpuruṣaiḥ — by the Kimpuruṣas; dṛṣṭvā — after seeing; te — those demigods; ārāt — not far away; dadṛśuḥ — saw; vaṭam — a banyan tree.

Translation
They also saw that the bathing ghāṭas and their staircases were made of vaidūrya-maṇi. The water was full of lotus flowers. Passing by such lakes, the demigods reached a place where there was a great banyan tree.

Text 32
स योजनशतोत्सेध: पादोनविटपायत: ।
पर्यक्‍कृताचलच्छायो निर्नीडस्तापवर्जित: ॥ ३२ ॥
sa yojana-śatotsedhaḥ
pādona-viṭapāyataḥ
paryak-kṛtācala-cchāyo
nirnīḍas tāpa-varjitaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — that banyan tree; yojana-śata — one hundred yojanas (eight hundred miles); utsedhaḥ — height; pāda-ūna — less by a quarter (six hundred miles); viṭapa — by the branches; āyataḥ — spread out; paryak — all around; kṛta — made; acala — unshaken; chāyaḥ — the shadow; nirnīḍaḥ — without bird nests; tāpa-varjitaḥ — without heat.

Translation
That banyan tree was eight hundred miles high, and its branches spread over six hundred miles around. The tree cast a fine shade which permanently cooled the temperature, yet there was no noise of birds.

Text 33
तस्मिन्महायोगमये मुमुक्षुशरणे सुरा: ।
दद‍ृशु: शिवमासीनं त्यक्तामर्षमिवान्तकम् ॥ ३३ ॥
tasmin mahā-yogamaye
mumukṣu-śaraṇe surāḥ
dadṛśuḥ śivam āsīnaṁ
tyaktāmarṣam ivāntakam
Synonyms
tasmin — under that tree; mahā-yoga-maye — having many sages engaged in meditation on the Supreme; mumukṣu — of those who desire liberation; śaraṇe — the shelter; surāḥ — the demigods; dadṛśuḥ — saw; śivam — Lord Śiva; āsīnam — seated; tyakta-amarṣam — having given up anger; iva — as; antakam — eternal time.

Translation
The demigods saw Lord Śiva sitting under that tree, which was competent to give perfection to mystic yogīs and deliver all people. As grave as time eternal, he appeared to have given up all anger.

Text 34
सनन्दनाद्यैर्महासिद्धै: शान्तै: संशान्तविग्रहम् ।
उपास्यमानं सख्या च भर्त्रा गुह्यकरक्षसाम् ॥ ३४ ॥
sanandanādyair mahā-siddhaiḥ
śāntaiḥ saṁśānta-vigraham
upāsyamānaṁ sakhyā ca
bhartrā guhyaka-rakṣasām
Synonyms
sanandana-ādyaiḥ — the four Kumāras, headed by Sanandana; mahā-siddhaiḥ — liberated souls; śāntaiḥ — saintly; saṁśānta-vigraham — the grave and saintly Lord Śiva; upāsyamānam — was being praised; sakhyā — by Kuvera; ca — and; bhartrā — by the master; guhyaka-rakṣasām — of the Guhyakas and the Rākṣasas.

Translation
Lord Śiva sat there, surrounded by saintly persons like Kuvera, the master of the Guhyakas, and the four Kumāras, who were already liberated souls. Lord Śiva was grave and saintly.

Text 35
विद्यातपोयोगपथमास्थितं तमधीश्वरम् ।
चरन्तं विश्वसुहृदं वात्सल्याल्लोकमङ्गलम् ॥ ३५ ॥
vidyā-tapo-yoga-patham
āsthitaṁ tam adhīśvaram
carantaṁ viśva-suhṛdaṁ
vātsalyāl loka-maṅgalam
Synonyms
vidyā — knowledge; tapaḥ — austerity; yoga-patham — the path of devotional service; āsthitam — situated; tam — him (Lord Śiva); adhīśvaram — the master of the senses; carantam — performing (austerity, etc.); viśva-suhṛdam — the friend of the whole world; vātsalyāt — out of full affection; loka-maṅgalam — auspicious for everyone.

Translation
The demigods saw Lord Śiva situated in his perfection as the master of the senses, knowledge, fruitive activities and the path of achieving perfection. He was the friend of the entire world, and by virtue of his full affection for everyone, he was very auspicious.

Text 36
लिङ्गं च तापसाभीष्टं भस्मदण्डजटाजिनम् ।
अङ्गेन सन्ध्याभ्ररुचा चन्द्रलेखां च बिभ्रतम् ॥ ३६ ॥
liṅgaṁ ca tāpasābhīṣṭaṁ
bhasma-daṇḍa-jaṭājinam
aṅgena sandhyābhra-rucā
candra-lekhāṁ ca bibhratam
Synonyms
liṅgam — symptom; ca — and; tāpasa-abhīṣṭam — desired by Śaivite ascetics; bhasma — ashes; daṇḍa — staff; jaṭā — matted hair; ajinam — antelope skin; aṅgena — with his body; sandhyā-ābhra — reddish; rucā — colored; candra-lekhām — the crest of a half-moon; ca — and; bibhratam — bearing.

Translation
He was seated on a deerskin and was practicing all forms of austerity. Because his body was smeared with ashes, he looked like an evening cloud. On his hair was the sign of a half-moon, a symbolic representation.

Text 37
उपविष्टं दर्भमय्यां बृस्यां ब्रह्म सनातनम् ।
नारदाय प्रवोचन्तं पृच्छते श‍ृण्वतां सताम् ॥ ३७ ॥
upaviṣṭaṁ darbhamayyāṁ
bṛsyāṁ brahma sanātanam
nāradāya pravocantaṁ
pṛcchate śṛṇvatāṁ satām
Synonyms
upaviṣṭam — seated; darbha-mayyām — made of darbha, straw; bṛsyām — on a mattress; brahma — the Absolute Truth; sanātanam — the eternal; nāradāya — unto Nārada; pravocantam — speaking; pṛcchate — asking; śṛṇvatām — listening; satām — of the great sages.

Translation
He was seated on a straw mattress and speaking to all present, including the great sage Nārada, to whom he specifically spoke about the Absolute Truth.

Text 38
कृत्वोरौ दक्षिणे सव्यं पादपद्मं च जानुनि ।
बाहुं प्रकोष्ठेऽक्षमालाम् आसीनं तर्कमुद्रया ॥ ३८ ॥
kṛtvorau dakṣiṇe savyaṁ
pāda-padmaṁ ca jānuni
bāhuṁ prakoṣṭhe ’kṣa-mālām
āsīnaṁ tarka-mudrayā
Synonyms
kṛtvā — having placed; ūrau — thigh; dakṣiṇe — at the right; savyam — the left; pāda-padmam — lotus feet; ca — and; jānuni — on his knee; bāhum — hand; prakoṣṭhe — in the end of the right hand; akṣa-mālām — rudrākṣa beads; āsīnam — sitting; tarka-mudrayā — with the mudrā of argument.

Translation
His left leg was placed on his right thigh, and his left hand was placed on his left thigh. [This sitting posture is called vīrāsana.] In his right hand he held rudrākṣa beads, and his finger was in the mode of argument.

Text 39
तं ब्रह्मनिर्वाणसमाधिमाश्रितं
व्युपाश्रितं गिरिशं योगकक्षाम् ।
सलोकपाला मुनयो मनूनाम्
आद्यं मनुं प्राञ्जलय: प्रणेमु: ॥ ३९ ॥
taṁ brahma-nirvāṇa-samādhim āśritaṁ
vyupāśritaṁ giriśaṁ yoga-kakṣām
sa-loka-pālā munayo manūnām
ādyaṁ manuṁ prāñjalayaḥ praṇemuḥ
Synonyms
tam — him (Lord Śiva); brahma-nirvāṇa — in brahmānanda; samādhim — in trance; āśritam — absorbed; vyupāśritam — leaning on; giriśam — Lord Śiva; yoga-kakṣām — having his left knee firmly fixed with a knotted cloth; sa-loka-pālāḥ — along with the demigods (headed by Indra); munayaḥ — the sages; manūnām — of all thinkers; ādyam — the chief; manum — thinker; prāñjalayaḥ — with folded palms; praṇemuḥ — offered respectful obeisances.

Translation
All the sages and demigods, headed by Indra, offered their respectful obeisances unto Lord Śiva with folded hands. Lord Śiva was dressed in saffron garments and absorbed in trance, thus appearing to be the foremost of all sages.

Text 40
स तूपलभ्यागतमात्मयोनिं
सुरासुरेशैरभिवन्दिताङ्‌घ्रि: ।
उत्थाय चक्रे शिरसाभिवन्दन-
मर्हत्तम: कस्य यथैव विष्णु: ॥ ४० ॥
sa tūpalabhyāgatam ātma-yoniṁ
surāsureśair abhivanditāṅghriḥ
utthāya cakre śirasābhivandanam
arhattamaḥ kasya yathaiva viṣṇuḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — Lord Śiva; tu — but; upalabhya — seeing; āgatam — had arrived; ātma-yonim — Lord Brahmā; sura-asura-īśaiḥ — by the best of the demigods and demons; abhivandita-aṅghriḥ — whose feet are worshiped; utthāya — standing up; cakre — made; śirasā — with his head; abhivandanam — respectful; arhattamaḥ — Vāmanadeva; kasya — of Kaśyapa; yathā eva — just as; viṣṇuḥ — Viṣṇu.

Translation
Lord Śiva’s lotus feet were worshiped by both the demigods and demons, but still, in spite of his exalted position, as soon as he saw that Lord Brahmā was there among all the other demigods, he immediately stood up and offered him respect by bowing down and touching his lotus feet, just as Vāmanadeva offered His respectful obeisances to Kaśyapa Muni.

Text 41
तथापरे सिद्धगणा महर्षिभि-
र्ये वै समन्तादनु नीललोहितम् ।
नमस्कृत: प्राह शशाङ्कशेखरं
कृतप्रणामं प्रहसन्निवात्मभू: ॥ ४१ ॥
tathāpare siddha-gaṇā maharṣibhir
ye vai samantād anu nīlalohitam
namaskṛtaḥ prāha śaśāṅka-śekharaṁ
kṛta-praṇāmaṁ prahasann ivātmabhūḥ
Synonyms
tathā — so; apare — the others; siddha-gaṇāḥ — the Siddhas; mahā-ṛṣibhiḥ — along with the great sages; ye — who; vai — indeed; samantāt — from all sides; anu — after; nīlalohitam — Lord Śiva; namaskṛtaḥ — making obeisances; prāha — said; śaśāṅka-śekharam — to Lord Śiva; kṛta-praṇāmam — having made obeisances; prahasan — smiling; iva — as; ātmabhūḥ — Lord Brahmā.

Translation
All the sages who were sitting with Lord Śiva, such as Nārada and others, also offered their respectful obeisances to Lord Brahmā. After being so worshiped, Lord Brahmā, smiling, began to speak to Lord Śiva.

Text 42
ब्रह्मोवाच
जाने त्वामीशं विश्वस्य जगतो योनिबीजयो: ।
शक्ते: शिवस्य च परं यत्तद्ब्रह्म निरन्तरम् ॥ ४२ ॥
brahmovāca
jāne tvām īśaṁ viśvasya
jagato yoni-bījayoḥ
śakteḥ śivasya ca paraṁ
yat tad brahma nirantaram
Synonyms
brahmā uvāca — Lord Brahmā said; jāne — I know; tvām — you (Lord Śiva); īśam — the controller; viśvasya — of the entire material manifestation; jagataḥ — of the cosmic manifestation; yoni-bījayoḥ — of both the mother and father; śakteḥ — of potency; śivasya — of Śiva; ca — and; param — the Supreme; yat — which; tat — that; brahma — without change; nirantaram — with no material qualities.

Translation
Lord Brahmā said: My dear Lord Śiva, I know that you are the controller of the entire material manifestation, the combination father and mother of the cosmic manifestation, and the Supreme Brahman beyond the cosmic manifestation as well. I know you in that way.

Text 43
त्वमेव भगवन्नेतच्छिवशक्त्यो: स्वरूपयो: ।
विश्वं सृजसि पास्यत्सि क्रीडन्नूर्णपटो यथा ॥ ४३ ॥
tvam eva bhagavann etac
chiva-śaktyoḥ svarūpayoḥ
viśvaṁ sṛjasi pāsy atsi
krīḍann ūrṇa-paṭo yathā
Synonyms
tvam — you; eva — certainly; bhagavan — O my lord; etat — this; śiva-śaktyoḥ — being situated in your auspicious energy; svarūpayoḥ — by your personal expansion; viśvam — this universe; sṛjasi — create; pāsi — maintain; atsi — annihilate; krīḍan — working; ūrṇa-paṭaḥ — spider’s web; yathā — just like.

Translation
My dear lord, you create this cosmic manifestation, maintain it, and annihilate it by expansion of your personality, exactly as a spider creates, maintains and winds up its web.

Text 44
त्वमेव धर्मार्थदुघाभिपत्तये
दक्षेण सूत्रेण ससर्जिथाध्वरम् ।
त्वयैव लोकेऽवसिताश्च सेतवो
यान्ब्राह्मणा: श्रद्दधते धृतव्रता: ॥ ४४ ॥
tvam eva dharmārtha-dughābhipattaye
dakṣeṇa sūtreṇa sasarjithādhvaram
tvayaiva loke ’vasitāś ca setavo
yān brāhmaṇāḥ śraddadhate dhṛta-vratāḥ
Synonyms
tvam — Your Lordship; eva — certainly; dharma-artha-dugha — benefit derived from religion and economic development; abhipattaye — for their protection; dakṣeṇa — by Dakṣa; sūtreṇa — making him the cause; sasarjitha — created; adhvaram — sacrifices; tvayā — by you; eva — certainly; loke — in this world; avasitāḥ — regulated; ca — and; setavaḥ — respect for the varṇāśrama institution; yān — which; brāhmaṇāḥ — the brāhmaṇas; śraddadhate — respect very much; dhṛta-vratāḥ — taking it as a vow.

Translation
My dear lord, Your Lordship has introduced the system of sacrifices through the agency of Dakṣa, and thus one may derive the benefits of religious activities and economic development. Under your regulative principles, the institution of the four varṇās and āśramas is respected. The brāhmaṇas therefore vow to follow this system strictly.

Text 45
त्वं कर्मणां मङ्गल मङ्गलानां
कर्तु: स्वलोकं तनुषे स्व: परं वा ।
अमङ्गलानां च तमिस्रमुल्बणं
विपर्यय: केन तदेव कस्यचित् ॥ ४५ ॥
tvaṁ karmaṇāṁ maṅgala maṅgalānāṁ
kartuḥ sva-lokaṁ tanuṣe svaḥ paraṁ vā
amaṅgalānāṁ ca tamisram ulbaṇaṁ
viparyayaḥ kena tad eva kasyacit
Synonyms
tvam — Your Lordship; karmaṇām — of the prescribed duties; maṅgala — O most auspicious; maṅgalānām — of the auspicious; kartuḥ — of the performer; sva-lokam — respective higher planetary systems; tanuṣe — expand; svaḥ — heavenly planets; param — transcendental world; vā — or; amaṅgalānām — of the inauspicious; ca — and; tamisram — the name of a particular hell; ulbaṇam — ghastly; viparyayaḥ — the opposite; kena — why; tat eva — certainly that; kasyacit — for someone.

Translation
O most auspicious lord, you have ordained the heavenly planets, the spiritual Vaikuṇṭha planets and the impersonal Brahman sphere as the respective destinations of the performers of auspicious activities. Similarly, for others, who are miscreants, you have destined different kinds of hells which are horrible and ghastly. Yet sometimes it is found that their destinations are just the opposite. It is very difficult to ascertain the cause of this.

Text 46
न वै सतां त्वच्चरणार्पितात्मनां
भूतेषु सर्वेष्वभिपश्यतां तव ।
भूतानि चात्मन्यपृथग्दिद‍ृक्षतां
प्रायेण रोषोऽभिभवेद्यथा पशुम् ॥ ४६ ॥
na vai satāṁ tvac-caraṇārpitātmanāṁ
bhūteṣu sarveṣv abhipaśyatāṁ tava
bhūtāni cātmany apṛthag-didṛkṣatāṁ
prāyeṇa roṣo ’bhibhaved yathā paśum
Synonyms
na — not; vai — but; satām — of the devotees; tvat-caraṇa-arpita-ātmanām — of those who are completely surrendered at your lotus feet; bhūteṣu — among living entities; sarveṣu — all varieties; abhipaśyatām — perfectly seeing; tava — your; bhūtāni — living entities; ca — and; ātmani — in the Supreme; apṛthak — nondifferent; didṛkṣatām — those who see like that; prāyeṇa — almost always; roṣaḥ — anger; abhibhavet — takes place; yathā — exactly like; paśum — the animals.

Translation
My dear Lord, devotees who have fully dedicated their lives unto your lotus feet certainly observe your presence as Paramātmā in each and every being, and as such they do not differentiate between one living being and another. Such persons treat all living entities equally. They never become overwhelmed by anger like animals, who can see nothing without differentiation.

Text 47
पृथग्धिय: कर्मद‍ृशो दुराशया:
परोदयेनार्पितहृद्रुजोऽनिशम् ।
परान् दुरुक्तैर्वितुदन्त्यरुन्तुदा-
स्तान्मावधीद्दैववधान्भवद्विध: ॥ ४७ ॥
pṛthag-dhiyaḥ karma-dṛśo durāśayāḥ
parodayenārpita-hṛd-rujo ’niśam
parān duruktair vitudanty aruntudās
tān māvadhīd daiva-vadhān bhavad-vidhaḥ
Synonyms
pṛthak — differently; dhiyaḥ — those who are thinking; karma — fruitive activities; dṛśaḥ — observer; durāśayāḥ — mean-minded; para-udayena — by others’ flourishing condition; arpita — given up; hṛt — heart; rujaḥ — anger; aniśam — always; parān — others; duruktaiḥ — harsh words; vitudanti — gives pain; aruntudāḥ — by piercing words; tān — unto them; mā — not; avadhīt — kill; daiva — by providence; vadhān — already killed; bhavat — you; vidhaḥ — like.

Translation
Persons who observe everything with differentiation, who are simply attached to fruitive activities, who are mean-minded, who are always pained to see the flourishing condition of others and who thus give distress to them by uttering harsh and piercing words have already been killed by providence. Thus there is no need for them to be killed again by an exalted personality like you.

Text 48
यस्मिन्यदा पुष्करनाभमायया
दुरन्तया स्पृष्टधिय: पृथग्दृश: ।
कुर्वन्ति तत्र ह्यनुकम्पया कृपां
न साधवो दैवबलात्कृते क्रमम् ॥ ४८ ॥
yasmin yadā puṣkara-nābha-māyayā
durantayā spṛṣṭa-dhiyaḥ pṛthag-dṛśaḥ
kurvanti tatra hy anukampayā kṛpāṁ
na sādhavo daiva-balāt kṛte kramam
Synonyms
yasmin — in some place; yadā — when; puṣkara-nābha-māyayā — by the illusory energy of Puṣkaranābha, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; durantayā — insurmountable; spṛṣṭa-dhiyaḥ — bewildered; pṛthak-dṛśaḥ — the same persons who see differently; kurvanti — do; tatra — there; hi — certainly; anukampayā — out of compassion; kṛpām — mercy; na — never; sādhavaḥ — saintly persons; daiva-balāt — by providence; kṛte — being done; kramam — prowess.

Translation
My dear lord, if in some places materialists, who are already bewildered by the insurmountable illusory energy of the Supreme Godhead, sometimes commit offenses, a saintly person, with compassion, does not take this seriously. Knowing that they commit offenses because they are overpowered by the illusory energy, he does not show his prowess to counteract them.

Text 49
भवांस्तु पुंस: परमस्य मायया
दुरन्तयास्पृष्टमति: समस्तद‍ृक् ।
तया हतात्मस्वनुकर्मचेत:-
स्वनुग्रहं कर्तुमिहार्हसि प्रभो ॥ ४९ ॥
bhavāṁs tu puṁsaḥ paramasya māyayā
durantayāspṛṣṭa-matiḥ samasta-dṛk
tayā hatātmasv anukarma-cetaḥsv
anugrahaṁ kartum ihārhasi prabho
Synonyms
bhavān — Your Lordship; tu — but; puṁsaḥ — of the person; paramasya — the supreme; māyayā — by the material energy; durantayā — of great potency; aspṛṣṭa — unaffected; matiḥ — intelligence; samasta-dṛk — seer or knower of everything; tayā — by the same illusory energy; hata-ātmasu — bewildered at heart; anukarma-cetaḥsu — whose hearts are attracted by fruitive activities; anugraham — mercy; kartum — to do; iha — in this case; arhasi — desire; prabho — O lord.

Translation
My dear lord, you are never bewildered by the formidable influence of the illusory energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore you are omniscient and should be merciful and compassionate toward those who are bewildered by the same illusory energy and are very much attached to fruitive activities.

Text 50
कुर्वध्वरस्योद्धरणं हतस्य भो:
त्वयासमाप्तस्य मनो प्रजापते: ।
न यत्र भागं तव भागिनो ददु:
कुयाजिनो येन मखो निनीयते ॥ ५० ॥
kurv adhvarasyoddharaṇaṁ hatasya bhoḥ
tvayāsamāptasya mano prajāpateḥ
na yatra bhāgaṁ tava bhāgino daduḥ
kuyājino yena makho ninīyate
Synonyms
kuru — just execute; adhvarasya — of the sacrifice; uddharaṇam — complete regularly; hatasya — killed; bhoḥ — O; tvayā — by you; asamāptasya — of the unfinished sacrifice; mano — O Lord Śiva; prajāpateḥ — of Mahārāja Dakṣa; na — not; yatra — where; bhāgam — share; tava — your; bhāginaḥ — deserving to take the share; daduḥ — did not give; ku-yājinaḥ — bad priests; yena — by the bestower; makhaḥ — sacrifice; ninīyate — gets the result.

Translation
My dear Lord Śiva, you are a shareholder of a portion of the sacrifice, and you are the giver of the result. The bad priests did not deliver your share, and therefore you destroyed everything, and the sacrifice remains unfinished. Now you can do the needful and take your rightful share.

Text 51
जीवताद्यजमानोऽयं प्रपद्येताक्षिणी भग: ।
भृगो: श्मश्रूणि रोहन्तु पूष्णो दन्ताश्च पूर्ववत् ॥ ५१ ॥
jīvatād yajamāno ’yaṁ
prapadyetākṣiṇī bhagaḥ
bhṛgoḥ śmaśrūṇi rohantu
pūṣṇo dantāś ca pūrvavat
Synonyms
jīvatāt — let him be alive; yajamānaḥ — the performer of the sacrifice (Dakṣa); ayam — this; prapadyeta — let him get back; akṣiṇī — by the eyes; bhagaḥ — Bhagadeva; bhṛgoḥ — of the sage Bhṛgu; śmaśrūṇi — mustache; rohantu — may grow again; pūṣṇaḥ — of Pūṣādeva; dantāḥ — the chain of teeth; ca — and; pūrva-vat — like before.

Translation
My dear lord, by your mercy the performer of the sacrifice [King Dakṣa] may get back his life, Bhaga may get back his eyes, Bhṛgu his mustache, and Pūṣā his teeth.

Text 52
देवानां भग्नगात्राणामृत्विजां चायुधाश्मभि: ।
भवतानुगृहीतानामाशु मन्योऽस्त्वनातुरम् ॥ ५२ ॥
devānāṁ bhagna-gātrāṇām
ṛtvijāṁ cāyudhāśmabhiḥ
bhavatānugṛhītānām
āśu manyo ’stv anāturam
Synonyms
devānām — of the demigods; bhagna-gātrāṇām — whose limbs are badly broken; ṛtvijām — of the priests; ca — and; āyudha-aśmabhiḥ — by weapons and by stones; bhavatā — by you; anugṛhītānām — being favored; āśu — at once; manyo — O Lord Śiva (in an angry mood); astu — let there be; anāturam — recovery from injuries.

Translation
O Lord Śiva, may the demigods and the priests whose limbs have been broken by your soldiers recover from the injuries by your grace.

Text 53
एष ते रुद्र भागोऽस्तु यदुच्छिष्टोऽध्वरस्य वै ।
यज्ञस्ते रुद्रभागेन कल्पतामद्य यज्ञहन् ॥ ५३ ॥
eṣa te rudra bhāgo ’stu
yad-ucchiṣṭo ’dhvarasya vai
yajñas te rudra bhāgena
kalpatām adya yajña-han
Synonyms
eṣaḥ — this; te — your; rudra — O Lord Śiva; bhāgaḥ — portion; astu — let it be; yat — whatever; ucchiṣṭaḥ — is the remainder; adhvarasya — of the sacrifice; vai — indeed; yajñaḥ — the sacrifice; te — your; rudra — O Rudra; bhāgena — by the portion; kalpatām — may be completed; adya — today; yajña-han — O destroyer of the sacrifice.

Translation
O destroyer of the sacrifice, please take your portion of the sacrifice and let the sacrifice be completed by your grace.