Text 1
मैत्रेय उवाच
सनकाद्या नारदश्च ऋभुर्हंसोऽरुणिर्यति: ।
नैते गृहान् ब्रह्मसुता ह्यावसन्नूर्ध्वरेतस: ॥ १ ॥
maitreya uvāca
sanakādyā nāradaś ca
ṛbhur haṁso ’ruṇir yatiḥ
naite gṛhān brahma-sutā
hy āvasann ūrdhva-retasaḥ
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — Maitreya said; sanaka-ādyāḥ — those headed by Sanaka; nāradaḥ — Nārada; ca — and; ṛbhuḥ — Ṛbhu; haṁsaḥ — Haṁsa; aruṇiḥ — Aruṇi; yatiḥ — Yati; na — not; ete — all these; gṛhān — at home; brahma-sutāḥ — sons of Brahmā; hi — certainly; āvasan — did live; ūrdhva-retasaḥ — unadulterated celibates.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya said: The four great Kumāra sages headed by Sanaka, as well as Nārada, Ṛbhu, Haṁsa, Aruṇi and Yati, all sons of Brahmā, did not live at home, but became ūrdhva-retā, or naiṣṭhika-brahmacārīs, unadulterated celibates.

Text 2
मृषाधर्मस्य भार्यासीद्दम्भं मायां च शत्रुहन् ।
असूत मिथुनं तत्तु निऋर्तिर्जगृहेऽप्रज: ॥ २ ॥
mṛṣādharmasya bhāryāsīd
dambhaṁ māyāṁ ca śatru-han
asūta mithunaṁ tat tu
nirṛtir jagṛhe ’prajaḥ
Synonyms
mṛṣā — Mṛṣā; adharmasya — of Irreligion; bhāryā — wife; āsīt — was; dambham — Bluffing; māyām — Cheating; ca — and; śatru-han — O slayer of enemies; asūta — produced; mithunam — combination; tat — that; tu — but; nirṛtiḥ — Nirṛti; jagṛhe — took; aprajaḥ — being childless.

Translation
Another son of Lord Brahmā was Irreligion, whose wife’s name was Falsity. From their combination were born two demons named Dambha, or Bluffing, and Māyā, or Cheating. These two demons were taken by a demon named Nirṛti, who had no children.

Text 3
तयो: समभवल्लोभो निकृतिश्च महामते ।
ताभ्यां क्रोधश्च हिंसा च यद्दुरुक्ति: स्वसा कलि: ॥ ३ ॥
tayoḥ samabhaval lobho
nikṛtiś ca mahā-mate
tābhyāṁ krodhaś ca hiṁsā ca
yad duruktiḥ svasā kaliḥ
Synonyms
tayoḥ — those two; samabhavat — were born; lobhaḥ — Greed; nikṛtiḥ — Cunning; ca — and; mahā-mate — O great soul; tābhyām — from both of them; krodhaḥ — Anger; ca — and; hiṁsā — Envy; ca — and; yat — from both of whom; duruktiḥ — Harsh Speech; svasā — sister; kaliḥ — Kali.

Translation
Maitreya told Vidura: O great soul, from Dambha and Māyā were born Greed and Nikṛti, or Cunning. From their combination came children named Krodha [Anger] and Hiṁsā [Envy], and from their combination were born Kali and his sister Durukti (Harsh Speech).

Text 4
दुरुक्तौ कलिराधत्त भयं मृत्युं च सत्तम ।
तयोश्च मिथुनं जज्ञे यातना निरयस्तथा ॥ ४ ॥
duruktau kalir ādhatta
bhayaṁ mṛtyuṁ ca sattama
tayoś ca mithunaṁ jajñe
yātanā nirayas tathā
Synonyms
duruktau — in Durukti; kaliḥ — Kali; ādhatta — produced; bhayam — Fearfulness; mṛtyum — Death; ca — and; sat-tama — O greatest of all good men; tayoḥ — of those two; ca — and; mithunam — by combination; jajñe — were produced; yātanā — Excessive Pain; nirayaḥ — Hell; tathā — as well.

Translation
O greatest of all good men, by the combination of Kali and Harsh Speech were born children named Mṛtyu (Death) and Bhīti (Fear). From the combination of Mṛtyu and Bhīti came children named Yātanā (Excessive Pain) and Niraya (Hell).

Text 5
सङ्ग्रहेण मयाख्यात: प्रतिसर्गस्तवानघ ।
त्रि: श्रुत्वैतत्पुमान् पुण्यं विधुनोत्यात्मनो मलम् ॥ ५ ॥
saṅgraheṇa mayākhyātaḥ
pratisargas tavānagha
triḥ śrutvaitat pumān puṇyaṁ
vidhunoty ātmano malam
Synonyms
saṅgraheṇa — in summary; mayā — by me; ākhyātaḥ — is explained; pratisargaḥ — cause of devastation; tava — your; anagha — O pure one; triḥ — three times; śrutvā — having heard; etat — this description; pumān — one who; puṇyam — piety; vidhunoti — washes off; ātmanaḥ — of the soul; malam — contamination.

Translation
My dear Vidura, I have summarily explained the causes of devastation. One who hears this description three times attains piety and washes the sinful contamination from his soul.

Text 6
अथात: कीर्तये वंशं पुण्यकीर्ते: कुरूद्वह ।
स्वायम्भुवस्यापि मनोर्हरेरंशांशजन्मन: ॥ ६ ॥
athātaḥ kīrtaye vaṁśaṁ
puṇya-kīrteḥ kurūdvaha
svāyambhuvasyāpi manor
harer aṁśāṁśa-janmanaḥ
Synonyms
atha — now; ataḥ — hereafter; kīrtaye — I shall describe; vaṁśam — dynasty; puṇya-kīrteḥ — celebrated for virtuous activities; kuru-udvaha — O best of the Kurus; svāyambhuvasya — of Svāyambhuva; api — even; manoḥ — of the Manu; hareḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; aṁśa — plenary expansion; aṁśa — part of; janmanaḥ — born of.

Translation
Maitreya continued: O best of the Kuru dynasty, I shall now describe to you the descendants of Svāyambhuva Manu, who was born of a part of a plenary expansion of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 7
प्रियव्रतोत्तानपादौ शतरूपापते: सुतौ ।
वासुदेवस्य कलया रक्षायां जगत: स्थितौ ॥ ७ ॥
priyavratottānapādau
śatarūpā-pateḥ sutau
vāsudevasya kalayā
rakṣāyāṁ jagataḥ sthitau
Synonyms
priyavrata — Priyavrata; uttānapādau — Uttānapāda; śatarūpā-pateḥ — of Queen Śatarūpā and her husband, Manu; sutau — the two sons; vāsudevasya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kalayā — by plenary expansion; rakṣāyām — for the protection; jagataḥ — of the world; sthitau — for the maintenance.

Translation
Svāyambhuva Manu had two sons by his wife, Śatarūpā, and the names of the sons were Uttānapāda and Priyavrata. Because both of them were descendants of a plenary expansion of Vāsudeva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they were very competent to rule the universe to maintain and protect the citizens.

Text 8
जाये उत्तानपादस्य सुनीति: सुरुचिस्तयो: ।
सुरुचि: प्रेयसी पत्युर्नेतरा यत्सुतो ध्रुव: ॥ ८ ॥
jāye uttānapādasya
sunītiḥ surucis tayoḥ
suruciḥ preyasī patyur
netarā yat-suto dhruvaḥ
Synonyms
jāye — of the two wives; uttānapādasya — of King Uttānapāda; sunītiḥ — Sunīti; suruciḥ — Suruci; tayoḥ — of both of them; suruciḥ — Suruci; preyasī — very dear; patyuḥ — of the husband; na itarā — not the other; yat — whose; sutaḥ — son; dhruvaḥ — Dhruva.

Translation
King Uttānapāda had two queens, named Sunīti and Suruci. Suruci was much more dear to the King; Sunīti, who had a son named Dhruva, was not his favorite.

Text 9
एकदा सुरुचे: पुत्रमङ्कमारोप्य लालयन् ।
उत्तमं नारुरुक्षन्तं ध्रुवं राजाभ्यनन्दत ॥ ९ ॥
ekadā suruceḥ putram
aṅkam āropya lālayan
uttamaṁ nārurukṣantaṁ
dhruvaṁ rājābhyanandata
Synonyms
ekadā — once upon a time; suruceḥ — of Queen Suruci; putram — the son; aṅkam — on the lap; āropya — placing; lālayan — while patting; uttamam — Uttama; na — did not; ārurukṣantam — trying to get on; dhruvam — Dhruva; rājā — the King; abhyanandata — welcome.

Translation
Once upon a time, King Uttānapāda was patting the son of Suruci, Uttama, placing him on his lap. Dhruva Mahārāja was also trying to get on the King’s lap, but the King did not very much welcome him.

Text 10
तथा चिकीर्षमाणं तं सपत्‍न्यास्तनयं ध्रुवम् ।
सुरुचि: श‍ृण्वतो राज्ञ: सेर्ष्यमाहातिगर्विता ॥ १० ॥
tathā cikīrṣamāṇaṁ taṁ
sapatnyās tanayaṁ dhruvam
suruciḥ śṛṇvato rājñaḥ
serṣyam āhātigarvitā
Synonyms
tathā — thus; cikīrṣamāṇam — the child Dhruva, who was trying to get up; tam — unto him; sa-patnyāḥ — of her co-wife (Sunīti); tanayam — son; dhruvam — Dhruva; suruciḥ — Queen Suruci; śṛṇvataḥ — while hearing; rājñaḥ — of the King; sa-īrṣyam — with envy; āha — said; atigarvitā — being too proud.

Translation
While the child, Dhruva Mahārāja, was trying to get on the lap of his father, Suruci, his stepmother, became very envious of the child, and with great pride she began to speak so as to be heard by the King himself.

Text 11
न वत्स नृपतेर्धिष्ण्यं भवानारोढुमर्हति ।
न गृहीतो मया यत्त्वं कुक्षावपि नृपात्मज: ॥ ११ ॥
na vatsa nṛpater dhiṣṇyaṁ
bhavān āroḍhum arhati
na gṛhīto mayā yat tvaṁ
kukṣāv api nṛpātmajaḥ
Synonyms
na — not; vatsa — my dear child; nṛpateḥ — of the King; dhiṣṇyam — seat; bhavān — yourself; āroḍhum — to get on; arhati — deserve; na — not; gṛhītaḥ — taken; mayā — by me; yat — because; tvam — you; kukṣau — in the womb; api — although; nṛpa-ātmajaḥ — son of the King.

Translation
Queen Suruci told Dhruva Mahārāja: My dear child, you do not deserve to sit on the throne or on the lap of the King. Surely you are also the son of the King, but because you did not take your birth from my womb, you are not qualified to sit on your father’s lap.

Text 12
बालोऽसि बत नात्मानमन्यस्त्रीगर्भसम्भृतम् ।
नूनं वेद भवान् यस्य दुर्लभेऽर्थे मनोरथ: ॥ १२ ॥
bālo ’si bata nātmānam
anya-strī-garbha-sambhṛtam
nūnaṁ veda bhavān yasya
durlabhe ’rthe manorathaḥ
Synonyms
bālaḥ — child; asi — you are; bata — however; na — not; ātmānam — my own; anya — other; strī — woman; garbha — womb; sambhṛtam — born by; nūnam — however; veda — just try to know; bhavān — yourself; yasya — of which; durlabhe — unapproachable; arthe — matter; manaḥ-rathaḥ — desirous.

Translation
My dear child, you are unaware that you were born not of my womb but of another woman. Therefore you should know that your attempt is doomed to failure. You are trying to fulfill a desire which is impossible to fulfill.

Text 13
तपसाराध्य पुरुषं तस्यैवानुग्रहेण मे ।
गर्भे त्वं साधयात्मानं यदीच्छसि नृपासनम् ॥ १३ ॥
tapasārādhya puruṣaṁ
tasyaivānugraheṇa me
garbhe tvaṁ sādhayātmānaṁ
yadīcchasi nṛpāsanam
Synonyms
tapasā — by austerities; ārādhya — having satisfied; puruṣam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tasya — by His; eva — only; anugraheṇa — by the mercy of; me — my; garbhe — in the womb; tvam — you; sādhaya — place; ātmānam — yourself; yadi — if; icchasi — you desire; nṛpa-āsanam — on the throne of the King.

Translation
If you at all desire to rise to the throne of the King, then you have to undergo severe austerities. First of all you must satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, and then, when you are favored by Him because of such worship, you shall have to take your next birth from my womb.

Text 14
मैत्रेय उवाच
मातु: सपत्‍न्या: स दुरुक्तिविद्ध:
श्वसन् रुषा दण्डहतो यथाहि: ।
हित्वा मिषन्तं पितरं सन्नवाचं
जगाम मातु: प्ररुदन् सकाशम् ॥ १४ ॥
maitreya uvāca
mātuḥ sapatnyāḥ sa durukti-viddhaḥ
śvasan ruṣā daṇḍa-hato yathāhiḥ
hitvā miṣantaṁ pitaraṁ sanna-vācaṁ
jagāma mātuḥ prarudan sakāśam
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya said; mātuḥ — of his mother; sa-patnyāḥ — of the co-wife; saḥ — he; durukti — harsh words; viddhaḥ — being pierced by; śvasan — breathing very heavily; ruṣā — out of anger; daṇḍa-hataḥ — struck by a stick; yathā — as much as; ahiḥ — a snake; hitvā — giving up; miṣantam — simply looking over; pitaram — his father; sanna-vācam — silently; jagāma — went; mātuḥ — to his mother; prarudan — weeping; sakāśam — near.

Translation
The sage Maitreya continued: My dear Vidura, as a snake, when struck by a stick, breathes very heavily, Dhruva Mahārāja, having been struck by the strong words of his stepmother, began to breathe very heavily because of great anger. When he saw that his father was silent and did not protest, he immediately left the palace and went to his mother.

Text 15
तं नि:श्वसन्तं स्फुरिताधरोष्ठं
सुनीतिरुत्सङ्ग उदूह्य बालम् ।
निशम्य तत्पौरमुखान्नितान्तं
सा विव्यथे यद्गदितं सपत्‍न्या ॥ १५ ॥
taṁ niḥśvasantaṁ sphuritādharoṣṭhaṁ
sunītir utsaṅga udūhya bālam
niśamya tat-paura-mukhān nitāntaṁ
sā vivyathe yad gaditaṁ sapatnyā
Synonyms
tam — him; niḥśvasantam — heavily breathing; sphurita — trembling; adhara-oṣṭham — upper and lower lips; sunītiḥ — Queen Sunīti; utsaṅge — on her lap; udūhya — lifting; bālam — her son; niśamya — after hearing; tat-paura-mukhāt — from the mouths of other inhabitants; nitāntam — all descriptions; sā — she; vivyathe — became aggrieved; yat — that which; gaditam — spoken; sa-patnyā — by her co-wife.

Translation
When Dhruva Mahārāja reached his mother, his lips were trembling in anger, and he was crying very grievously. Queen Sunīti immediately lifted her son onto her lap, while the palace residents who had heard all the harsh words of Suruci related everything in detail. Thus Sunīti also became greatly aggrieved.

Text 16
सोत्सृज्य धैर्यं विललाप शोक
दावाग्निना दावलतेव बाला ।
वाक्यं सपत्‍न्या: स्मरती सरोज
श्रिया द‍ृशा बाष्पकलामुवाह ॥ १६ ॥
sotsṛjya dhairyaṁ vilalāpa śoka-
dāvāgninā dāva-lateva bālā
vākyaṁ sapatnyāḥ smaratī saroja-
śriyā dṛśā bāṣpa-kalām uvāha
Synonyms
sā — she; utsṛjya — giving up; dhairyam — patience; vilalāpa — lamented; śoka-dāva-agninā — by the fire of grief; dāva-latā iva — like burnt leaves; bālā — the woman; vākyam — words; sa-patnyāḥ — spoken by her co-wife; smaratī — remember; saroja-śriyā — a face as beautiful as a lotus; dṛśā — by looking; bāṣpa-kalām — weeping; uvāha — said.

Translation
This incident was unbearable to Sunīti’s patience. She began to burn as if in a forest fire, and in her grief she became just like a burnt leaf and so lamented. As she remembered the words of her co-wife, her bright, lotuslike face filled with tears, and thus she spoke.

Text 17
दीर्घं श्वसन्ती वृजिनस्य पार-
मपश्यती बालकमाह बाला ।
मामङ्गलं तात परेषु मंस्था
भुङ्क्ते जनो यत्परदु:खदस्तत् ॥ १७ ॥
dīrghaṁ śvasantī vṛjinasya pāram
apaśyatī bālakam āha bālā
māmaṅgalaṁ tāta pareṣu maṁsthā
bhuṅkte jano yat para-duḥkhadas tat
Synonyms
dīrgham — heavy; śvasantī — breathing; vṛjinasya — of the danger; pāram — limitation; apaśyatī — without finding; bālakam — to her son; āha — said; bālā — the lady; mā — let there not be; amaṅgalam — ill fortune; tāta — my dear son; pareṣu — unto others; maṁsthāḥ — desire; bhuṅkte — suffered; janaḥ — person; yat — that which; para-duḥkhadaḥ — who is apt to inflict pains upon others; tat — that.

Translation
She also was breathing very heavily, and she did not know the factual remedy for the painful situation. Not finding any remedy, she said to her son: My dear son, don’t wish for anything inauspicious for others. Anyone who inflicts pains upon others suffers himself from that pain.

Text 18
सत्यं सुरुच्याभिहितं भवान्मे
यद्दुर्भगाया उदरे गृहीत: ।
स्तन्येन वृद्धश्च विलज्जते यां
भार्येति वा वोढुमिडस्पतिर्माम् ॥ १८ ॥
satyaṁ surucyābhihitaṁ bhavān me
yad durbhagāyā udare gṛhītaḥ
stanyena vṛddhaś ca vilajjate yāṁ
bhāryeti vā voḍhum iḍaspatir mām
Synonyms
satyam — truth; surucyā — by Queen Suruci; abhihitam — narrated; bhavān — unto you; me — of me; yat — because; durbhagāyāḥ — of the unfortunate; udare — in the womb; gṛhītaḥ — taken birth; stanyena — fed by the breast milk; vṛddhaḥ ca — grown up; vilajjate — becomes ashamed; yām — unto one; bhāryā — wife; iti — thus; vā — or; voḍhum — to accept; iḍaḥ-patiḥ — the King; mām — me.

Translation
Sunīti said: My dear boy, whatever has been spoken by Suruci is so, because the King, your father, does not consider me his wife or even his maidservant. He feels ashamed to accept me. Therefore it is a fact that you have taken birth from the womb of an unfortunate woman, and by being fed from her breast you have grown up.

Text 19
आतिष्ठ तत्तात विमत्सरस्त्वम्
उक्तं समात्रापि यदव्यलीकम् ।
आराधयाधोक्षजपादपद्मं
यदीच्छसेऽध्यासनमुत्तमो यथा ॥ १९ ॥
ātiṣṭha tat tāta vimatsaras tvam
uktaṁ samātrāpi yad avyalīkam
ārādhayādhokṣaja-pāda-padmaṁ
yadīcchase ’dhyāsanam uttamo yathā
Synonyms
ātiṣṭha — just execute; tat — that; tāta — my dear son; vimatsaraḥ — without being envious; tvam — unto you; uktam — said; samātrā api — by your stepmother; yat — whatever; avyalīkam — they are all factual; ārādhaya — just begin worshiping; adhokṣaja — the Transcendence; pāda-padmam — lotus feet; yadi — if; icchase — desire; adhyāsanam — to be seated along with; uttamaḥ — your stepbrother; yathā — as much as.

Translation
My dear boy, whatever has been spoken by Suruci, your stepmother, although very harsh to hear, is factual. Therefore, if you desire at all to sit on the same throne as your stepbrother, Uttama, then give up your envious attitude and immediately try to execute the instructions of your stepmother. Without further delay, you must engage yourself in worshiping the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 20
यस्याङ्‌घ्रि पद्मं परिचर्य विश्व
विभावनायात्तगुणाभिपत्ते: ।
अजोऽध्यतिष्ठत्खलु पारमेष्ठ्यं
पदं जितात्मश्वसनाभिवन्द्यम् ॥ २० ॥
yasyāṅghri-padmaṁ paricarya viśva-
vibhāvanāyātta-guṇābhipatteḥ
ajo ’dhyatiṣṭhat khalu pārameṣṭhyaṁ
padaṁ jitātma-śvasanābhivandyam
Synonyms
yasya — whose; aṅghri — leg; padmam — lotus feet; paricarya — worshiping; viśva — universe; vibhāvanāya — for creating; ātta — received; guṇa-abhipatteḥ — for acquiring the required qualifications; ajaḥ — the unborn (Lord Brahmā); adhyatiṣṭhat — became situated; khalu — undoubtedly; pārameṣṭhyam — the supreme position within the universe; padam — position; jita-ātma — one who has conquered his mind; śvasana — by controlling the life air; abhivandyam — worshipable.

Translation
Sunīti continued: The Supreme Personality of Godhead is so great that simply by worshiping His lotus feet, your great-grandfather, Lord Brahmā, acquired the necessary qualifications to create this universe. Although he is unborn and is the chief of all living creatures, he is situated in that exalted post because of the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whom even great yogīs worship by controlling the mind and regulating the life air [prāṇa].

Text 21
तथा मनुर्वो भगवान् पितामहो
यमेकमत्या पुरुदक्षिणैर्मखै: ।
इष्ट्वाभिपेदे दुरवापमन्यतो
भौमं सुखं दिव्यमथापवर्ग्यम् ॥ २१ ॥
tathā manur vo bhagavān pitāmaho
yam eka-matyā puru-dakṣiṇair makhaiḥ
iṣṭvābhipede duravāpam anyato
bhaumaṁ sukhaṁ divyam athāpavargyam
Synonyms
tathā — similarly; manuḥ — Svāyambhuva Manu; vaḥ — your; bhagavān — worshipable; pitāmahaḥ — grandfather; yam — unto whom; eka-matyā — with unflinching devotion; puru — great; dakṣiṇaiḥ — charity; makhaiḥ — by executing sacrifices; iṣṭvā — worshiping; abhipede — achieved; duravāpam — difficult to achieve; anyataḥ — by any other means; bhaumam — material; sukham — happiness; divyam — celestial; atha — thereafter; āpavargyam — liberation.

Translation
Sunīti informed her son: Your grandfather Svāyambhuva Manu executed great sacrifices with distribution of charity, and thereby, with unflinching faith and devotion, he worshiped and satisfied the Supreme Personality of Godhead. By acting in that way, he achieved the greatest success in material happiness and afterwards achieved liberation, which is impossible to obtain by worshiping the demigods.

Text 22
तमेव वत्साश्रय भृत्यवत्सलं
मुमुक्षुभिर्मृग्यपदाब्जपद्धतिम् ।
अनन्यभावे निजधर्मभाविते
मनस्यवस्थाप्य भजस्व पूरुषम् ॥ २२ ॥
tam eva vatsāśraya bhṛtya-vatsalaṁ
mumukṣubhir mṛgya-padābja-paddhatim
ananya-bhāve nija-dharma-bhāvite
manasy avasthāpya bhajasva pūruṣam
Synonyms
tam — Him; eva — also; vatsa — my dear boy; āśraya — take shelter; bhṛtya-vatsalam — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is very kind to His devotees; mumukṣubhiḥ — also by persons desiring liberation; mṛgya — to be sought; pada-abja — lotus feet; paddhatim — system; ananya-bhāve — in an unflinching situation; nija-dharma-bhāvite — being situated in one’s original constitutional position; manasi — unto the mind; avasthāpya — placing; bhajasva — go on executing devotional service; pūruṣam — the Supreme Person.

Translation
My dear boy, you also should take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is very kind to His devotees. Persons seeking liberation from the cycle of birth and death always take shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord in devotional service. Becoming purified by executing your allotted occupation, just situate the Supreme Personality of Godhead in your heart, and without deviating for a moment, engage always in His service.

Text 23
नान्यं तत: पद्मपलाशलोचनाद्
दु:खच्छिदं ते मृगयामि कञ्चन ।
यो मृग्यते हस्तगृहीतपद्मया
श्रियेतरैरङ्ग विमृग्यमाणया ॥ २३ ॥
nānyaṁ tataḥ padma-palāśa-locanād
duḥkha-cchidaṁ te mṛgayāmi kañcana
yo mṛgyate hasta-gṛhīta-padmayā
śriyetarair aṅga vimṛgyamāṇayā
Synonyms
na anyam — no others; tataḥ — therefore; padma-palāśa-locanāt — from the lotus-eyed Supreme Personality of Godhead; duḥkha-chidam — one who can mitigate others’ difficulties; te — your; mṛgayāmi — I am searching after; kañcana — anyone else; yaḥ — who; mṛgyate — searches; hasta-gṛhīta-padmayā — taking a lotus flower in the hand; śriyā — the goddess of fortune; itaraiḥ — by others; aṅga — my dear boy; vimṛgyamāṇayā — one who is worshiped.

Translation
My dear Dhruva, as far as I am concerned, I do not find anyone who can mitigate your distress but the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose eyes are like lotus petals. Many demigods such as Lord Brahmā seek the pleasure of the goddess of fortune, but the goddess of fortune herself, with a lotus flower in her hand, is always ready to render service to the Supreme Lord.

Text 24
मैत्रेय उवाच
एवं सञ्जल्पितं मातुराकर्ण्यार्थागमं वच: ।
सन्नियम्यात्मनात्मानं निश्चक्राम पितु: पुरात् ॥ २४ ॥
maitreya uvāca
evaṁ sañjalpitaṁ mātur
ākarṇyārthāgamaṁ vacaḥ
sanniyamyātmanātmānaṁ
niścakrāma pituḥ purāt
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya said; evam — thus; sañjalpitam — spoken together; mātuḥ — from the mother; ākarṇya — hearing; artha-āgamam — purposeful; vacaḥ — words; sanniyamya — controlling; ātmanā — by the mind; ātmānam — own self; niścakrāma — got out; pituḥ — of the father; purāt — from the house.

Translation
The great sage Maitreya continued: The instruction of Dhruva Mahārāja’s mother, Sunīti, was actually meant for fulfilling his desired objective. Therefore, after deliberate consideration and with intelligence and fixed determination, he left his father’s house.

Text 25
नारदस्तदुपाकर्ण्य ज्ञात्वा तस्य चिकीर्षितम् ।
स्पृष्ट्वा मूर्धन्यघघ्नेन पाणिना प्राह विस्मित: ॥ २५ ॥
nāradas tad upākarṇya
jñātvā tasya cikīrṣitam
spṛṣṭvā mūrdhany agha-ghnena
pāṇinā prāha vismitaḥ
Synonyms
nāradaḥ — the great sage Nārada; tat — that; upākarṇya — overhearing; jñātvā — and knowing; tasya — his (Dhruva Mahārāja’s); cikīrṣitam — activities; spṛṣṭvā — by touching; mūrdhani — on the head; agha-ghnena — which can drive away all sinful activities; pāṇinā — by the hand; prāha — said; vismitaḥ — being surprised.

Translation
The great sage Nārada overheard this news, and understanding all the activities of Dhruva Mahārāja, he was struck with wonder. He approached Dhruva, and touching the boy’s head with his all-virtuous hand, he spoke as follows.

Text 26
अहो तेज: क्षत्रियाणां मानभङ्गममृष्यताम् ।
बालोऽप्ययं हृदा धत्ते यत्समातुरसद्वच: ॥ २६ ॥
aho tejaḥ kṣatriyāṇāṁ
māna-bhaṅgam amṛṣyatām
bālo ’py ayaṁ hṛdā dhatte
yat samātur asad-vacaḥ
Synonyms
aho — how surprising it is; tejaḥ — power; kṣatriyāṇām — of the kṣatriyas; māna-bhaṅgam — hurting the prestige; amṛṣyatām — unable to tolerate; bālaḥ — only a child; api — although; ayam — this; hṛdā — at heart; dhatte — has taken; yat — that which; sa-mātuḥ — of the stepmother; asat — unpalatable; vacaḥ — words.

Translation
How wonderful are the powerful kṣatriyas! They cannot tolerate even a slight infringement upon their prestige. Just imagine! This boy is only a small child, yet harsh words from his stepmother proved unbearable to him.

Text 27
नारद उवाच
नाधुनाप्यवमानं ते सम्मानं वापि पुत्रक ।
लक्षयाम: कुमारस्य सक्तस्य क्रीडनादिषु ॥ २७ ॥
nārada uvāca
nādhunāpy avamānaṁ te
sammānaṁ vāpi putraka
lakṣayāmaḥ kumārasya
saktasya krīḍanādiṣu
Synonyms
nāradaḥ uvāca — the great sage Nārada said; na — not; adhunā — just now; api — although; avamānam — insult; te — unto you; sammānam — offering respects; vā — or; api — certainly; putraka — my dear boy; lakṣayāmaḥ — I can see; kumārasya — of boys like you; saktasya — being attached; krīḍana-ādiṣu — to sports and frivolities.

Translation
The great sage Nārada told Dhruva: My dear boy, you are only a little boy whose attachment is to sports and other frivolities. Why are you so affected by words insulting your honor?

Text 28
विकल्पे विद्यमानेऽपि न ह्यसन्तोषहेतव: ।
पुंसो मोहमृते भिन्ना यल्लोके निजकर्मभि: ॥ २८ ॥
vikalpe vidyamāne ’pi
na hy asantoṣa-hetavaḥ
puṁso moham ṛte bhinnā
yal loke nija-karmabhiḥ
Synonyms
vikalpe — alternation; vidyamāne api — although there is; na — not; hi — certainly; asantoṣa — dissatisfaction; hetavaḥ — causes; puṁsaḥ — of the persons; moham ṛte — without being illusioned; bhinnāḥ — separated; yat loke — within this world; nija-karmabhiḥ — by his own work.

Translation
My dear Dhruva, if you feel that your sense of honor has been insulted, you still have no cause for dissatisfaction. This kind of dissatisfaction is another feature of the illusory energy; every living entity is controlled by his previous actions, and therefore there are different varieties of life for enjoying or suffering.

Text 29
परितुष्येत्ततस्तात तावन्मात्रेण पूरुष: ।
दैवोपसादितं यावद्वीक्ष्येश्वरगतिं बुध: ॥ २९ ॥
parituṣyet tatas tāta
tāvan-mātreṇa pūruṣaḥ
daivopasāditaṁ yāvad
vīkṣyeśvara-gatiṁ budhaḥ
Synonyms
parituṣyet — one should be satisfied; tataḥ — therefore; tāta — my dear boy; tāvat — up to such; mātreṇa — quality; pūruṣaḥ — a person; daiva — destiny; upasāditam — offered by; yāvat — as; vīkṣya — seeing; īśvara-gatim — the process of the Supreme; budhaḥ — one who is intelligent.

Translation
The process of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is very wonderful. One who is intelligent should accept that process and be satisfied with whatever comes, favorable or unfavorable, by His supreme will.

Text 30
अथ मात्रोपदिष्टेन योगेनावरुरुत्ससि ।
यत्प्रसादं स वै पुंसां दुराराध्यो मतो मम ॥ ३० ॥
atha mātropadiṣṭena
yogenāvarurutsasi
yat-prasādaṁ sa vai puṁsāṁ
durārādhyo mato mama
Synonyms
atha — therefore; mātrā — by your mother; upadiṣṭena — being instructed; yogena — by mystic meditation; avarurutsasi — want to elevate yourself; yat-prasādam — whose mercy; saḥ — that; vai — certainly; puṁsām — of the living entities; durārādhyaḥ — very difficult to perform; mataḥ — opinion; mama — my.

Translation
Now you have decided to undertake the mystic process of meditation under the instruction of your mother, just to achieve the mercy of the Lord, but in my opinion such austerities are not possible for any ordinary man. It is very difficult to satisfy the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 31
मुनय: पदवीं यस्य नि:सङ्गेनोरुजन्मभि: ।
न विदुर्मृगयन्तोऽपि तीव्रयोगसमाधिना ॥ ३१ ॥
munayaḥ padavīṁ yasya
niḥsaṅgenoru-janmabhiḥ
na vidur mṛgayanto ’pi
tīvra-yoga-samādhinā
Synonyms
munayaḥ — great sages; padavīm — path; yasya — whose; niḥsaṅgena — by detachment; uru-janmabhiḥ — after many births; na — never; viduḥ — understood; mṛgayantaḥ — searching for; api — certainly; tīvra-yoga — severe austerities; samādhinā — by trance.

Translation
Nārada Muni continued: After trying this process for many, many births and remaining unattached to material contamination, placing themselves continually in trance and executing many types of austerities, many mystic yogīs were unable to find the end of the path of God realization.

Text 32
अतो निवर्ततामेष निर्बन्धस्तव निष्फल: ।
यतिष्यति भवान् काले श्रेयसां समुपस्थिते ॥ ३२ ॥
ato nivartatām eṣa
nirbandhas tava niṣphalaḥ
yatiṣyati bhavān kāle
śreyasāṁ samupasthite
Synonyms
ataḥ — hereafter; nivartatām — just stop yourself; eṣaḥ — this; nirbandhaḥ — determination; tava — your; niṣphalaḥ — without any result; yatiṣyati — in the future you should try; bhavān — yourself; kāle — in due course of time; śreyasām — opportunities; samupasthite — being present.

Translation
For this reason, my dear boy, you should not endeavor for this; it will not be successful. It is better that you go home. When you are grown up, by the mercy of the Lord you will get a chance for these mystic performances. At that time you may execute this function.

Text 33
यस्य यद्दैवविहितं स तेन सुखदु:खयो: ।
आत्मानं तोषयन्देही तमस: पारमृच्छति ॥ ३३ ॥
yasya yad daiva-vihitaṁ
sa tena sukha-duḥkhayoḥ
ātmānaṁ toṣayan dehī
tamasaḥ pāram ṛcchati
Synonyms
yasya — anyone; yat — that which; daiva — by destiny; vihitam — destined; saḥ — such a person; tena — by that; sukha-duḥkhayoḥ — happiness or distress; ātmānam — one’s self; toṣayan — being satisfied; dehī — an embodied soul; tamasaḥ — of the darkness; pāram — to the other side; ṛcchati — crosses.

Translation
One should try to keep himself satisfied in any condition of life — whether distress or happiness — which is offered by the supreme will. A person who endures in this way is able to cross over the darkness of nescience very easily.

Text 34
गुणाधिकान्मुदं लिप्सेदनुक्रोशं गुणाधमात् ।
मैत्रीं समानादन्विच्छेन्न तापैरभिभूयते ॥ ३४ ॥
guṇādhikān mudaṁ lipsed
anukrośaṁ guṇādhamāt
maitrīṁ samānād anvicchen
na tāpair abhibhūyate
Synonyms
guṇa-adhikāt — one who is more qualified; mudam — pleasure; lipset — one should feel; anukrośam — compassion; guṇa-adhamāt — one who is less qualified; maitrīm — friendship; samānāt — with an equal; anvicchet — one should desire; na — not; tāpaiḥ — by tribulation; abhibhūyate — becomes affected.

Translation
Every man should act like this: when he meets a person more qualified than himself, he should be very pleased; when he meets someone less qualified than himself, he should be compassionate toward him; and when he meets someone equal to himself, he should make friendship with him. In this way one is never affected by the threefold miseries of this material world.

Text 35
ध्रुव उवाच
सोऽयं शमो भगवता सुखदु:खहतात्मनाम् ।
दर्शित: कृपया पुंसां दुर्दर्शोऽस्मद्विधैस्तु य: ॥ ३५ ॥
dhruva uvāca
so ’yaṁ śamo bhagavatā
sukha-duḥkha-hatātmanām
darśitaḥ kṛpayā puṁsāṁ
durdarśo ’smad-vidhais tu yaḥ
Synonyms
dhruvaḥ uvāca — Dhruva Mahārāja said; saḥ — that; ayam — this; śamaḥ — equilibrium of mind; bhagavatā — by Your Lordship; sukha-duḥkha — happiness and miseries; hata-ātmanām — those who are affected; darśitaḥ — shown; kṛpayā — by mercy; puṁsām — of the people; durdarśaḥ — very difficult to perceive; asmat-vidhaiḥ — by persons like us; tu — but; yaḥ — whatever you have said.

Translation
Dhruva Mahārāja said: My dear Lord Nāradajī, for a person whose heart is disturbed by the material conditions of happiness and distress, whatever you have so kindly explained for attainment of peace of mind is certainly a very good instruction. But as far as I am concerned, I am covered by ignorance, and this kind of philosophy does not touch my heart.

Text 36
अथापि मेऽविनीतस्य क्षात्‍त्रं घोरमुपेयुष: ।
सुरुच्या दुर्वचोबाणैर्न भिन्ने श्रयते हृदि ॥ ३६ ॥
athāpi me ’vinītasya
kṣāttraṁ ghoram upeyuṣaḥ
surucyā durvaco-bāṇair
na bhinne śrayate hṛdi
Synonyms
atha api — therefore; me — my; avinītasya — not very submissive; kṣāttram — the spirit of a kṣatriya; ghoram — intolerant; upeyuṣaḥ — achieved; surucyāḥ — of Queen Suruci; durvacaḥ — harsh words; bāṇaiḥ — by the arrows; na — not; bhinne — being pierced; śrayate — remain in; hṛdi — the heart.

Translation
My dear lord, I am very impudent for not accepting your instructions, but this is not my fault. It is due to my having been born in a kṣatriya family. My stepmother, Suruci, has pierced my heart with her harsh words. Therefore your valuable instruction does not stand in my heart.

Text 37
पदं त्रिभुवनोत्कृष्टं जिगीषो: साधु वर्त्म मे ।
ब्रूह्यस्मत्पितृभिर्ब्रह्मन्नन्यैरप्यनधिष्ठितम् ॥ ३७ ॥
padaṁ tri-bhuvanotkṛṣṭaṁ
jigīṣoḥ sādhu vartma me
brūhy asmat-pitṛbhir brahmann
anyair apy anadhiṣṭhitam
Synonyms
padam — position; tri-bhuvana — the three worlds; utkṛṣṭam — the best; jigīṣoḥ — desirous; sādhu — honest; vartma — way; me — unto me; brūhi — please tell; asmat — our; pitṛbhiḥ — by the forefathers (the father and grandfather); brahman — O great brāhmaṇa; anyaiḥ — by others; api — even; anadhiṣṭhitam — not acquired.

Translation
O learned brāhmaṇa, I want to occupy a position more exalted than any yet achieved within the three worlds by anyone, even by my father and grandfather. If you will oblige, kindly advise me of an honest path to follow by which I can achieve the goal of my life.

Text 38
नूनं भवान्भगवतो योऽङ्गज: परमेष्ठिन: ।
वितुदन्नटते वीणां हिताय जगतोऽर्कवत् ॥ ३८ ॥
nūnaṁ bhavān bhagavato
yo ’ṅgajaḥ parameṣṭhinaḥ
vitudann aṭate vīṇāṁ
hitāya jagato ’rkavat
Synonyms
nūnam — certainly; bhavān — Your Honor; bhagavataḥ — of the Lord; yaḥ — that which; aṅga-jaḥ — born from the body; parameṣṭhinaḥ — Lord Brahmā; vitudan — by playing on; aṭate — travel all over; vīṇām — a musical instrument; hitāya — for the welfare; jagataḥ — of the world; arka-vat — like the sun.

Translation
My dear lord, you are a worthy son of Lord Brahmā, and you travel, playing on your musical instrument, the vīṇā, for the welfare of the entire universe. You are like the sun, which rotates in the universe for the benefit of all living beings.

Text 39
मैत्रेय उवाच
इत्युदाहृतमाकर्ण्य भगवान्नारदस्तदा ।
प्रीत: प्रत्याह तं बालं सद्वाक्यमनुकम्पया ॥ ३९ ॥
maitreya uvāca
ity udāhṛtam ākarṇya
bhagavān nāradas tadā
prītaḥ pratyāha taṁ bālaṁ
sad-vākyam anukampayā
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the sage Maitreya continued; iti — thus; udāhṛtam — being spoken; ākarṇya — hearing; bhagavān nāradaḥ — the great personality Nārada; tadā — thereupon; prītaḥ — being pleased; pratyāha — replied; tam — him; bālam — the boy; sat-vākyam — good advice; anukampayā — being compassionate.

Translation
The sage Maitreya continued: The great personality Nārada Muni, upon hearing the words of Dhruva Mahārāja, became very compassionate toward him, and in order to show him his causeless mercy, he gave him the following expert advice.

Text 40
नारद उवाच
जनन्याभिहित: पन्था: स वै नि:श्रेयसस्य ते ।
भगवान् वासुदेवस्तं भज तं प्रवणात्मना ॥ ४० ॥
nārada uvāca
jananyābhihitaḥ panthāḥ
sa vai niḥśreyasasya te
bhagavān vāsudevas taṁ
bhaja taṁ pravaṇātmanā
Synonyms
nāradaḥ uvāca — the great sage Nārada said; jananyā — by your mother; abhihitaḥ — stated; panthāḥ — the path; saḥ — that; vai — certainly; niḥśreyasasya — the ultimate goal of life; te — for you; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vāsudevaḥ — Kṛṣṇa; tam — unto Him; bhaja — render your service; tam — by Him; pravaṇa-ātmanā — fully absorbing your mind.

Translation
The great sage Nārada told Dhruva Mahārāja: The instruction given by your mother, Sunīti, to follow the path of devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is just suitable for you. You should therefore completely absorb yourself in the devotional service of the Lord.

Text 41
धर्मार्थकाममोक्षाख्यं य इच्छेच्छ्रेय आत्मन: ।
एकं ह्येव हरेस्तत्र कारणं पादसेवनम् ॥ ४१ ॥
dharmārtha-kāma-mokṣākhyaṁ
ya icchec chreya ātmanaḥ
ekaṁ hy eva hares tatra
kāraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam
Synonyms
dharma-artha-kāma-mokṣa — the four principles religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and liberation; ākhyam — by the name; yaḥ — who; icchet — may desire; śreyaḥ — the goal of life; ātmanaḥ — of the self; ekam hi eva — only the one; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tatra — in that; kāraṇam — the cause; pāda-sevanam — worshiping the lotus feet.

Translation
Any person who desires the fruits of the four principles religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and, at the end, liberation, should engage himself in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, for worship of His lotus feet yields the fulfillment of all of these.

Text 42
तत्तात गच्छ भद्रं ते यमुनायास्तटं शुचि ।
पुण्यं मधुवनं यत्र सान्निध्यं नित्यदा हरे: ॥ ४२ ॥
tat tāta gaccha bhadraṁ te
yamunāyās taṭaṁ śuci
puṇyaṁ madhuvanaṁ yatra
sānnidhyaṁ nityadā hareḥ
Synonyms
tat — that; tāta — my dear son; gaccha — go; bhadram — good fortune; te — for you; yamunāyāḥ — of the Yamunā; taṭam — bank; śuci — being purified; puṇyam — the holy; madhu-vanam — of the name Madhuvana; yatra — where; sānnidhyam — being nearer; nityadā — always; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
My dear boy, I therefore wish all good fortune for you. You should go to the bank of the Yamunā, where there is a virtuous forest named Madhuvana, and there be purified. Just by going there, one draws nearer to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who always lives there.

Text 43
स्‍नात्वानुसवनं तस्मिन् कालिन्द्या: सलिले शिवे ।
कृत्वोचितानि निवसन्नात्मन: कल्पितासन: ॥ ४३ ॥
snātvānusavanaṁ tasmin
kālindyāḥ salile śive
kṛtvocitāni nivasann
ātmanaḥ kalpitāsanaḥ
Synonyms
snātvā — after taking bath; anusavanam — three times; tasmin — in that; kālindyāḥ — in the river Kālindī (the Yamunā); salile — in the water; śive — which is very auspicious; kṛtvā — performing; ucitāni — suitable; nivasan — sitting; ātmanaḥ — of the self; kalpita-āsanaḥ — having prepared a sitting place.

Translation
Nārada Muni instructed: My dear boy, in the waters of the Yamunā River, which is known as Kālindī, you should take three baths daily because the water is very auspicious, sacred and clear. After bathing, you should perform the necessary regulative principles for aṣṭāṅga-yoga and then sit down on your āsana [sitting place] in a calm and quiet position.

Text 44
प्राणायामेन त्रिवृता प्राणेन्द्रियमनोमलम् ।
शनैर्व्युदस्याभिध्यायेन्मनसा गुरुणा गुरुम् ॥ ४४ ॥
prāṇāyāmena tri-vṛtā
prāṇendriya-mano-malam
śanair vyudasyābhidhyāyen
manasā guruṇā gurum
Synonyms
prāṇāyāmena — by breathing exercises; tri-vṛtā — by the three recommended ways; prāṇa-indriya — the life air and the senses; manaḥ — mind; malam — impurity; śanaiḥ — gradually; vyudasya — giving up; abhidhyāyet — meditate upon; manasā — by the mind; guruṇā — undisturbed; gurum — the supreme spiritual master, Kṛṣṇa.

Translation
After sitting on your seat, practice the three kinds of breathing exercises, and thus gradually control the life air, the mind and the senses. Completely free yourself from all material contamination, and with great patience begin to meditate on the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 45
प्रसादाभिमुखं शश्वत्प्रसन्नवदनेक्षणम् ।
सुनासं सुभ्रुवं चारुकपोलं सुरसुन्दरम् ॥ ४५ ॥
prasādābhimukhaṁ śaśvat
prasanna-vadanekṣaṇam
sunāsaṁ subhruvaṁ cāru-
kapolaṁ sura-sundaram
Synonyms
prasāda-abhimukham — always prepared to offer causeless mercy; śaśvat — always; prasanna — pleasing; vadana — mouth; īkṣaṇam — vision; su-nāsam — very nicely constructed nose; su-bhruvam — very nicely decorated eyebrows; cāru — beautiful; kapolam — forehead; sura — the demigods; sundaram — good looking.

Translation
[The form of the Lord is described herein.] The Lord’s face is perpetually very beautiful and pleasing in attitude. To the devotees who see Him, He appears never to be displeased, and He is always prepared to award benedictions to them. His eyes, His nicely decorated eyebrows, His raised nose and His broad forehead are all very beautiful. He is more beautiful than all the demigods.

Text 46
तरुणं रमणीयाङ्गमरुणोष्ठेक्षणाधरम् ।
प्रणताश्रयणं नृम्णं शरण्यं करुणार्णवम् ॥ ४६ ॥
taruṇaṁ ramaṇīyāṅgam
aruṇoṣṭhekṣaṇādharam
praṇatāśrayaṇaṁ nṛmṇaṁ
śaraṇyaṁ karuṇārṇavam
Synonyms
taruṇam — youthful; ramaṇīya — attractive; aṅgam — all parts of the body; aruṇa-oṣṭha — lips pinkish like the rising sun; īkṣaṇa-adharam — eyes of the same nature; praṇata — one who is surrendered; āśrayaṇam — shelter of the surrendered; nṛmṇam — transcendentally pleasing in all respects; śaraṇyam — the person unto whom it is just worthy to surrender; karuṇā — merciful like; arṇavam — the ocean.

Translation
Nārada Muni continued: The Lord’s form is always youthful. Every limb and every part of His body is properly formed, free from defect. His eyes and lips are pinkish like the rising sun. He is always prepared to give shelter to the surrendered soul, and anyone so fortunate as to look upon Him feels all satisfaction. The Lord is always worthy to be the master of the surrendered soul, for He is the ocean of mercy.

Text 47
श्रीवत्साङ्कं घनश्यामं पुरुषं वनमालिनम् ।
शङ्खचक्रगदापद्मैरभिव्यक्तचतुर्भुजम् ॥ ४७ ॥
śrīvatsāṅkaṁ ghana-śyāmaṁ
puruṣaṁ vana-mālinam
śaṅkha-cakra-gadā-padmair
abhivyakta-caturbhujam
Synonyms
śrīvatsa-aṅkam — the mark of Śrīvatsa on the chest of the Lord; ghana-śyāmam — deeply bluish; puruṣam — the Supreme Person; vana-mālinam — with a garland of flowers; śaṅkha — conchshell; cakra — wheel; gadā — club; padmaiḥ — lotus flower; abhivyakta — manifested; catuḥ-bhujam — four-handed.

Translation
The Lord is further described as having the mark of Śrīvatsa, or the sitting place of the goddess of fortune, and His bodily hue is deep bluish. The Lord is a person, He wears a garland of flowers, and He is eternally manifest with four hands, which hold [beginning from the lower left hand] a conchshell, wheel, club and lotus flower.

Text 48
किरीटिनं कुण्डलिनं केयूरवलयान्वितम् ।
कौस्तुभाभरणग्रीवं पीतकौशेयवाससम् ॥ ४८ ॥
kirīṭinaṁ kuṇḍalinaṁ
keyūra-valayānvitam
kaustubhābharaṇa-grīvaṁ
pīta-kauśeya-vāsasam
Synonyms
kirīṭinam — the Lord is decorated with a jeweled helmet; kuṇḍalinam — with pearl earrings; keyūra — jeweled necklace; valaya-anvitam — with jeweled bracelets; kaustubha-ābharaṇa-grīvam — His neck is decorated by the Kaustubha jewel; pīta-kauśeya-vāsasam — and He is dressed with yellow silk garments.

Translation
The entire body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, is decorated. He wears a valuable jeweled helmet, necklaces and bracelets, His neck is adorned with the Kaustubha jewel, and He is dressed in yellow silk garments.

Text 49
काञ्चीकलापपर्यस्तं लसत्काञ्चननूपुरम् ।
दर्शनीयतमं शान्तं मनोनयनवर्धनम् ॥ ४९ ॥
kāñcī-kalāpa-paryastaṁ
lasat-kāñcana-nūpuram
darśanīyatamaṁ śāntaṁ
mano-nayana-vardhanam
Synonyms
kāñcī-kalāpa — small bells; paryastam — surrounding the waist; lasat-kāñcana-nūpuram — His legs are decorated with golden ankle bells; darśanīya-tamam — the superexcellent feature; śāntam — peaceful, calm and quiet; manaḥ-nayana-vardhanam — very pleasing to the eyes and the mind.

Translation
The Lord is decorated with small golden bells around His waist, and His lotus feet are decorated with golden ankle bells. All His bodily features are very attractive and pleasing to the eyes. He is always peaceful, calm and quiet and very pleasing to the eyes and the mind.

Text 50
पद्‌भ्यां नखमणिश्रेण्या विलसद्‌भ्यां समर्चताम् ।
हृत्पद्मकर्णिकाधिष्ण्यमाक्रम्यात्मन्यवस्थितम् ॥ ५० ॥
padbhyāṁ nakha-maṇi-śreṇyā
vilasadbhyāṁ samarcatām
hṛt-padma-karṇikā-dhiṣṇyam
ākramyātmany avasthitam
Synonyms
padbhyām — by His lotus feet; nakha-maṇi-śreṇyā — by the light of the jewellike nails on the toes; vilasadbhyām — glittering lotus feet; samarcatām — persons who are engaged in worshiping them; hṛt-padma-karṇikā — the whorl of the lotus flower of the heart; dhiṣṇyam — situated; ākramya — seizing; ātmani — in the heart; avasthitam — situated.

Translation
Real yogīs meditate upon the transcendental form of the Lord as He stands on the whorl of the lotus of their hearts, the jewellike nails of His lotus feet glittering.

Text 51
स्मयमानमभिध्यायेत्सानुरागावलोकनम् ।
नियतेनैकभूतेन मनसा वरदर्षभम् ॥ ५१ ॥
smayamānam abhidhyāyet
sānurāgāvalokanam
niyatenaika-bhūtena
manasā varadarṣabham
Synonyms
smayamānam — the Lord’s smiling; abhidhyāyet — one should meditate upon Him; sa-anurāga-avalokanam — one who is looking toward the devotees with great affection; niyatena — in this way, regularly; eka-bhūtena — with great attention; manasā — with the mind; vara-da-ṛṣabham — one should meditate upon the greatest bestower of benedictions.

Translation
The Lord is always smiling, and the devotee should constantly see the Lord in this form, as He looks very mercifully toward the devotee. In this way the meditator should look toward the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the bestower of all benedictions.

Text 52
एवं भगवतो रूपं सुभद्रं ध्यायतो मन: ।
निर्वृत्या परया तूर्णं सम्पन्नं न निवर्तते ॥ ५२ ॥
evaṁ bhagavato rūpaṁ
subhadraṁ dhyāyato manaḥ
nirvṛtyā parayā tūrṇaṁ
sampannaṁ na nivartate
Synonyms
evam — thus; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rūpam — form; su-bhadram — very auspicious; dhyāyataḥ — meditating; manaḥ — the mind; nirvṛtyā — being freed from all material contamination; parayā — transcendental; tūrṇam — very soon; sampannam — being enriched; na — never; nivartate — come down.

Translation
One who meditates in this way, concentrating his mind upon the always auspicious form of the Lord, is very soon freed from all material contamination, and he does not come down from meditation upon the Lord.

Text 53
जपश्च परमो गुह्य: श्रूयतां मे नृपात्मज ।
यं सप्तरात्रं प्रपठन्पुमान् पश्यति खेचरान् ॥ ५३ ॥
japaś ca paramo guhyaḥ
śrūyatāṁ me nṛpātmaja
yaṁ sapta-rātraṁ prapaṭhan
pumān paśyati khecarān
Synonyms
japaḥ ca — the chanting mantra in this connection; paramaḥ — very, very; guhyaḥ — confidential; śrūyatām — please hear; me — from me; nṛpa-ātmaja — O son of the King; yam — which; sapta-rātram — seven nights; prapaṭhan — chanting; pumān — a person; paśyati — can see; khe-carān — human beings who travel in space.

Translation
O son of the King, now I shall speak unto you the mantra which is to be chanted with this process of meditation. One who carefully chants this mantra for seven nights can see the perfect human beings flying in the sky.

Text 54
ॐ नमो भगवते वासुदेवाय ।
मन्त्रेणानेन देवस्य कुर्याद् द्रव्यमयीं बुध: ।
सपर्यां विविधैर्द्रव्यैर्देशकालविभागवित् ॥ ५४ ॥
oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya
mantreṇānena devasya
kuryād dravyamayīṁ budhaḥ
saparyāṁ vividhair dravyair
deśa-kāla-vibhāgavit
Synonyms
om — O my Lord; namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances; bhagavate — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vāsudevāya — unto the Supreme Lord, Vāsudeva; mantreṇa — by this hymn, or mantra; anena — this; devasya — of the Lord; kuryāt — one should do; dravyamayīm — physical; budhaḥ — one who is learned; saparyām — worship by the prescribed method; vividhaiḥ — with varieties; dravyaiḥ — paraphernalia; deśa — according to country; kāla — time; vibhāga-vit — one who knows the divisions.

Translation
Oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya. This is the twelve-syllable mantra for worshiping Lord Kṛṣṇa. One should install the physical forms of the Lord, and with the chanting of the mantra one should offer flowers and fruits and other varieties of foodstuffs exactly according to the rules and regulations prescribed by authorities. But this should be done in consideration of place, time, and attendant conveniences and inconveniences.

Text 55
सलिलै: शुचिभिर्माल्यैर्वन्यैर्मूलफलादिभि: ।
शस्ताङ्कुरांशुकैश्चार्चेत्तुलस्या प्रियया प्रभुम् ॥ ५५ ॥
salilaiḥ śucibhir mālyair
vanyair mūla-phalādibhiḥ
śastāṅkurāṁśukaiś cārcet
tulasyā priyayā prabhum
Synonyms
salilaiḥ — by use of water; śucibhiḥ — being purified; mālyaiḥ — by garlands; vanyaiḥ — of forest flowers; mūla — roots; phala-ādibhiḥ — by different kinds of vegetables and fruits; śasta — the newly grown grass; aṅkura — buds; aṁśukaiḥ — by the skin of trees, such as the bhūrja; ca — and; arcet — should worship; tulasyā — by the tulasī leaves; priyayā — which are very dear to the Lord; prabhum — the Lord.

Translation
One should worship the Lord by offering pure water, pure flower garlands, fruits, flowers and vegetables which are available in the forest, or by collecting newly grown grasses, small buds of flowers or even the skins of trees, and if possible, by offering tulasī leaves, which are very dear to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 56
लब्ध्वा द्रव्यमयीमर्चां क्षित्यम्ब्वादिषु वार्चयेत् ।
आभृतात्मा मुनि: शान्तो यतवाङ्‌मितवन्यभुक् ॥ ५६ ॥
labdhvā dravyamayīm arcāṁ
kṣity-ambv-ādiṣu vārcayet
ābhṛtātmā muniḥ śānto
yata-vāṅ mita-vanya-bhuk
Synonyms
labdhvā — by getting; dravya-mayīm — made of physical elements; arcām — worshipable Deity; kṣiti — earth; ambu — water; ādiṣu — beginning with; vā — or; arcayet — worship; ābhṛta-ātmā — one who is fully self-controlled; muniḥ — a great personality; śāntaḥ — peacefully; yata-vāk — controlling the force of talking; mita — frugal; vanya-bhuk — eating whatever is available in the forest.

Translation
It is possible to worship a form of the Lord made of physical elements such as earth, water, pulp, wood and metal. In the forest one can make a form with no more than earth and water and worship Him according to the above principles. A devotee who has full control over his self should be very sober and peaceful and must be satisfied simply with eating whatever fruits and vegetables are available in the forest.

Text 57
स्वेच्छावतारचरितैरचिन्त्यनिजमायया ।
करिष्यत्युत्तमश्लोकस्तद् ध्यायेद्‌धृदयङ्गमम् ॥ ५७ ॥
svecchāvatāra-caritair
acintya-nija-māyayā
kariṣyaty uttamaślokas
tad dhyāyed dhṛdayaṅ-gamam
Synonyms
sva-icchā — by His own supreme will; avatāra — incarnation; caritaiḥ — activities; acintya — inconceivable; nija-māyayā — by His own potency; kariṣyati — performs; uttama-ślokaḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat — that; dhyāyet — one should meditate; hṛdayam-gamam — very attractive.

Translation
My dear Dhruva, besides worshiping the Deity and chanting the mantra three times a day, you should meditate upon the transcendental activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His different incarnations, as exhibited by His supreme will and personal potencies.

Text 58
परिचर्या भगवतो यावत्य: पूर्वसेविता: ।
ता मन्त्रहृदयेनैव प्रयुञ्‍ज्यान्मन्त्रमूर्तये ॥ ५८ ॥
paricaryā bhagavato
yāvatyaḥ pūrva-sevitāḥ
tā mantra-hṛdayenaiva
prayuñjyān mantra-mūrtaye
Synonyms
paricaryāḥ — service; bhagavataḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; yāvatyaḥ — as they are prescribed (as above mentioned); pūrva-sevitāḥ — recommended or done by previous ācāryas; tāḥ — that; mantra — hymns; hṛdayena — within the heart; eva — certainly; prayuñjyāt — one should worship; mantra-mūrtaye — who is nondifferent from the mantra.

Translation
One should follow in the footsteps of previous devotees regarding how to worship the Supreme Lord with the prescribed paraphernalia, or one should offer worship within the heart by reciting the mantra to the Personality of Godhead, who is nondifferent from the mantra.

Texts 59-60
एवं कायेन मनसा वचसा च मनोगतम् ।
परिचर्यमाणो भगवान् भक्तिमत्परिचर्यया ॥ ५९ ॥
पुंसाममायिनां सम्यग्भजतां भाववर्धन: ।
श्रेयो दिशत्यभिमतं यद्धर्मादिषु देहिनाम् ॥ ६० ॥
evaṁ kāyena manasā
vacasā ca mano-gatam
paricaryamāṇo bhagavān
bhaktimat-paricaryayā
puṁsām amāyināṁ samyag
bhajatāṁ bhāva-vardhanaḥ
śreyo diśaty abhimataṁ
yad dharmādiṣu dehinām
Synonyms
evam — thus; kāyena — by the body; manasā — by the mind; vacasā — by the words; ca — also; manaḥ-gatam — simply by thinking of the Lord; paricaryamāṇaḥ — engaged in the devotional service; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhakti-mat — according to the regulative principles of devotional service; paricaryayā — by worshiping the Lord; puṁsām — of the devotee; amāyinām — who is sincere and serious; samyak — perfectly; bhajatām — engaged in devotional service; bhāva-vardhanaḥ — the Lord, who increases the ecstasy of the devotee; śreyaḥ — ultimate goal; diśati — bestows; abhimatam — desire; yat — as they are; dharma-ādiṣu — regarding spiritual life and economic development; dehinām — of the conditioned souls.

Translation
Anyone who thus engages in the devotional service of the Lord, seriously and sincerely, with his mind, words and body, and who is fixed in the activities of the prescribed devotional methods, is blessed by the Lord according to his desire. If a devotee desires material religiosity, economic development, sense gratification or liberation from the material world, he is awarded these results.

Text 61
विरक्तश्चेन्द्रियरतौ भक्तियोगेन भूयसा ।
तं निरन्तरभावेन भजेताद्धा विमुक्तये ॥ ६१ ॥
viraktaś cendriya-ratau
bhakti-yogena bhūyasā
taṁ nirantara-bhāvena
bhajetāddhā vimuktaye
Synonyms
viraktaḥ ca — completely renounced order of life; indriya-ratau — in the matter of sense gratification; bhakti-yogena — by the process of devotional service; bhūyasā — with great seriousness; tam — unto Him (the Supreme); nirantara — constantly, twenty-four hours daily; bhāvena — in the topmost stage of ecstasy; bhajeta — must worship; addhā — directly; vimuktaye — for liberation.

Translation
If one is very serious about liberation, he must stick to the process of transcendental loving service, engaging twenty-four hours a day in the highest stage of ecstasy, and he must certainly be aloof from all activities of sense gratification.

Text 62
इत्युक्तस्तं परिक्रम्य प्रणम्य च नृपार्भक: ।
ययौ मधुवनं पुण्यं हरेश्चरणचर्चितम् ॥ ६२ ॥
ity uktas taṁ parikramya
praṇamya ca nṛpārbhakaḥ
yayau madhuvanaṁ puṇyaṁ
hareś caraṇa-carcitam
Synonyms
iti — thus; uktaḥ — being spoken; tam — him (Nārada Muni); parikramya — by circumambulating; praṇamya — by offering obeisances; ca — also; nṛpa-arbhakaḥ — the boy of the King; yayau — went to; madhuvanam — a forest in Vṛndāvana known as Madhuvana; puṇyam — which is auspicious and pious; hareḥ — of the Lord; caraṇa-carcitam — imprinted by the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Translation
When Dhruva Mahārāja, the son of the King, was thus advised by the great sage Nārada, he circumambulated Nārada, his spiritual master, and offered him respectful obeisances. Then he started for Madhuvana, which is always imprinted with the lotus footprints of Lord Kṛṣṇa and which is therefore especially auspicious.

Text 63
तपोवनं गते तस्मिन्प्रविष्टोऽन्त:पुरं मुनि: ।
अर्हितार्हणको राज्ञा सुखासीन उवाच तम् ॥ ६३ ॥
tapo-vanaṁ gate tasmin
praviṣṭo ’ntaḥ-puraṁ muniḥ
arhitārhaṇako rājñā
sukhāsīna uvāca tam
Synonyms
tapaḥ-vanam — the forest path where Dhruva Mahārāja executed his austerity; gate — having thus approached; tasmin — there; praviṣṭaḥ — having entered; antaḥ-puram — within the private house; muniḥ — the great sage Nārada; arhita — being worshiped; arhaṇakaḥ — by respectful behavior; rājñā — by the King; sukha-āsīnaḥ — when he comfortably sat on his seat; uvāca — said; tam — unto him (the King).

Translation
After Dhruva entered Madhuvana Forest to execute devotional service, the great sage Nārada thought it wise to go to the King to see how he was faring within the palace. When Nārada Muni approached, the King received him properly, offering him due obeisances. After being seated comfortably, Nārada began to speak.

Text 64
नारद उवाच
राजन् किं ध्यायसे दीर्घं मुखेन परिशुष्यता ।
किं वा न रिष्यते कामो धर्मो वार्थेन संयुत: ॥ ६४ ॥
nārada uvāca
rājan kiṁ dhyāyase dīrghaṁ
mukhena pariśuṣyatā
kiṁ vā na riṣyate kāmo
dharmo vārthena saṁyutaḥ
Synonyms
nāradaḥ uvāca — the great sage Nārada Muni said; rājan — my dear King; kim — what; dhyāyase — thinking of; dīrgham — very deeply; mukhena — with your face; pariśuṣyatā — as if drying up; kim vā — whether; na — not; riṣyate — been lost; kāmaḥ — sense gratification; dharmaḥ — religious rituals; vā — or; arthena — with economic development; saṁyutaḥ — along with.

Translation
The great sage Nārada inquired: My dear King, your face appears to be withering up, and you look like you have been thinking of something for a very long time. Why is that? Have you been hampered in following your path of religious rites, economic development and sense gratification?

Text 65
राजोवाच
सुतो मे बालको ब्रह्मन् स्त्रैणेनाकरुणात्मना ।
निर्वासित: पञ्चवर्ष: सह मात्रा महान्कवि: ॥ ६५ ॥
rājovāca
suto me bālako brahman
straiṇenākaruṇātmanā
nirvāsitaḥ pañca-varṣaḥ
saha mātrā mahān kaviḥ
Synonyms
rājā uvāca — the King replied; sutaḥ — son; me — my; bālakaḥ — tender boy; brahman — my dear brāhmaṇa; straiṇena — one who is too addicted to his wife; akaruṇā-ātmanā — one who is very hard of heart and without mercy; nirvāsitaḥ — is banished; pañca-varṣaḥ — although the boy is five years old; saha — with; mātrā — mother; mahān — great personality; kaviḥ — devotee.

Translation
The King replied: O best of the brāhmaṇas, I am very much addicted to my wife, and I am so fallen that I have abandoned all merciful behavior, even to my son, who is only five years old. I have banished him and his mother, even though he is a great soul and a great devotee.

Text 66
अप्यनाथं वने ब्रह्मन्मा स्मादन्त्यर्भकं वृका: ।
श्रान्तं शयानं क्षुधितं परिम्‍लानमुखाम्बुजम् ॥ ६६ ॥
apy anāthaṁ vane brahman
mā smādanty arbhakaṁ vṛkāḥ
śrāntaṁ śayānaṁ kṣudhitaṁ
parimlāna-mukhāmbujam
Synonyms
api — certainly; anātham — without being protected by anyone; vane — in the forest; brahman — my dear brāhmaṇa; mā — whether or not; sma — did not; adanti — devour; arbhakam — the helpless boy; vṛkāḥ — wolves; śrāntam — being fatigued; śayānam — lying down; kṣudhitam — being hungry; parimlāna — emaciated; mukha-ambujam — his face, which is just like a lotus flower.

Translation
My dear brāhmaṇa, the face of my son was just like a lotus flower. I am thinking of his precarious condition. He is unprotected, and he might be very hungry. He might have lain down somewhere in the forest, and the wolves might have attacked him to eat his body.

Text 67
अहो मे बत दौरात्म्यं स्त्रीजितस्योपधारय ।
योऽङ्कं प्रेम्णारुरुक्षन्तं नाभ्यनन्दमसत्तम: ॥ ६७ ॥
aho me bata daurātmyaṁ
strī-jitasyopadhāraya
yo ’ṅkaṁ premṇārurukṣantaṁ
nābhyanandam asattamaḥ
Synonyms
aho — alas; me — my; bata — certainly; daurātmyam — cruelty; strī-jitasya — conquered by a woman; upadhāraya — just think of me in this regard; yaḥ — who; aṅkam — lap; premṇā — out of love; ārurukṣantam — trying to rise onto it; na — not; abhyanandam — received properly; asat-tamaḥ — the most cruel.

Translation
Alas, just see how I was conquered by my wife! Just imagine my cruelty! Out of love and affection the boy was trying to get up on my lap, but I did not receive him, nor did I even pat him for a moment. Just imagine how hardhearted I am.

Text 68
नारद उवाच
मा मा शुच: स्वतनयं देवगुप्तं विशाम्पते ।
तत्प्रभावमविज्ञाय प्रावृङ्क्ते यद्यशो जगत् ॥ ६८ ॥
nārada uvāca
mā mā śucaḥ sva-tanayaṁ
deva-guptaṁ viśāmpate
tat-prabhāvam avijñāya
prāvṛṅkte yad-yaśo jagat
Synonyms
nāradaḥ uvāca — the great sage Nārada said; mā — do not; mā — do not; śucaḥ — be aggrieved; sva-tanayam — of your own son; deva-guptam — he is well protected by the Lord; viśām-pate — O master of human society; tat — his; prabhāvam — influence; avijñāya — without knowing; prāvṛṅkte — widespread; yat — whose; yaśaḥ — reputation; jagat — all over the world.

Translation
The great sage Nārada replied: My dear King, please do not be aggrieved about your son. He is well protected by the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although you have no actual information of his influence, his reputation is already spread all over the world.

Text 69
सुदुष्करं कर्म कृत्वा लोकपालैरपि प्रभु: ।
ऐष्यत्यचिरतो राजन् यशो विपुलयंस्तव ॥ ६९ ॥
suduṣkaraṁ karma kṛtvā
loka-pālair api prabhuḥ
aiṣyaty acirato rājan
yaśo vipulayaṁs tava
Synonyms
su-duṣkaram — impossible to perform; karma — work; kṛtvā — after performing; loka-pālaiḥ — by great personalities; api — even; prabhuḥ — quite competent; aiṣyati — will come back; acirataḥ — without delay; rājan — my dear King; yaśaḥ — reputation; vipulayan — causing to become great; tava — your.

Translation
My dear King, your son is very competent. He will perform activities which would be impossible even for great kings and sages. Very soon he will complete his task and come back home. You should know that he will also spread your reputation all over the world.

Text 70
मैत्रेय उवाच
इति देवर्षिणा प्रोक्तं विश्रुत्य जगतीपति: ।
राजलक्ष्मीमनाद‍ृत्य पुत्रमेवान्वचिन्तयत् ॥ ७० ॥
maitreya uvāca
iti devarṣiṇā proktaṁ
viśrutya jagatī-patiḥ
rāja-lakṣmīm anādṛtya
putram evānvacintayat
Synonyms
maitreyaḥ uvāca — the great sage Maitreya said; iti — thus; devarṣiṇā — by the great sage Nārada; proktam — spoken; viśrutya — hearing; jagatī-patiḥ — the King; rāja-lakṣmīm — the opulence of his big kingdom; anādṛtya — without taking care of; putram — his son; eva — certainly; anvacintayat — began to think of him.

Translation
The great Maitreya continued: The King, Uttānapāda, after being advised by Nārada Muni, practically gave up all duties in relation with his kingdom, which was very vast and wide, opulent like the goddess of fortune, and he simply began to think of his son Dhruva.

Text 71
तत्राभिषिक्त: प्रयतस्तामुपोष्य विभावरीम् ।
समाहित: पर्यचरद‍ृष्यादेशेन पूरुषम् ॥ ७१ ॥
tatrābhiṣiktaḥ prayatas
tām upoṣya vibhāvarīm
samāhitaḥ paryacarad
ṛṣy-ādeśena pūruṣam
Synonyms
tatra — thereupon; abhiṣiktaḥ — after taking a bath; prayataḥ — with great attention; tām — that; upoṣya — fasting; vibhāvarīm — night; samāhitaḥ — perfect attention; paryacarat — worshiped; ṛṣi — by the great sage Nārada; ādeśena — as advised; pūruṣam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
Elsewhere, Dhruva Mahārāja, having arrived at Madhuvana, took his bath in the river Yamunā and observed fasting in the night with great care and attention. After that, as advised by the great sage Nārada, he engaged himself in worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 72
त्रिरात्रान्ते त्रिरात्रान्ते कपित्थबदराशन: ।
आत्मवृत्त्यनुसारेण मासं निन्येऽर्चयन्हरिम् ॥ ७२ ॥
tri-rātrānte tri-rātrānte
kapittha-badarāśanaḥ
ātma-vṛtty-anusāreṇa
māsaṁ ninye ’rcayan harim
Synonyms
tri — three; rātra-ante — at the end of night; tri — three; rātra-ante — at the end of night; kapittha-badara — fruits and berries; aśanaḥ — eating; ātma-vṛtti — just to preserve the body; anusāreṇa — as it was necessary, minimum; māsam — one month; ninye — passed away; arcayan — worshiping; harim — the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
For the first month Dhruva Mahārāja ate only fruits and berries on every third day, only to keep his body and soul together, and in this way he progressed in his worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 73
द्वितीयं च तथा मासं षष्ठे षष्ठेऽर्भको दिने ।
तृणपर्णादिभि: शीर्णै: कृतान्नोऽभ्यर्चयन्विभुम् ॥ ७३ ॥
dvitīyaṁ ca tathā māsaṁ
ṣaṣṭhe ṣaṣṭhe ’rbhako dine
tṛṇa-parṇādibhiḥ śīrṇaiḥ
kṛtānno ’bhyarcayan vibhum
Synonyms
dvitīyam — the next month; ca — also; tathā — as mentioned above; māsam — month; ṣaṣṭhe ṣaṣṭhe — every sixth day; arbhakaḥ — the innocent boy; dine — on days; tṛṇa-parṇa-ādibhiḥ — by grasses and leaves; śīrṇaiḥ — which were dry; kṛta-annaḥ — made for his food; abhyarcayan — and thus continued his method of worship; vibhum — for the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
In the second month Dhruva Mahārāja ate only every six days, and for his eatables he took dry grass and leaves. Thus he continued his worship.

Text 74
तृतीयं चानयन्मासं नवमे नवमेऽहनि ।
अब्भक्ष उत्तमश्लोकमुपाधावत्समाधिना ॥ ७४ ॥
tṛtīyaṁ cānayan māsaṁ
navame navame ’hani
ab-bhakṣa uttamaślokam
upādhāvat samādhinā
Synonyms
tṛtīyam — the third month; ca — also; ānayan — passing; māsam — one month; navame navame — on each ninth; ahani — on the day; ap-bhakṣaḥ — drinking water only; uttama-ślokam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is worshiped by selected verses; upādhāvat — worshiped; samādhinā — in trance.

Translation
In the third month he drank water only every nine days. Thus he remained completely in trance and worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is adored by selected verses.

Text 75
चतुर्थमपि वै मासं द्वादशे द्वादशेऽहनि ।
वायुभक्षो जितश्वासो ध्यायन्देवमधारयत् ॥ ७५ ॥
caturtham api vai māsaṁ
dvādaśe dvādaśe ’hani
vāyu-bhakṣo jita-śvāso
dhyāyan devam adhārayat
Synonyms
caturtham — fourth; api — also; vai — in that way; māsam — the month; dvādaśe dvādaśe — on the twelfth; ahani — day; vāyu — air; bhakṣaḥ — eating; jita-śvāsaḥ — controlling the breathing process; dhyāyan — meditating; devam — the Supreme Lord; adhārayat — worshiped.

Translation
In the fourth month Dhruva Mahārāja became a complete master of the breathing exercise, and thus he inhaled air only every twelfth day. In this way he became completely fixed in his position and worshiped the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 76
पञ्चमे मास्यनुप्राप्ते जितश्वासो नृपात्मज: ।
ध्यायन् ब्रह्म पदैकेन तस्थौ स्थाणुरिवाचल: ॥ ७६ ॥
pañcame māsy anuprāpte
jita-śvāso nṛpātmajaḥ
dhyāyan brahma padaikena
tasthau sthāṇur ivācalaḥ
Synonyms
pañcame — in the fifth; māsi — in the month; anuprāpte — being situated; jita-śvāsaḥ — and still controlling the breathing; nṛpa-ātmajaḥ — the son of the King; dhyāyan — meditating; brahma — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; padā ekena — with one leg; tasthau — stood; sthāṇuḥ — just like a column; iva — like; acalaḥ — without movement.

Translation
By the fifth month, Mahārāja Dhruva, the son of the King, had controlled his breathing so perfectly that he was able to stand on only one leg, just as a column stands, without motion, and concentrate his mind fully on the Parabrahman.

Text 77
सर्वतो मन आकृष्य हृदि भूतेन्द्रियाशयम् ।
ध्यायन्भगवतो रूपं नाद्राक्षीत्किञ्चनापरम् ॥ ७७ ॥
sarvato mana ākṛṣya
hṛdi bhūtendriyāśayam
dhyāyan bhagavato rūpaṁ
nādrākṣīt kiñcanāparam
Synonyms
sarvataḥ — in all respects; manaḥ — mind; ākṛṣya — concentrating; hṛdi — in the heart; bhūta-indriya-āśayam — resting place of the senses and the objects of the senses; dhyāyan — meditating; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rūpam — form; na adrākṣīt — did not see; kiñcana — anything; aparam — else.

Translation
He completely controlled his senses and their objects, and in this way he fixed his mind, without diversion to anything else, upon the form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 78
आधारं महदादीनां प्रधानपुरुषेश्वरम् ।
ब्रह्म धारयमाणस्य त्रयो लोकाश्चकम्पिरे ॥ ७८ ॥
ādhāraṁ mahad-ādīnāṁ
pradhāna-puruṣeśvaram
brahma dhārayamāṇasya
trayo lokāś cakampire
Synonyms
ādhāram — repose; mahat-ādīnām — of the material sum total known as the mahat-tattva; pradhāna — the chief; puruṣa-īśvaram — master of all living entities; brahma — the Supreme Brahman, the Personality of Godhead; dhārayamāṇasya — having taken into the heart; trayaḥ — the three planetary systems; lokāḥ — all the planets; cakampire — began to tremble.

Translation
When Dhruva Mahārāja thus captured the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the refuge of the total material creation and who is the master of all living entities, the three worlds began to tremble.

Text 79
यदैकपादेन स पार्थिवार्भक
स्तस्थौ तदङ्गुष्ठनिपीडिता मही ।
ननाम तत्रार्धमिभेन्द्रधिष्ठिता
तरीव सव्येतरत: पदे पदे ॥ ७९ ॥
yadaika-pādena sa pārthivārbhakas
tasthau tad-aṅguṣṭha-nipīḍitā mahī
nanāma tatrārdham ibhendra-dhiṣṭhitā
tarīva savyetarataḥ pade pade
Synonyms
yadā — when; eka — with one; pādena — leg; saḥ — Dhruva Mahārāja; pārthiva — the King’s; arbhakaḥ — child; tasthau — remained standing; tat-aṅguṣṭha — his big toe; nipīḍitā — being pressed; mahī — the earth; nanāma — bent down; tatra — then; ardham — half; ibha-indra — the king of elephants; dhiṣṭhitā — being situated; tarī iva — like a boat; savya-itarataḥ — right and left; pade pade — in every step.

Translation
As Dhruva Mahārāja, the King’s son, kept himself steadily standing on one leg, the pressure of his big toe pushed down half the earth, just as an elephant being carried on a boat rocks the boat left and right with his every step.

Text 80
तस्मिन्नभिध्यायति विश्वमात्मनो
द्वारं निरुध्यासुमनन्यया धिया ।
लोका निरुच्छ्‌वासनिपीडिता भृशं
सलोकपाला: शरणं ययुर्हरिम् ॥ ८० ॥
tasminn abhidhyāyati viśvam ātmano
dvāraṁ nirudhyāsum ananyayā dhiyā
lokā nirucchvāsa-nipīḍitā bhṛśaṁ
sa-loka-pālāḥ śaraṇaṁ yayur harim
Synonyms
tasmin — Dhruva Mahārāja; abhidhyāyati — when meditating with full concentration; viśvam ātmanaḥ — the total body of the universe; dvāram — the holes; nirudhya — closed; asum — the life air; ananyayā — without being diverted; dhiyā — meditation; lokāḥ — all the planets; nirucchvāsa — having stopped breathing; nipīḍitāḥ — thus being suffocated; bhṛśam — very soon; sa-loka-pālāḥ — all the great demigods from different planets; śaraṇam — shelter; yayuḥ — took; harim — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
When Dhruva Mahārāja became practically one in heaviness with Lord Viṣṇu, the total consciousness, due to his fully concentrating and his closing all the holes of his body, the total universal breathing became choked up, and all the great demigods in all the planetary systems felt suffocated and thus took shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 81
देवा ऊचु:
नैवं विदामो भगवन् प्राणरोधं
चराचरस्याखिलसत्त्वधाम्न: ।
विधेहि तन्नो वृजिनाद्विमोक्षं
प्राप्ता वयं त्वां शरणं शरण्यम् ॥ ८१ ॥
devā ūcuḥ
naivaṁ vidāmo bhagavan prāṇa-rodhaṁ
carācarasyākhila-sattva-dhāmnaḥ
vidhehi tan no vṛjinād vimokṣaṁ
prāptā vayaṁ tvāṁ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyam
Synonyms
devāḥ ūcuḥ — all the demigods said; na — not; evam — thus; vidāmaḥ — we can understand; bhagavan — O Personality of Godhead; prāṇa-rodham — how we feel our breathing choked; cara — moving; acarasya — not moving; akhila — universal; sattva — existence; dhāmnaḥ — the reservoir of; vidhehi — kindly do the needful; tat — therefore; naḥ — our; vṛjināt — from the danger; vimokṣam — liberation; prāptāḥ — approaching; vayam — all of us; tvām — unto You; śaraṇam — shelter; śaraṇyam — worthy to be taken shelter of.

Translation
The demigods said: Dear Lord, You are the refuge of all moving and nonmoving living entities. We feel all living entities to be suffocating, their breathing processes choked up. We have never experienced such a thing. Since You are the ultimate shelter of all surrendered souls, we have therefore approached You; kindly save us from this danger.

Text 82
श्रीभगवानुवाच
मा भैष्ट बालं तपसो दुरत्यया-
न्निवर्तयिष्ये प्रतियात स्वधाम ।
यतो हि व: प्राणनिरोध आसी-
दौत्तानपादिर्मयि सङ्गतात्मा ॥ ८२ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
mā bhaiṣṭa bālaṁ tapaso duratyayān
nivartayiṣye pratiyāta sva-dhāma
yato hi vaḥ prāṇa-nirodha āsīd
auttānapādir mayi saṅgatātmā
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead replied; mā bhaiṣṭa — do not be afraid; bālam — the boy Dhruva; tapasaḥ — by his severe austerity; duratyayāt — strongly determined; nivartayiṣye — I shall ask him to stop this; pratiyāta — you can return; sva-dhāma — your own respective homes; yataḥ — from whom; hi — certainly; vaḥ — your; prāṇa-nirodhaḥ — choking the life air; āsīt — happened; auttānapādiḥ — on account of the son of King Uttānapāda; mayi — unto Me; saṅgata-ātmā — fully absorbed in thought of Me.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead replied: My dear demigods, do not be perturbed by this. It is due to the severe austerity and full determination of the son of King Uttānapāda, who is now fully absorbed in thought of Me. He has obstructed the universal breathing process. You can safely return to your respective homes. I shall stop this boy in his severe acts of austerities, and you will be saved from this situation.