Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
विलोक्य दूषितां कृष्णां कृष्ण: कृष्णाहिना विभु: ।
तस्या विशुद्धिमन्विच्छन् सर्पं तमुदवासयत् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
vilokya dūṣitāṁ kṛṣṇāṁ
kṛṣṇaḥ kṛṣṇāhinā vibhuḥ
tasyā viśuddhim anvicchan
sarpaṁ tam udavāsayat
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; vilokya — seeing; dūṣitām — contaminated; kṛṣṇām — the river Yamunā; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; kṛṣṇa-ahinā — by the black serpent; vibhuḥ — the almighty Lord; tasyāḥ — of the river; viśuddhim — the purification; anvicchan — desiring; sarpam — serpent; tam — that; udavāsayat — sent away.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, seeing that the Yamunā River had been contaminated by the black snake Kāliya, desired to purify the river, and thus the Lord banished him from it.

Text 2
श्रीराजोवाच
कथमन्तर्जलेऽगाधे न्यगृह्णाद् भगवानहिम् ।
स वै बहुयुगावासं यथासीद् विप्र कथ्यताम् ॥ २ ॥
śrī-rājovāca
katham antar-jale ’gādhe
nyagṛhṇād bhagavān ahim
sa vai bahu-yugāvāsaṁ
yathāsīd vipra kathyatām
Synonyms
śrī-rājā uvāca — King Parīkṣit said; katham — how; antaḥ-jale — within the water; agādhe — unfathomable; nyagṛhṇāt — subdued; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ahim — the serpent; saḥ — he, Kāliya; vai — indeed; bahu-yuga — for many ages; āvāsam — having residence; yathā — how; āsīt — so became; vipra — O learned brāhmaṇa; kathyatām — please explain.

Translation
King Parīkṣit inquired: O learned sage, please explain how the Supreme Personality of Godhead chastised the serpent Kāliya within the unfathomable waters of the Yamunā, and how it was that Kāliya had been living there for so many ages.

Text 3
ब्रह्मन् भगवतस्तस्य भूम्न: स्वच्छन्दवर्तिन: ।
गोपालोदारचरितं कस्तृप्येतामृतं जुषन् ॥ ३ ॥
brahman bhagavatas tasya
bhūmnaḥ svacchanda-vartinaḥ
gopālodāra-caritaṁ
kas tṛpyetāmṛtaṁ juṣan
Synonyms
brahman — O brāhmaṇa; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Lord; tasya — of Him; bhūmnaḥ — the unlimited; sva-chanda-vartinaḥ — who acts according to His own desires; gopāla — as a cowherd boy; udāra — magnanimous; caritam — the pastimes; kaḥ — who; tṛpyeta — can be satiated; amṛtam — such nectar; juṣan — partaking of.

Translation
O brāhmaṇa, the unlimited Supreme Personality of Godhead freely acts according to His own desires. Who could be satiated when hearing the nectar of the magnanimous pastimes He performed as a cowherd boy in Vṛndāvana?

Text 4
श्रीशुक उवाच
कालिन्द्यां कालियस्यासीद् ह्रद: कश्चिद् विषाग्निना ।
श्रप्यमाणपया यस्मिन् पतन्त्युपरिगा: खगा: ॥ ४ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
kālindyāṁ kāliyasyāsīd
hradaḥ kaścid viṣāgninā
śrapyamāṇa-payā yasmin
patanty upari-gāḥ khagāḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; kālindyām — within the river Yamunā; kāliyasya — of the serpent Kāliya; āsīt — there was; hradaḥ — lake; kaścit — a certain; viṣa — of his poison; agninā — by the fire; śrapyamāṇa — being heated and boiled; payāḥ — its water; yasmin — into which; patanti — would fall down; upari-gāḥ — traveling above; khagāḥ — the birds.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Within the river Kālindī [Yamunā] was a lake inhabited by the serpent Kāliya, whose fiery poison constantly heated and boiled its waters. Indeed, the vapors thus created were so poisonous that birds flying over the contaminated lake would fall down into it.

Text 5
विप्रुष्मता विषदोर्मिमारुतेनाभिमर्शिता: ।
म्रियन्ते तीरगा यस्य प्राणिन: स्थिरजङ्गमा: ॥ ५ ॥
vipruṣmatā viṣadormi-
mārutenābhimarśitāḥ
mriyante tīra-gā yasya
prāṇinaḥ sthira-jaṅgamāḥ
Synonyms
vipruṭ-matā — containing droplets of the water; viṣa-da — poisonous; ūrmi — (having touched) the waves; mārutena — by the wind; abhimarśitāḥ — contacted; mriyante — would die; tīra-gāḥ — present upon the shore; yasya — of which; prāṇinaḥ — all living entities; sthira-jaṅgamāḥ — both nonmoving and moving.

Translation
The wind blowing over that deadly lake carried droplets of water to the shore. Simply by coming in contact with that poisonous breeze, all vegetation and creatures on the shore died.

Text 6
तं चण्डवेगविषवीर्यमवेक्ष्य तेन
दुष्टां नदीं च खलसंयमनावतार: ।
कृष्ण: कदम्बमधिरुह्य ततोऽतितुङ्ग-
मास्फोट्य गाढरशनो न्यपतद् विषोदे ॥ ६ ॥
taṁ caṇḍa-vega-viṣa-vīryam avekṣya tena
duṣṭāṁ nadīṁ ca khala-saṁyamanāvatāraḥ
kṛṣṇaḥ kadambam adhiruhya tato ’ti-tuṅgam
āsphoṭya gāḍha-raśano nyapatad viṣode
Synonyms
tam — him, Kāliya; caṇḍa-vega — of fearsome power; viṣa — the poison; vīryam — whose strength; avekṣya — seeing; tena — by him; duṣṭām — contaminated; nadīm — the river; ca — and; khala — the envious demons; saṁyamana — for subduing; avatāraḥ — whose descent from the spiritual world; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; kadambam — a kadamba tree; adhiruhya — climbing up on; tataḥ — from it; ati-tuṅgam — very high; āsphoṭya — slapping His arms; gāḍha-raśanaḥ — tying His belt firmly; nyapatat — He jumped; viṣa-ude — into the poisoned water.

Translation
Lord Kṛṣṇa saw how the Kāliya serpent had polluted the Yamunā River with his terribly powerful poison. Since Kṛṣṇa had descended from the spiritual world specifically to subdue envious demons, the Lord immediately climbed to the top of a very high kadamba tree and prepared Himself for battle. He tightened His belt, slapped His arms and then jumped into the poisonous water.

Text 7
सर्पह्रद: पुरुषसारनिपातवेग-
सङ्‌क्षोभितोरगविषोच्छ्वसिताम्बुराशि: ।
पर्यक्‍प्लुतो विषकषायबिभीषणोर्मि-
र्धावन् धनु:शतमनन्तबलस्य किं तत् ॥ ७ ॥
sarpa-hradaḥ puruṣa-sāra-nipāta-vega-
saṅkṣobhitoraga-viṣocchvasitāmbu-rāśiḥ
paryak pluto viṣa-kaṣāya-bibhīṣaṇormir
dhāvan dhanuḥ-śatam ananta-balasya kiṁ tat
Synonyms
sarpa-hradaḥ — the serpent’s lake; puruṣa-sāra — of the most exalted Supreme Personality of Godhead; nipāta-vega — by the force of the fall; saṅkṣobhita — completely agitated; uraga — of the snakes; viṣa-ucchvasita — breathed upon with the poison; ambu-rāśiḥ — all of whose water; paryak — on all sides; plutaḥ — flooding; viṣa-kaṣāya — because of the contamination of the poison; bibhīṣaṇa — fearsome; ūrmiḥ — whose waves; dhāvan — flowing; dhanuḥ-śatam — the extent of one hundred bow-lengths; ananta-balasya — for Him whose strength is immeasurable; kim — what; tat — that.

Translation
When the Supreme Personality of Godhead landed in the serpent’s lake, the snakes there became extremely agitated and began breathing heavily, further polluting it with volumes of poison. The force of the Lord’s entrance into the lake caused it to overflow on all sides, and poisonous, fearsome waves flooded the surrounding lands up to a distance of one hundred bow-lengths. This is not at all amazing, however, for the Supreme Lord possesses infinite strength.

Text 8
तस्य ह्रदे विहरतो भुजदण्डघूर्ण-
वार्घोषमङ्ग वरवारणविक्रमस्य ।
आश्रुत्य तत् स्वसदनाभिभवं निरीक्ष्य
चक्षु:श्रवा: समसरत्तदमृष्यमाण: ॥ ८ ॥
tasya hrade viharato bhuja-daṇḍa-ghūrṇa-
vār-ghoṣam aṅga vara-vāraṇa-vikramasya
āśrutya tat sva-sadanābhibhavaṁ nirīkṣya
cakṣuḥ-śravāḥ samasarat tad amṛṣyamāṇaḥ
Synonyms
tasya — of Him; hrade — in his lake; viharataḥ — who was playing; bhuja-daṇḍa — by His mighty arms; ghūrṇa — swirled about; vāḥ — of the water; ghoṣam — the resounding; aṅga — my dear King; vara-vāraṇa — like a great elephant; vikramasya — whose prowess; āśrutya — hearing; tat — that; sva-sadana — of his own residence; abhibhavam — the trespassing; nirīkṣya — taking note of; cakṣuḥ-śravāḥ — Kāliya; samasarat — came forward; tat — that; amṛṣyamāṇaḥ — being unable to tolerate.

Translation
Kṛṣṇa began sporting in Kāliya’s lake like a lordly elephant — swirling His mighty arms and making the water resound in various ways. When Kāliya heard these sounds, he understood that someone was trespassing in his lake. The serpent could not tolerate this and immediately came forward.

Text 9
तं प्रेक्षणीयसुकुमारघनावदातं
श्रीवत्सपीतवसनं स्मितसुन्दरास्यम् ।
क्रीडन्तमप्रतिभयं कमलोदराङ्‍‍‍‍‍घ्रि
सन्दश्य मर्मसु रुषा भुजया चछाद ॥ ९ ॥
taṁ prekṣaṇīya-sukumāra-ghanāvadātaṁ
śrīvatsa-pīta-vasanaṁ smita-sundarāsyam
krīḍantam apratibhayaṁ kamalodarāṅghriṁ
sandaśya marmasu ruṣā bhujayā cachāda
Synonyms
tam — Him; prekṣaṇīya — attractive to look at; su-kumāra — most delicate; ghana — like a cloud; avadātam — glowing white; śrīvatsa — wearing the Śrīvatsa mark; pīta — and yellow; vasanam — garments; smita — smiling; sundara — beautiful; āsyam — whose face; krīḍantam — playing; aprati-bhayam — without fear of others; kamala — of a lotus; udara — like the inside; aṅghrim — whose feet; sandaśya — biting; marmasu — upon the chest; ruṣā — with anger; bhujayā — with his snake coils; cachāda — enveloped.

Translation
Kāliya saw that Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who wore yellow silken garments, was very delicate, His attractive body shining like a glowing white cloud, His chest bearing the mark of Śrīvatsa, His face smiling beautifully and His feet resembling the whorl of a lotus flower. The Lord was playing fearlessly in the water. Despite His wonderful appearance, the envious Kāliya furiously bit Him on the chest and then completely enwrapped Him in his coils.

Text 10
तं नागभोगपरिवीतमद‍ृष्टचेष्ट-
मालोक्य तत्प्रियसखा: पशुपा भृशार्ता: ।
कृष्णेऽर्पितात्मसुहृदर्थकलत्रकामा
दु:खानुशोकभयमूढधियो निपेतु: ॥ १० ॥
taṁ nāga-bhoga-parivītam adṛṣṭa-ceṣṭam
ālokya tat-priya-sakhāḥ paśupā bhṛśārtāḥ
kṛṣṇe ’rpitātma-suhṛd-artha-kalatra-kāmā
duḥkhānuśoka-bhaya-mūḍha-dhiyo nipetuḥ
Synonyms
tam — Him; nāga — of the serpent; bhoga — within the coils; parivītam — enveloped; adṛṣṭa-ceṣṭam — not exhibiting any movement; ālokya — seeing; tat-priya-sakhāḥ — His dear friends; paśu-pāḥ — the cowherds; bhṛśa-ārtāḥ — greatly disturbed; kṛṣṇe — unto Lord Kṛṣṇa; arpita — offered; ātma — their very selves; su-hṛt — their relations; artha — wealth; kalatra — wives; kāmāḥ — and all objects of desire; duḥkha — by pain; anuśoka — remorse; bhaya — and fear; mūḍha — bewildered; dhiyaḥ — their intelligence; nipetuḥ — they fell down.

Translation
When the members of the cowherd community, who had accepted Kṛṣṇa as their dearmost friend, saw Him enveloped in the snake’s coils, motionless, they were greatly disturbed. They had offered Kṛṣṇa everything — their very selves, their families, their wealth, wives and all pleasures. At the sight of the Lord in the clutches of the Kāliya snake, their intelligence became deranged by grief, lamentation and fear, and thus they fell to the ground.

Text 11
गावो वृषा वत्सतर्य: क्रन्दमाना: सुदु:खिता: ।
कृष्णे न्यस्तेक्षणा भीता रुदन्त्य इव तस्थिरे ॥ ११ ॥
gāvo vṛṣā vatsataryaḥ
krandamānāḥ su-duḥkhitāḥ
kṛṣṇe nyastekṣaṇā bhītā
rudantya iva tasthire
Synonyms
gāvaḥ — the cows; vṛṣāḥ — the bulls; vatsataryaḥ — the female calves; krandamānāḥ — crying loudly; su-duḥkhitāḥ — very much distressed; kṛṣṇe — upon Lord Kṛṣṇa; nyasta — fixed; īkṣaṇāḥ — their sight; bhītāḥ — fearful; rudantyaḥ — crying; iva — as if; tasthire — they stood still.

Translation
The cows, bulls and female calves, in great distress, called out piteously to Kṛṣṇa. Fixing their eyes on Him, they stood still in fear, as if ready to cry but too shocked to shed tears.

Text 12
अथ व्रजे महोत्पातास्त्रिविधा ह्यतिदारुणा: ।
उत्पेतुर्भुवि दिव्यात्मन्यासन्नभयशंसिन: ॥ १२ ॥
atha vraje mahotpātās
tri-vidhā hy ati-dāruṇāḥ
utpetur bhuvi divy ātmany
āsanna-bhaya-śaṁsinaḥ
Synonyms
atha — then; vraje — in Vṛndāvana; mahā-utpātāḥ — very ominous disturbances; tri-vidhāḥ — of the three varieties; hi — indeed; ati-dāruṇāḥ — most fearsome; utpetuḥ — arose; bhuvi — upon the earth; divi — in the sky; ātmani — in the bodies of living creatures; āsanna — imminent; bhaya — danger; saṁśinaḥ — announcing.

Translation
In the Vṛndāvana area there then arose all three types of fearful omens — those on the earth, those in the sky and those in the bodies of living creatures — which announced imminent danger.

Texts 13-15
तानालक्ष्य भयोद्विग्ना गोपा नन्दपुरोगमा: ।
विना रामेण गा: कृष्णं ज्ञात्वा चारयितुं गतम् ॥ १३ ॥
तैर्दुर्निमित्तैर्निधनं मत्वा प्राप्तमतद्विद: ।
तत्प्राणास्तन्मनस्कास्ते दु:खशोकभयातुरा: ॥ १४ ॥
आबालवृद्धवनिता: सर्वेऽङ्ग पशुवृत्तय: ।
निर्जग्मुर्गोकुलाद् दीना: कृष्णदर्शनलालसा: ॥ १५ ॥
tān ālakṣya bhayodvignā
gopā nanda-purogamāḥ
vinā rāmeṇa gāḥ kṛṣṇaṁ
jñātvā cārayituṁ gatam
tair durnimittair nidhanaṁ
matvā prāptam atad-vidaḥ
tat-prāṇās tan-manaskās te
duḥkha-śoka-bhayāturāḥ
ā-bāla-vṛddha-vanitāḥ
sarve ’ṅga paśu-vṛttayaḥ
nirjagmur gokulād dīnāḥ
kṛṣṇa-darśana-lālasāḥ
Synonyms
tān — these signs; ālakṣya — seeing; bhaya-udvignāḥ — agitated by fear; gopāḥ — the cowherds; nanda-puraḥ-gamāḥ — headed by Nanda Mahārāja; vinā — without; rāmeṇa — Balarāma; gāḥ — the cows; kṛṣṇam — Kṛṣṇa; jñātvā — understanding; cārayitum — to herd; gatam — gone; taiḥ — from those; durnimittaiḥ — bad omens; nidhanam — destruction; matvā — considering; prāptam — attained; atat-vidaḥ — not knowing His opulences; tat-prāṇāḥ — having Him as their very source of life; tat-manaskāḥ — their minds being absorbed in Him; te — they; duḥkha — by pain; śoka — unhappiness; bhaya — and fear; āturāḥ — overwhelmed; ā-bāla — including the children; vṛddha — old persons; vanitāḥ — and ladies; sarve — all; aṅga — my dear King Parīkṣit; paśu-vṛttayaḥ — behaving as an affectionate cow does toward her calf; nirjagmuḥ — they went out; gokulāt — from Gokula; dīnāḥ — feeling wretched; kṛṣṇa-darśana — for the sight of Lord Kṛṣṇa; lālasāḥ — anxious.

Translation
Seeing the inauspicious omens, Nanda Mahārāja and the other cowherd men were fearful, for they knew that Kṛṣṇa had gone to herd the cows that day without His elder brother, Balarāma. Because they had dedicated their minds to Kṛṣṇa, accepting Him as their very life, they were unaware of His great power and opulence. Thus they concluded that the inauspicious omens indicated He had met with death, and they were overwhelmed with grief, lamentation and fear. All the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, including the children, women and elderly persons, thought of Kṛṣṇa just as a cow thinks of her helpless young calf, and thus these poor, suffering people rushed out of the village, intent upon finding Him.

Text 16
तांस्तथा कातरान् वीक्ष्य भगवान् माधवो बल: ।
प्रहस्य किञ्चिन्नोवाच प्रभावज्ञोऽनुजस्य स: ॥ १६ ॥
tāṁs tathā kātarān vīkṣya
bhagavān mādhavo balaḥ
prahasya kiñcin novāca
prabhāva-jño ’nujasya saḥ
Synonyms
tān — them; tathā — in such a condition; kātarān — distressed; vīkṣya — seeing; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mādhavaḥ — the master of all mystic knowledge; balaḥ — Lord Balarāma; prahasya — gently smiling; kiñcit — anything at all; na — did not; uvāca — say; prabhāva-jñaḥ — knowing the power; anujasya — of His younger brother; saḥ — He.

Translation
The Supreme Lord Balarāma, the master of all transcendental knowledge, smiled and said nothing when He saw the residents of Vṛndāvana in such distress, since He understood the extraordinary power of His younger brother.

Text 17
तेऽन्वेषमाणा दयितं कृष्णं सूचितया पदै: ।
भगवल्लक्षणैर्जग्मु: पदव्या यमुनातटम् ॥ १७ ॥
te ’nveṣamāṇā dayitaṁ
kṛṣṇaṁ sūcitayā padaiḥ
bhagaval-lakṣaṇair jagmuḥ
padavyā yamunā-taṭam
Synonyms
te — they; anveṣamāṇāḥ — searching out; dayitam — their dearmost; kṛṣṇam — Kṛṣṇa; sūcitayā — (along the path) which was marked; padaiḥ — by His footprints; bhagavat-lakṣaṇaiḥ — the symbolic markings of the Personality of Godhead; jagmuḥ — they went; padavyā — along the path; yamunā-taṭam — to the bank of the Yamunā.

Translation
The residents hurried toward the banks of the Yamunā in search of their dearmost Kṛṣṇa, following the path marked by His footprints, which bore the unique signs of the Personality of Godhead.

Text 18
ते तत्र तत्राब्जयवाङ्कुशाशनि-
ध्वजोपपन्नानि पदानि विश्पते: ।
मार्गे गवामन्यपदान्तरान्तरे
निरीक्षमाणा ययुरङ्ग सत्वरा: ॥ १८ ॥
te tatra tatrābja-yavāṅkuśāśani-
dhvajopapannāni padāni viś-pateḥ
mārge gavām anya-padāntarāntare
nirīkṣamāṇā yayur aṅga satvarāḥ
Synonyms
te — they; tatra tatra — here and there; abja — with the lotus flower; yava — barleycorn; aṅkuśa — elephant goad; aśani — thunderbolt; dhvaja — and flag; upapannāni — adorned; padāni — the footprints; viṭ-pateḥ — of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the master of the cowherd community; mārge — upon the path; gavām — of the cows; anya-pada — the other footprints; antara-antare — dispersed among; nirīkṣamāṇāḥ — seeing; yuyuḥ — they went; aṅga — my dear King; sa-tvarāḥ — rapidly.

Translation
The footprints of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the master of the entire cowherd community, were marked with the lotus flower, barleycorn, elephant goad, thunderbolt and flag. My dear King Parīkṣit, seeing His footprints on the path among the cows’ hoofprints, the residents of Vṛndāvana rushed along in great haste.

Text 19
अन्तर्ह्रदे भुजगभोगपरीतमारात्
कृष्णं निरीहमुपलभ्य जलाशयान्ते ।
गोपांश्च मूढधिषणान् परित: पशूंश्च
सङ्क्रन्दत: परमकश्मलमापुरार्ता: ॥ १९ ॥
antar hrade bhujaga-bhoga-parītam ārāt
kṛṣṇaṁ nirīham upalabhya jalāśayānte
gopāṁś ca mūḍha-dhiṣaṇān paritaḥ paśūṁś ca
saṅkrandataḥ parama-kaśmalam āpur ārtāḥ
Synonyms
antaḥ — within; hrade — the lake; bhujaga — of the serpent; bhoga — within the body; parītam — enveloped; ārāt — from a distance; kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; nirīham — not moving; upalabhya — seeing; jala-āśaya — the body of water; ante — within; gopān — the cowherd boys; ca — and; mūḍha-dhiṣaṇān — unconscious; paritaḥ — surrounding; paśūn — the animals; ca — and; saṅkrandataḥ — crying out; parama-kaśmalam — the greatest bewilderment; āpuḥ — they experienced; ārtāḥ — being distressed.

Translation
As they hurried along the path to the bank of the Yamunā River, they saw from a distance that Kṛṣṇa was in the lake, motionless within the coils of the black serpent. They further saw that the cowherd boys had fallen unconscious and that the animals were standing on all sides, crying out for Kṛṣṇa. Seeing all this, the residents of Vṛndāvana were overwhelmed with anguish and confusion.

Text 20
गोप्योऽनुरक्तमनसो भगवत्यनन्ते
तत्सौहृदस्मितविलोकगिर: स्मरन्त्य: ।
ग्रस्तेऽहिना प्रियतमे भृशदु:खतप्ता:
शून्यं प्रियव्यतिहृतं दद‍ृशुस्त्रिलोकम् ॥ २० ॥
gopyo ’nurakta-manaso bhagavaty anante
tat-sauhṛda-smita-viloka-giraḥ smarantyaḥ
graste ’hinā priyatame bhṛśa-duḥkha-taptāḥ
śūnyaṁ priya-vyatihṛtaṁ dadṛśus tri-lokam
Synonyms
gopyaḥ — the cowherd girls; anurakta-manasaḥ — their minds very much attached to Him; bhagavati — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anante — the unlimited one; tat — His; sauhṛda — loving; smita — smiling; viloka — glances; giraḥ — and words; smarantyaḥ — remembering; graste — being seized; ahinā — by the serpent; priya-tame — their most dear; bhṛśa — extremely; duḥkha — by pain; taptāḥ — tormented; śūnyam — empty; priya-vyatihṛtam — deprived of their darling; dadṛśuḥ — they saw; tri-lokam — all the three worlds (the entire universe).

Translation
When the young gopīs, whose minds were constantly attached to Kṛṣṇa, the unlimited Supreme Lord, saw that He was now within the grips of the serpent, they remembered His loving friendship, His smiling glances and His talks with them. Burning with great sorrow, they saw the entire universe as void.

Text 21
ता: कृष्णमातरमपत्यमनुप्रविष्टां
तुल्यव्यथा: समनुगृह्य शुच: स्रवन्त्य: ।
तास्ता व्रजप्रियकथा: कथयन्त्य आसन्
कृष्णाननेऽर्पितद‍ृशो मृतकप्रतीका: ॥ २१ ॥
tāḥ kṛṣṇa-mātaram apatyam anupraviṣṭāṁ
tulya-vyathāḥ samanugṛhya śucaḥ sravantyaḥ
tās tā vraja-priya-kathāḥ kathayantya āsan
kṛṣṇānane ’rpita-dṛśo mṛtaka-pratīkāḥ
Synonyms
tāḥ — those ladies; kṛṣṇa-mātaram — the mother of Kṛṣṇa (Yaśodā); apatyam — upon her son; anupraviṣṭām — fixing her vision; tulya — equally; vyathāḥ — pained; samanugṛhya — holding back firmly; śucaḥ — floods of sorrow; sravantyaḥ — spilling forth; tāḥ tāḥ — each of them; vraja-priya — of the darling of Vraja; kathāḥ — topics; kathayantyaḥ — speaking; āsan — they stood; kṛṣṇa-ānane — unto the face of Lord Kṛṣṇa; arpita — offered; dṛśaḥ — their eyes; mṛtaka — corpses; pratīkāḥ — resembling.

Translation
Although the elder gopīs were feeling just as much distress as she and were pouring forth a flood of sorrowful tears, they had to forcibly hold back Kṛṣṇa’s mother, whose consciousness was totally absorbed in her son. Standing like corpses, with their eyes fixed upon His face, these gopīs each took turns recounting the pastimes of the darling of Vraja.

Text 22
कृष्णप्राणान्निर्विशतो नन्दादीन् वीक्ष्य तं ह्रदम् ।
प्रत्यषेधत् स भगवान् राम: कृष्णानुभाववित् ॥ २२ ॥
kṛṣṇa-prāṇān nirviśato
nandādīn vīkṣya taṁ hradam
pratyaṣedhat sa bhagavān
rāmaḥ kṛṣṇānubhāva-vit
Synonyms
kṛṣṇa-prāṇān — the men whose very life and soul was Kṛṣṇa; nirviśataḥ — entering; nanda-ādīn — headed by Nanda Mahārāja; vīkṣya — seeing; tam — that; hradam — lake; pratyaṣedhat — forbade; saḥ — He; bhagavān — the all-powerful Lord; rāmaḥ — Balarāma; kṛṣṇa — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; anubhāva — the power; vit — knowing well.

Translation
Lord Balarāma then saw that Nanda Mahārāja and the other cowherd men, who had dedicated their very lives to Kṛṣṇa, were beginning to enter the serpent’s lake. As the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Balarāma fully knew Lord Kṛṣṇa’s actual power, and therefore He restrained them.

Text 23
इत्थं स्वगोकुलमनन्यगतिं निरीक्ष्य
सस्त्रीकुमारमतिदु:खितमात्महेतो: ।
आज्ञाय मर्त्यपदवीमनुवर्तमान:
स्थित्वा मुहूर्तमुदतिष्ठदुरङ्गबन्धात् ॥ २३ ॥
ittham sva-gokulam ananya-gatiṁ nirīkṣya
sa-strī-kumāram ati-duḥkhitam ātma-hetoḥ
ājñāya martya-padavīm anuvartamānaḥ
sthitvā muhūrtam udatiṣṭhad uraṅga-bandhāt
Synonyms
ittham — in this fashion; sva-gokulam — His own community of Gokula; ananya-gatim — having no other goal or shelter (than Him); nirīkṣya — observing; sa-strī — including the women; kumāram — and children; ati-duḥkhitam — extremely distressed; ātma-hetoḥ — on His account; ājñāya — understanding; martya-padavīm — the way of mortals; anuvartamānaḥ — imitating; sthitvā — remaining; muhūrtam — for some time; udatiṣṭhat — He rose up; uraṅga — of the serpent; bandhāt — from the bonds.

Translation
The Lord remained for some time within the coils of the serpent, imitating the behavior of an ordinary mortal. But when He understood that the women, children and other residents of His village of Gokula were in acute distress because of their love for Him, their only shelter and goal in life, He immediately rose up from the bonds of the Kāliya serpent.

Text 24
तत्प्रथ्यमानवपुषा व्यथितात्मभोग-
स्त्यक्त्वोन्नमय्य कुपित: स्वफणान् भुजङ्ग: ।
तस्थौ श्वसञ्छ्वसनरन्ध्रविषाम्बरीष-
स्तब्धेक्षणोल्मुकमुखो हरिमीक्षमाण: ॥ २४ ॥
tat-prathyamāna-vapuṣā vyathitātma-bhogas
tyaktvonnamayya kupitaḥ sva-phaṇān bhujaṅgaḥ
tasthau śvasañ chvasana-randhra-viṣāmbarīṣa-
stabdhekṣaṇolmuka-mukho harim īkṣamāṇaḥ
Synonyms
tat — of Him, Lord Kṛṣṇa; prathyamāna — expanding; vapuṣā — by the transcendental body; vyathita — pained; ātma — his own; bhogaḥ — serpent body; tyaktvā — giving Him up; unnamayya — raising high; kupitaḥ — angered; sva-phaṇān — his hoods; bhujaṅga — the serpent; tasthau — stood still; śvasan — breathing heavily; śvasana-randhra — his nostrils; viṣa-ambarīṣa — like two vessels for cooking poison; stabdha — fixed; īkṣaṇa — his eyes; ulmuka — like firebrands; mukhaḥ — his face; harim — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; īkṣamāṇaḥ — observing.

Translation
His coils tormented by the expanding body of the Lord, Kāliya released Him. In great anger the serpent then raised his hoods high and stood still, breathing heavily. His nostrils appeared like vessels for cooking poison, and the staring eyes in his face like firebrands. Thus the serpent looked at the Lord.

Text 25
तं जिह्वया द्विशिखया परिलेलिहानं
द्वे सृक्‍वणी ह्यतिकरालविषाग्निद‍ृष्टिम् ।
क्रीडन्नमुं परिससार यथा खगेन्द्रो
बभ्राम सोऽप्यवसरं प्रसमीक्षमाण: ॥ २५ ॥
taṁ jihvayā dvi-śikhayā parilelihānaṁ
dve sṛkvaṇī hy ati-karāla-viṣāgni-dṛṣṭim
krīḍann amuṁ parisasāra yathā khagendro
babhrāma so ’py avasaraṁ prasamīkṣamāṇaḥ
Synonyms
tam — him, Kāliya; jihvayā — with his tongue; dvi-śikhayā — having two points; parilelihānam — repeatedly licking; dve — his two; sṛkvaṇī — lips; hi — indeed; ati-karāla — most terrible; viṣa-agni — full of poisonous fire; dṛṣṭim — whose glance; krīḍan — playing; amum — him; parisasāra — moved around; yathā — just as; khaga-indraḥ — the king of birds, Garuḍa; babhrāma — wandered around; saḥ — Kāliya; api — also; avasaram — the opportunity (to strike); prasamīkṣamāṇaḥ — carefully looking for.

Translation
Again and again Kāliya licked his lips with his bifurcated tongues as He stared at Kṛṣṇa with a glance full of terrible, poisonous fire. But Kṛṣṇa playfully circled around him, just as Garuḍa would play with a snake. In response, Kāliya also moved about, looking for an opportunity to bite the Lord.

Text 26
एवं परिभ्रमहतौजसमुन्नतांस-
मानम्य तत्पृथुशिर:स्वधिरूढ आद्य: ।
तन्मूर्धरत्ननिकरस्पर्शातिताम्र-
पादाम्बुजोऽखिलकलादिगुरुर्ननर्त ॥ २६ ॥
evaṁ paribhrama-hataujasam unnatāṁsam
ānamya tat-pṛthu-śiraḥsv adhirūḍha ādyaḥ
tan-mūrdha-ratna-nikara-sparśāti-tāmra-
pādāmbujo ’khila-kalādi-gurur nanarta
Synonyms
evam — in this way; paribhrama — because of the Lord’s moving around him; hata — spoiled; ojasam — whose strength; unnata — raised high; aṁsam — whose shoulders; ānamya — making him bend down; tat — his; pṛthu-śiraḥsu — onto the broad heads; adhirūḍhaḥ — having climbed up; ādyaḥ — the ultimate origin of everything; tat — his; mūrdha — on the heads; ratna-nikara — the numerous jewels; sparśa — because of touching; ati-tāmra — very much reddened; pāda-ambujaḥ — whose lotus feet; akhila-kalā — of all arts; ādi-guruḥ — the original spiritual master; nanarta — began to dance.

Translation
Having severely depleted the serpent’s strength with His relentless circling, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the origin of everything, pushed down Kāliya’s raised shoulders and mounted his broad serpentine heads. Thus Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the original master of all fine arts, began to dance, His lotus feet deeply reddened by the touch of the numerous jewels upon the serpent’s heads.

Text 27
तं नर्तुमुद्यतमवेक्ष्य तदा तदीय-
गन्धर्वसिद्धमुनिचारणदेववध्व: ।
प्रीत्या मृदङ्गपणवानकवाद्यगीत-
पुष्पोपहारनुतिभि: सहसोपसेदु: ॥ २७ ॥
taṁ nartum udyatam avekṣya tadā tadīya-
gandharva-siddha-muni-cāraṇa-deva-vadhvaḥ
prītyā mṛdaṅga-paṇavānaka-vādya-gīta-
puṣpopahāra-nutibhiḥ sahasopaseduḥ
Synonyms
tam — Him; nartum — in dancing; udyatam — engaged; avekṣya — taking note of; tadā — then; tadīya — His servants; gandharva-siddha — the Gandharvas and Siddhas; muni-cāraṇa — the sages and the Cāraṇas; deva-vadhvaḥ — the wives of the demigods; prītyā — with great pleasure; mṛdaṅga-paṇava-ānaka — of various kinds of drums; vādya — with musical accompaniment; gīta — song; puṣpa — flowers; upahāra — other presentations; nutibhiḥ — and prayers; sahasā — immediately; upaseduḥ — arrived.

Translation
Seeing the Lord dancing, His servants in the heavenly planets — the Gandharvas, Siddhas, sages, Cāraṇas and wives of the demigods — immediately arrived there. With great pleasure they began accompanying the Lord’s dancing by playing drums such as mṛdaṅgas, paṇavas and ānakas. They also made offerings of songs, flowers and prayers.

Text 28
यद् यच्छिरो न नमतेऽङ्ग शतैकशीर्ष्ण-
स्तत्तन् ममर्द खरदण्डधरोऽङ्‍‍‍‍‍घ्रिपातै: ।
क्षीणायुषो भ्रमत उल्बणमास्यतोऽसृङ्
नस्तो वमन् परमकश्मलमाप नाग: ॥ २८ ॥
yad yac chiro na namate ’ṅga śataika-śīrṣṇas
tat tan mamarda khara-daṇḍa-dharo ’ṅghri-pātaiḥ
kṣīṇāyuṣo bhramata ulbaṇam āsyato ’sṛṅ
nasto vaman parama-kaśmalam āpa nāgaḥ
Synonyms
yat yat — whichever; śiraḥ — heads; na namate — would not bow down; aṅga — my dear King Parīkṣit; śata-eka-śīrṣṇaḥ — of him who had 101 heads; tat tat — those; mamarda — trampled down; khara — on those who are evil; daṇḍa — punishment; dharaḥ — the Lord who exerts; aṅghri-pātaiḥ — with the blows of His feet; kṣīṇa-āyuṣaḥ — of Kāliya, whose life was becoming depleted; bhramataḥ — who was still moving about; ulbaṇam — terrible; āsyataḥ — from his mouths; asṛk — blood; nastaḥ — from his nostrils; vaman — vomiting; parama — extreme; kaśmalam — trouble; āpa — experienced; nāgaḥ — the serpent.

Translation
My dear King, Kāliya had 101 prominent heads, and when one of them would not bow down, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who inflicts punishment on cruel wrong-doers, would smash that stubborn head by striking it with His feet. Then, as Kāliya entered his death throes, he began wheeling his heads around and vomiting ghastly blood from his mouths and nostrils. The serpent thus experienced extreme pain and misery.

Text 29
तस्याक्षिभिर्गरलमुद्वमत: शिर:सु
यद् यत् समुन्नमति नि:श्वसतो रुषोच्चै: ।
नृत्यन् पदानुनमयन् दमयां बभूव
पुष्पै: प्रपूजित इवेह पुमान् पुराण: ॥ २९ ॥
tasyākṣibhir garalam udvamataḥ śiraḥsu
yad yat samunnamati niḥśvasato ruṣoccaiḥ
nṛtyan padānunamayan damayāṁ babhūva
puṣpaiḥ prapūjita iveha pumān purāṇaḥ
Synonyms
tasya — of him; akṣibhiḥ — from the eyes; garalam — poisonous waste; udvamataḥ — who was vomiting; śiraḥsu — among the heads; yat yat — whichever; samunnamati — would rise up; niḥśvasataḥ — who was breathing; ruṣā — out of anger; uccaiḥ — heavily; nṛtyan — while dancing; padā — with His foot; anunamayan — making bow down; damayām babhūva — He subdued; puṣpaiḥ — with flowers; prapūjitaḥ — being worshiped; iva — indeed; iha — on this occasion; pumān — the Personality of Godhead; purāṇaḥ — original.

Translation
Exuding poisonous waste from his eyes, Kāliya, would occasionally dare to raise up one of his heads, which would breathe heavily with anger. Then the Lord would dance on it and subdue it, forcing it to bow down with His foot. The demigods took each of these exhibitions as an opportunity to worship Him, the primeval Personality of Godhead, with showers of flowers.

Text 30
तच्चित्रताण्डवविरुग्नफणासहस्रो
रक्तं मुखैरुरु वमन्नृप भग्नगात्र: ।
स्मृत्वा चराचरगुरुं पुरुषं पुराणं
नारायणं तमरणं मनसा जगाम ॥ ३० ॥
tac-citra-tāṇḍava-virugna-phaṇā-sahasro
raktaṁ mukhair uru vaman nṛpa bhagna-gātraḥ
smṛtvā carācara-guruṁ puruṣaṁ purāṇaṁ
nārāyaṇaṁ tam araṇaṁ manasā jagāma
Synonyms
tat — of Him; citra — amazing; tāṇḍava — by the powerful dancing; virugna — broken; phaṇā-sahasraḥ — his one thousand hoods; raktam — blood; mukhaiḥ — from his mouths; uru — profusely; vaman — vomiting; nṛpa — O King Parīkṣit; bhagna-gātraḥ — his limbs crushed; smṛtvā — remembering; cara-acara — of all moving and nonmoving beings; gurum — the spiritual master; puruṣam — the Personality of Godhead; purāṇam — ancient; nārāyaṇam — Lord Nārāyaṇa; tam — to Him; araṇam — for shelter; manasā — within his mind; jagāma — he approached.

Translation
My dear King Parīkṣit, Lord Kṛṣṇa’s wonderful, powerful dancing trampled and broke all of Kāliya’s one thousand hoods. Then the serpent, profusely vomiting blood from his mouths, finally recognized Śrī Kṛṣṇa to be the eternal Personality of Godhead, the supreme master of all moving and nonmoving beings, Śrī Nārāyaṇa. Thus within his mind Kāliya took shelter of the Lord.

Text 31
कृष्णस्य गर्भजगतोऽतिभरावसन्नं
पार्ष्णिप्रहारपरिरुग्नफणातपत्रम् ।
द‍ृष्ट्वाहिमाद्यमुपसेदुरमुष्य पत्‍न्य
आर्ता: श्लथद्वसनभूषणकेशबन्धा: ॥ ३१ ॥
kṛṣṇasya garbha-jagato ’ti-bharāvasannaṁ
pārṣṇi-prahāra-parirugna-phaṇātapatram
dṛṣṭvāhim ādyam upasedur amuṣya patnya
ārtāḥ ślathad-vasana-bhūṣaṇa-keśa-bandhāḥ
Synonyms
kṛṣṇasya — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; garbha — in whose abdomen; jagataḥ — is found the entire universe; ati-bhara — by the extreme weight; avasannam — fatigued; pārṣṇi — of His heels; prahāra — by the striking; parirugna — shattered; phaṇā — his hoods; ātapatram — which were like umbrellas; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; ahim — the serpent; ādyam — the primeval Lord; upaseduḥ — approached; amuṣya — of Kāliya; patnyaḥ — the wives; ārtāḥ — feeling distressed; ślathat — disarrayed; vasana — their clothing; bhūṣaṇa — ornaments; keśa-bandhāḥ — and the locks of their hair.

Translation
When Kāliya’s wives saw how the serpent had become so fatigued from the excessive weight of Lord Kṛṣṇa, who carries the entire universe in His abdomen, and how Kāliya’s umbrellalike hoods had been shattered by the striking of Kṛṣṇa’s heels, they felt great distress. With their clothing, ornaments and hair scattered in disarray, they then approached the eternal Personality of Godhead.

Text 32
तास्तं सुविग्नमनसोऽथ पुरस्कृतार्भा:
कायं निधाय भुवि भूतपतिं प्रणेमु: ।
साध्व्य: कृताञ्जलिपुटा: शमलस्य भर्तु-
र्मोक्षेप्सव: शरणदं शरणं प्रपन्ना: ॥ ३२ ॥
tās taṁ su-vigna-manaso ’tha puraskṛtārbhāḥ
kāyaṁ nidhāya bhuvi bhūta-patiṁ praṇemuḥ
sādhvyaḥ kṛtāñjali-puṭāḥ śamalasya bhartur
mokṣepsavaḥ śaraṇa-daṁ śaraṇaṁ prapannāḥ
Synonyms
tāḥ — they, the wives of Kāliya; tam — to Him; su-vigna — very much agitated; manasaḥ — their minds; atha — then; puraḥ-kṛta — placing in front; arbhāḥ — their children; kāyam — their bodies; nidhāya — putting; bhuvi — upon the ground; bhūta-patim — to the Lord of all creatures; praṇemuḥ — they bowed down; sādhvyaḥ — the saintly ladies; kṛta-añjali-puṭāḥ — folding their hands in supplication; śamalasya — who was sinful; bhartuḥ — of their husband; mokṣa — the liberation; īpsavaḥ — desiring; śaraṇa-dam — He who grants shelter; śaraṇam — for shelter; prapannāḥ — they approached.

Translation
Their minds very much disturbed, those saintly ladies placed their children before them and then bowed down to the Lord of all creatures, laying their bodies flat upon the ground. They desired the liberation of their sinful husband and the shelter of the Supreme Lord, the giver of ultimate shelter, and thus they folded their hands in supplication and approached Him.

Text 33
नागपत्‍न्य ऊचु:
न्याय्यो हि दण्ड: कृतकिल्बिषेऽस्मिं-
स्तवावतार: खलनिग्रहाय ।
रिपो: सुतानामपि तुल्यद‍ृष्टि-
र्धत्से दमं फलमेवानुशंसन् ॥ ३३ ॥
nāga-patnya ūcuḥ
nyāyyo hi daṇḍaḥ kṛta-kilbiṣe ’smiṁs
tavāvatāraḥ khala-nigrahāya
ripoḥ sutānām api tulya-dṛṣṭir
dhatse damaṁ phalam evānuśaṁsan
Synonyms
nāga-patnyaḥ ūcuḥ — the wives of the serpent said; nyāyyaḥ — fair and just; hi — indeed; daṇḍaḥ — punishment; kṛta-kilbiṣe — to him who has committed offense; asmin — this person; tava — Your; avatāraḥ — descent into this world; khala — of the envious; nigrahāya — for the subjugation; ripoḥ — to an enemy; sutānām — to Your own sons; api — also; tulya-dṛṣṭiḥ — having equal vision; dhatse — You give; damam — punishment; phalam — the ultimate result; eva — indeed; anuśaṁsam — considering.

Translation
The wives of the Kāliya serpent said: The punishment this offender has been subjected to is certainly just. After all, You have incarnated within this world to curb down envious and cruel persons. You are so impartial that You look equally upon Your enemies and Your own sons, for when You impose a punishment on a living being You know it to be for his ultimate benefit.

Text 34
अनुग्रहोऽयं भवत: कृतो हि नो
दण्डोऽसतां ते खलु कल्मषापह: ।
यद् दन्दशूकत्वममुष्य देहिन:
क्रोधोऽपि तेऽनुग्रह एव सम्मत: ॥ ३४ ॥
anugraho ’yaṁ bhavataḥ kṛto hi no
daṇḍo ’satāṁ te khalu kalmaṣāpahaḥ
yad dandaśūkatvam amuṣya dehinaḥ
krodho ’pi te ’nugraha eva sammataḥ
Synonyms
anugrahaḥ — mercy; ayam — this; bhavataḥ — by You; kṛtaḥ — done; hi — indeed; naḥ — to us; daṇḍaḥ — punishment; asatām — of the evil; te — by You; khalu — indeed; kalmaṣa-apahaḥ — the dispelling of their contamination; yat — because; dandaśūkatvam — the condition of appearing as a serpent; amuṣya — of this Kāliya; dehinaḥ — the conditioned soul; krodhaḥ — anger; api — even; te — Your; anugrahaḥ — as mercy; eva — actually; sammataḥ — is accepted.

Translation
What You have done here is actually mercy for us, since the punishment You give to the wicked certainly drives away all their contamination. Indeed, because this conditioned soul, our husband, is so sinful that he has assumed the body of a serpent, Your anger toward him is obviously to be understood as Your mercy.

Text 35
तप: सुतप्तं किमनेन पूर्वं
निरस्तमानेन च मानदेन ।
धर्मोऽथ वा सर्वजनानुकम्पया
यतो भवांस्तुष्यति सर्वजीव: ॥ ३५ ॥
tapaḥ sutaptaṁ kim anena pūrvaṁ
nirasta-mānena ca māna-dena
dharmo ’tha vā sarva-janānukampayā
yato bhavāṁs tuṣyati sarva-jīvaḥ
Synonyms
tapaḥ — austerity; su-taptam — properly performed; kim — what; anena — by this Kāliya; pūrvam — in previous lives; nirasta-mānena — being free from false pride; ca — and; māna-dena — giving respect to others; dharmaḥ — religious duty; atha vā — or else; sarva-jana — to all persons; anukampayā — with compassion; yataḥ — by which; bhavān — Your good self; tuṣyati — is satisfied; sarva-jīvaḥ — the source of life for all beings.

Translation
Did our husband carefully perform austerities in a previous life, with his mind free of pride and full of respect for others? Is that why You are pleased with him? Or did he in some previous existence carefully execute religious duties with compassion for all living beings, and is that why You, the life of all living beings, are now satisfied with him?

Text 36
कस्यानुभावोऽस्य न देव विद्महे
तवाङ्‍‍‍‍‍घ्रिरेणुस्परशाधिकार: ।
यद्वाञ्छया श्रीर्ललनाचरत्तपो
विहाय कामान् सुचिरं धृतव्रता ॥ ३६ ॥
kasyānubhāvo ’sya na deva vidmahe
tavāṅghri-reṇu-sparaśādhikāraḥ
yad-vāñchayā śrīr lalanācarat tapo
vihāya kāmān su-ciraṁ dhṛta-vratā
Synonyms
kasya — of what; anubhāvaḥ — a result; asya — of the serpent (Kāliya); na — not; deva — my Lord; vidmahe — we know; tava — Your; aṅghri — of the lotus feet; reṇu — of the dust; sparaśa — for touching; adhikāraḥ — qualification; yat — for which; vāñchayā — with the desire; śrīḥ — the goddess of fortune; lalanā — (the topmost) woman; ācarat — performed; tapaḥ — austerity; vihāya — giving up; kāmān — all desires; su-ciram — for a long time; dhṛta — upheld; vratā — her vow.

Translation
O Lord, we do not know how the serpent Kāliya has attained this great opportunity of being touched by the dust of Your lotus feet. For this end, the goddess of fortune performed austerities for centuries, giving up all other desires and observing austere vows.

Text 37
न नाकपृष्ठं न च सार्वभौमं
न पारमेष्ठ्यं न रसाधिपत्यम् ।
न योगसिद्धीरपुनर्भवं वा
वाञ्छन्ति यत्पादरज:प्रपन्ना: ॥ ३७ ॥
na nāka-pṛṣṭhaṁ na ca sārva-bhaumaṁ
na pārameṣṭhyaṁ na rasādhipatyam
na yoga-siddhīr apunar-bhavaṁ vā
vāñchanti yat-pāda-rajaḥ-prapannāḥ
Synonyms
na — not; nāka-pṛṣṭham — heaven; na ca — nor; sārva-bhaumam — supreme sovereignty; na — not; pārameṣṭhyam — the topmost position of Brahmā; na — not; rasa-adhipatyam — rulership over the earth; na — not; yoga-siddhīḥ — the perfections of yogic practice; apunaḥ-bhavam — freedom from rebirth; vā — or; vāñchanti — desire; yat — whose; pāda — of the lotus feet; rajaḥ — the dust; prapannāḥ — those who have attained.

Translation
Those who have attained the dust of Your lotus feet never hanker for the kingship of heaven, limitless sovereignty, the position of Brahmā or rulership over the earth. They are not interested even in the perfections of yoga or in liberation itself.

Text 38
तदेष नाथाप दुरापमन्यै-
स्तमोजनि: क्रोधवशोऽप्यहीश: ।
संसारचक्रे भ्रमत: शरीरिणो
यदिच्छत: स्याद् विभव: समक्ष: ॥ ३८ ॥
tad eṣa nāthāpa durāpam anyais
tamo-janiḥ krodha-vaśo ’py ahīśaḥ
saṁsāra-cakre bhramataḥ śarīriṇo
yad-icchataḥ syād vibhavaḥ samakṣaḥ
Synonyms
tat — that; eṣaḥ — this Kāliya; nātha — O Lord; āpa — has achieved; durāpam — difficult to achieve; anyaiḥ — by others; tamaḥ-janiḥ — who was born in the mode of ignorance; krodha-vaśaḥ — who was under the sway of anger; api — even; ahi-īśaḥ — the king of serpents; saṁsāra-cakre — within the cycle of material existence; bhramataḥ — wandering; śarīriṇaḥ — for the embodied living entity; yat — by which (dust of Your lotus feet); icchataḥ — who has material desires; syāt — manifests; vibhavaḥ — all opulences; samakṣaḥ — before his eyes.

Translation
O Lord, although this Kāliya, the king of the serpents, has taken birth in the mode of ignorance and is controlled by anger, he has achieved that which is difficult for others to achieve. Embodied souls, who are full of desires and are thus wandering in the cycle of birth and death, can have all benedictions manifested before their eyes simply by receiving the dust of Your lotus feet.

Text 39
नमस्तुभ्यं भगवते पुरुषाय महात्मने ।
भूतावासाय भूताय पराय परमात्मने ॥ ३९ ॥
namas tubhyaṁ bhagavate
puruṣāya mahātmane
bhūtāvāsāya bhūtāya
parāya paramātmane
Synonyms
namaḥ — obeisances; tubhyam — to You; bhagavate — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puruṣāya — who are present within as the Supersoul; mahā-ātmane — who are all-pervasive; bhūta-āvāsāya — who are the shelter of the material elements (beginning with the ethereal sky); bhūtāya — who exist even prior to the creation; parāya — to the supreme cause; parama-ātmane — who are beyond all material cause.

Translation
We offer our obeisances unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Although present in the hearts of all living beings as the Supersoul, You are all-pervasive. Although the original shelter of all created material elements, You exist prior to their creation. And although the cause of everything, You are transcendental to all material cause and effect, being the Supreme Soul.

Text 40
ज्ञानविज्ञाननीधये ब्रह्मणेऽनन्तशक्तये ।
अगुणायाविकाराय नमस्ते प्राकृताय च ॥ ४० ॥
jñāna-vijñāna-nīdhaye
brahmaṇe ’nanta-śaktaye
aguṇāyāvikārāya
namas te prākṛtāya ca
Synonyms
jñāna — of consciousness; vijñāna — and spiritual potency; nidhaye — to the ocean; brahmaṇe — to the Absolute Truth; ananta-śaktaye — whose potencies are unlimited; aguṇāya — to Him who is never affected by the qualities of matter; avikārāya — who does not undergo any material transformation; namaḥ — obeisances; te — unto You; prākṛtāya — to the prime mover of material nature; ca — and.

Translation
Obeisances unto You, the Absolute Truth, who are the reservoir of all transcendental consciousness and potency and the possessor of unlimited energies. Although completely free of material qualities and transformations, You are the prime mover of material nature.

Text 41
कालाय कालनाभाय कालावयवसाक्षिणे ।
विश्वाय तदुपद्रष्ट्रे तत्कर्त्रे विश्वहेतवे ॥ ४१ ॥
kālāya kāla-nābhāya
kālāvayava-sākṣiṇe
viśvāya tad-upadraṣṭre
tat-kartre viśva-hetave
Synonyms
kālāya — unto time; kāla-nābhāya — unto Him who is the shelter of time; kāla-avayava — of the various phases of time; sākṣiṇe — to the witness; viśvāya — to the form of the universe; tad-upadraṣṭre — to the observer of it; tat-kartre — to the creator of it; viśva — of the universe; hetave — to the total cause.

Translation
Obeisances unto You, who are time itself, the shelter of time and the witness of time in all its phases. You are the universe, and also its separate observer. You are its creator, and also the totality of all its causes.

Texts 42-43
भूतमात्रेन्द्रियप्राणमनोबुद्ध्याशयात्मने ।
त्रिगुणेनाभिमानेन गूढस्वात्मानुभूतये ॥ ४२ ॥
नमोऽनन्ताय सूक्ष्माय कूटस्थाय विपश्चिते ।
नानावादानुरोधाय वाच्यवाचकशक्तये ॥ ४३ ॥
bhūta-mātrendriya-prāṇa-
mano-buddhy-āśayātmane
tri-guṇenābhimānena
gūḍha-svātmānubhūtaye
namo ’nantāya sūkṣmāya
kūṭa-sthāya vipaścite
nānā-vādānurodhāya
vācya-vācaka-śaktaye
Synonyms
bhūta — of the physical elements; mātra — the subtle basis of perception; indriya — the senses; prāṇa — the vital air of life; manaḥ — the mind; buddhi — the intelligence; āśaya — and of material consciousness; ātmane — to the ultimate soul; tri-guṇena — by the three modes of material nature; abhimānena — by false identification; gūḍha — who causes to become covered over; sva — one’s own; ātma — of the self; anubhūtaye — perception; namaḥ — obeisances; anantāya — to the unlimited Lord; sūkṣmāya — to the supremely subtle; kūṭa-sthāya — who is fixed in the center; vipaścite — to the omniscient one; nānā — various; vāda — philosophies; anurodhāya — who sanctions; vācya — of expressed ideas; vācaka — and expressing words; śaktaye — who possesses the potencies.

Translation
Obeisances unto You, who are the ultimate soul of the physical elements, of the subtle basis of perception, of the senses, of the vital air of life, and of the mind, intelligence and consciousness. By Your arrangement the infinitesimal spirit souls falsely identify with the three modes of material nature, and their perception of their own true self thus becomes clouded. We offer our obeisances unto You, the unlimited Supreme Lord, the supremely subtle one, the omniscient Personality of Godhead, who are always fixed in unchanging transcendence, who sanction the opposing views of different philosophies, and who are the power upholding expressed ideas and the words that express them.

Text 44
नम: प्रमाणमूलाय कवये शास्त्रयोनये ।
प्रवृत्ताय निवृत्ताय निगमाय नमो नम: ॥ ४४ ॥
namaḥ pramāṇa-mūlāya
kavaye śāstra-yonaye
pravṛttāya nivṛttāya
nigamāya namo namaḥ
Synonyms
namaḥ — obeisances; pramāṇa — of authoritative evidence; mūlāya — to the basis; kavaye — to the author; śāstra — of the revealed scripture; yonaye — to the source; pravṛttāya — which encourages sense gratification; nivṛttāya — which encourages renunciation; nigamāya — to Him who is the origin of both kinds of scripture; namaḥ namaḥ — repeated obeisances.

Translation
We offer our obeisances again and again to You, who are the basis of all authoritative evidence, who are the author and ultimate source of the revealed scriptures, and who have manifested Yourself in those Vedic literatures encouraging sense gratification as well as in those encouraging renunciation of the material world.

Text 45
नम: कृष्णाय रामाय वसुदेवसुताय च ।
प्रद्युम्नायानिरुद्धाय सात्वतां पतये नम: ॥ ४५ ॥
namaḥ kṛṣṇāya rāmāya
vasudeva-sutāya ca
pradyumnāyāniruddhāya
sātvatāṁ pataye namaḥ
Synonyms
namaḥ — obeisances; kṛṣṇāya — to Lord Kṛṣṇa; rāmāya — to Lord Rāma; vasudeva-sutāya — the son of Vasudeva; ca — and; pradyumnāya — to Lord Pradyumna; aniruddhāya — to Lord Aniruddha; sātvatām — of the devotees; pataye — to the Lord; namaḥ — obeisances.

Translation
We offer our obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Rāma, the sons of Vasudeva, and to Lord Pradyumna and Lord Aniruddha. We offer our respectful obeisances unto the master of all the saintly devotees of Viṣṇu.

Text 46
नमो गुणप्रदीपाय गुणात्मच्छादनाय च ।
गुणवृत्त्युपलक्ष्याय गुणद्रष्ट्रे स्वसंविदे ॥ ४६ ॥
namo guṇa-pradīpāya
guṇātma-cchādanāya ca
guṇa-vṛtty-upalakṣyāya
guṇa-draṣṭre sva-saṁvide
Synonyms
namaḥ — obeisances; guṇa-pradīpāya — to Him who manifests various qualities; guṇa — by the material modes; ātma — Himself; chādanāya — who disguises; ca — and; guṇa — of the modes; vṛtti — by the functioning; upalakṣyāya — who can be ascertained; guṇa-draṣṭre — to the separate witness of the material modes; sva — to His own devotees; saṁvide — who is known.

Translation
Obeisances to You, O Lord, who manifest varieties of material and spiritual qualities. You disguise Yourself with the material qualities, and yet the functioning of those same material qualities ultimately reveals Your existence. You stand apart from the material qualities as a witness and can be fully known only by Your devotees.

Text 47
अव्याकृतविहाराय सर्वव्याकृतसिद्धये ।
हृषीकेश नमस्तेऽस्तु मुनये मौनशीलिने ॥ ४७ ॥
avyākṛta-vihārāya
sarva-vyākṛta-siddhaye
hṛṣīkeśa namas te ’stu
munaye mauna-śīline
Synonyms
avyākṛta-vihārāya — to Him whose glories are unfathomable; sarva-vyākṛta — the creation and manifestation of all things; siddhaye — to Him who can be understood as existent on the basis of; hṛṣīka-īśa — O motivator of the senses; namaḥ — obeisances; te — unto You; astu — let there be; munaye — to the silent; mauna-śīline — to Him who acts in silence.

Translation
O Lord Hṛṣīkeśa, master of the senses, please let us offer our obeisances unto You, whose pastimes are inconceivably glorious. Your existence can be inferred from the necessity for a creator and revealer of all cosmic manifestations. But although Your devotees can understand You in this way, to the nondevotees You remain silent, absorbed in self-satisfaction.

Text 48
परावरगतिज्ञाय सर्वाध्यक्षाय ते नम: ।
अविश्वाय च विश्वाय तद्‌‌द्रष्ट्रेऽस्य च हेतवे ॥ ४८ ॥
parāvara-gati-jñāya
sarvādhyakṣāya te namaḥ
aviśvāya ca viśvāya
tad-draṣṭre ’sya ca hetave
Synonyms
para-avara — of all things, both superior and inferior; gati — the destinations; jñāya — to Him who knows; sarva — of all things; adhyakṣāya — to the regulator; te — You; namaḥ — our obeisances; aviśvāya — to Him who is distinct from the universe; ca — and; viśvāya — in whom the illusion of material creation manifests; tat-draṣṭre — to the witness of such illusion; asya — of this world; ca — and; hetave — to the root cause.

Translation
Obeisances unto You, who know the destination of all things, superior and inferior, and who are the presiding regulator of all that be. You are distinct from the universal creation, and yet You are the basis upon which the illusion of material creation evolves, and also the witness of this illusion. Indeed, You are the root cause of the entire world.

Text 49
त्वं ह्यस्य जन्मस्थितिसंयमान् विभो
गुणैरनीहोऽकृतकालशक्तिधृक् ।
तत्तत्स्वभावान् प्रतिबोधयन् सत:
समीक्षयामोघविहार ईहसे ॥ ४९ ॥
tvaṁ hy asya janma-sthiti-saṁyamān vibho
guṇair anīho ’kṛta-kāla-śakti-dhṛk
tat-tat-svabhāvān pratibodhayan sataḥ
samīkṣayāmogha-vihāra īhase
Synonyms
tvam — You; hi — indeed; asya — of this universe; janma-sthiti-saṁyamān — the creation, maintenance and destruction; vibho — O almighty Lord; guṇaiḥ — by the modes of nature; anīhaḥ — although uninvolved in any material endeavor; akṛta — beginningless; kāla-śakti — of the potency of time; dhṛk — the holder; tat-tat — of each of the modes; sva-bhāvān — the distinctive characteristics; pratibodhayan — awakening; sataḥ — which are already present in their dormant state; samīkṣayā — by Your glance; amogha-vihāraḥ — whose playful activities are impeccable; īhase — You act.

Translation
O almighty Lord, although You have no reason to become involved in material activity, still You act through Your eternal potency of time to arrange for the creation, maintenance and destruction of this universe. You do this by awakening the distinct functions of each of the modes of nature, which before the creation lie dormant. Simply by Your glance You perfectly execute all these activities of cosmic control in a sporting mood.

Text 50
तस्यैव तेऽमूस्तनवस्त्रिलोक्यां
शान्ता अशान्ता उत मूढयोनय: ।
शान्ता: प्रियास्ते ह्यधुनावितुं सतां
स्थातुश्च ते धर्मपरीप्सयेहत: ॥ ५० ॥
tasyaiva te ’mūs tanavas tri-lokyāṁ
śāntā aśāntā uta mūḍha-yonayaḥ
śāntāḥ priyās te hy adhunāvituṁ satāṁ
sthātuś ca te dharma-parīpsayehataḥ
Synonyms
tasya — of Him; eva — indeed; te — of You; amūḥ — these; tanavaḥ — material bodies; tri-lokyām — throughout the three worlds; śāntāḥ — peaceful (in the mode of goodness); aśāntāḥ — not peaceful (in the mode of passion); uta — and also; mūḍha-yonayaḥ — born in ignorant species; śāntāḥ — the peaceful persons in the mode of goodness; priyāḥ — dear; te — to You; hi — certainly; adhunā — now; avitum — to protect; satām — of the saintly devotees; sthātuḥ — who are present; ca — and; te — of You; dharma — their principles of religion; parīpsayā — with the desire of maintaining; īhataḥ — who is acting.

Translation
Therefore all material bodies throughout the three worlds — those that are peaceful, in the mode of goodness; those that are agitated, in the mode of passion; and those that are foolish, in the mode of ignorance — all are Your creations. Still, those living entities whose bodies are in the mode of goodness are especially dear to You, and it is to maintain them and protect their religious principles that You are now present on the earth.

Text 51
अपराध: सकृद् भर्त्रा सोढव्य: स्वप्रजाकृत: ।
क्षन्तुमर्हसि शान्तात्मन् मूढस्य त्वामजानत: ॥ ५१ ॥
aparādhaḥ sakṛd bhartrā
soḍhavyaḥ sva-prajā-kṛtaḥ
kṣantum arhasi śāntātman
mūḍhasya tvām ajānataḥ
Synonyms
aparādhaḥ — the offense; sakṛt — just once; bhartrā — by the master; soḍhavyaḥ — should be tolerated; sva-prajā — by his own subject; kṛtaḥ — committed; kṣantum — to tolerate; arhasi — it is befitting for You; śānta-ātman — O You who are always peaceful; mūḍhasya — of the foolish one; tvām — You; ajānataḥ — who does not understand.

Translation
At least once, a master should tolerate an offense committed by his child or subject. O supreme peaceful Soul, You should therefore forgive our foolish husband, who did not understand who You are.

Text 52
अनुगृह्णीष्व भगवन् प्राणांस्त्यजति पन्नग: ।
स्त्रीणां न: साधुशोच्यानां पति: प्राण: प्रदीयताम् ॥ ५२ ॥
anugṛhṇīṣva bhagavan
prāṇāṁs tyajati pannagaḥ
strīṇāṁ naḥ sādhu-śocyānāṁ
patiḥ prāṇaḥ pradīyatām
Synonyms
anugṛhṇīṣva — please show mercy; bhagavan — O Supreme Lord; prāṇān — his life airs; tyajati — is giving up; pannagaḥ — the serpent; strīṇām — for women; naḥ — us; sādhu-śocyānām — who are to be pitied by saintly personalities; patiḥ — the husband; prāṇaḥ — life itself; pradīyatām — should be given back.

Translation
O Supreme Lord, please be merciful. It is proper for the saintly to feel compassion for women like us. This serpent is about to give up his life. Please give us back our husband, who is our life and soul.

Text 53
विधेहि ते किङ्करीणामनुष्ठेयं तवाज्ञया ।
यच्छ्रद्धयानुतिष्ठन् वै मुच्यते सर्वतोभयात् ॥ ५३ ॥
vidhehi te kiṅkarīṇām
anuṣṭheyaṁ tavājñayā
yac-chraddhayānutiṣṭhan vai
mucyate sarvato bhayāt
Synonyms
vidhehi — please order; te — Your; kiṅkarīṇām — by the maidservants; anuṣṭheyam — what should be done; tava — Your; ājñayā — by the command; yat — which; śraddhayā — with faith; anutiṣṭhan — executing; vai — certainly; mucyate — one will become freed; sarvataḥ — from all; bhayāt — fear.

Translation
Now please tell us, Your maidservants, what we should do. Certainly anyone who faithfully executes Your order is automatically freed from all fear.

Text 54
श्रीशुक उवाच
इत्थं स नागपत्नीभिर्भगवान् समभिष्टुत: ।
मूर्च्छितं भग्नशिरसं विससर्जाङ्‍‍‍‍‍घ्रिकुट्टनै: ॥ ५४ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
itthaṁ sa nāga-patnībhir
bhagavān samabhiṣṭutaḥ
mūrcchitaṁ bhagna-śirasaṁ
visasarjāṅghri-kuṭṭanaiḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ittham — in this way; saḥ — He, Lord Kṛṣṇa; nāga-patnībhiḥ — by the wives of Kāliya; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; samabhiṣṭutaḥ — fully praised; mūrcchitam — who was unconscious; bhagna-śirasam — his heads crushed; visasarja — He let go; aṅghri-kuṭṭanaiḥ — by the striking of His feet.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus praised by the Nāgapatnīs, the Supreme Personality of Godhead released the serpent Kāliya, who had fallen unconscious, his heads battered by the striking of the Lord’s lotus feet.

Text 55
प्रतिलब्धेन्द्रियप्राण: कालिय: शनकैर्हरिम् ।
कृच्छ्रात् समुच्छ्वसन् दीन: कृष्णं प्राह कृताञ्जलि: ॥ ५५ ॥
pratilabdhendriya-prāṇaḥ
kāliyaḥ śanakair harim
kṛcchrāt samucchvasan dīnaḥ
kṛṣṇaṁ prāha kṛtāñjaliḥ
Synonyms
pratilabdha — regaining; indriya — the function of his senses; prāṇaḥ — and his vital force; kāliyaḥ — Kāliya; śanakaiḥ — gradually; harim — to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kṛcchrāt — with difficulty; samucchvasan — breathing loudly; dīnaḥ — wretched; kṛṣṇam — to Lord Kṛṣṇa; prāha — spoke; kṛta-añjaliḥ — in humble submission.

Translation
Kāliya slowly regained his vital force and sensory functions. Then, breathing loudly and painfully, the poor serpent addressed Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in humble submission.

Text 56
कालिय उवाच
वयं खला: सहोत्पत्त्या तामसा दीर्घमन्यव: ।
स्वभावो दुस्त्यजो नाथ लोकानां यदसद्ग्रह: ॥ ५६ ॥
kāliya uvāca
vayaṁ khalāḥ sahotpattyā
tamasā dīrgha-manyavaḥ
svabhāvo dustyajo nātha
lokānāṁ yad asad-grahaḥ
Synonyms
kāliyaḥ uvāca — Kāliya said; vayam — we; khalāḥ — envious; saha utpattyā — by our very birth; tāmasāḥ — of ignorant nature; dīrgha-manyavaḥ — constantly angry; svabhāvaḥ — one’s material nature; dustyajaḥ — is very difficult to give up; nātha — O Lord; lokānām — for ordinary persons; yat — because of which; asat — of the unreal and impure; grahaḥ — the acceptance.

Translation
The serpent Kāliya said: Our very birth as a snake has made us envious, ignorant and constantly angry. O my Lord, it is so difficult for people to give up their conditioned nature, by which they identify with that which is unreal.

Text 57
त्वया सृष्टमिदं विश्वं धातर्गुणविसर्जनम् ।
नानास्वभाववीर्यौजोयोनिबीजाशयाकृति ॥ ५७ ॥
tvayā sṛṣṭam idaṁ viśvaṁ
dhātar guṇa-visarjanam
nānā-svabhāva-vīryaujo-
yoni-bījāśayākṛti
Synonyms
tvayā — by You; sṛṣṭam — created; idam — this; viśvam — universe; dhātaḥ — O supreme provider; guṇa — of the material modes; visarjanam — the variegated creation; nānā — various; sva-bhāva — personal natures; vīrya — varieties of sensory strength; ojaḥ — and physical strength; yoni — wombs; bīja — seeds; āśaya — mentalities; ākṛti — and forms.

Translation
O supreme creator, it is You who generate this universe, composed of the variegated arrangement of the material modes, and in the process You manifest various kinds of personalities and species, varieties of sensory and physical strength, and varieties of mothers and fathers with variegated mentalities and forms.

Text 58
वयं च तत्र भगवन् सर्पा जात्युरुमन्यव: ।
कथं त्यजामस्त्वन्मायां दुस्त्यजां मोहिता: स्वयम् ॥ ५८ ॥
vayaṁ ca tatra bhagavan
sarpā jāty-uru-manyavaḥ
kathaṁ tyajāmas tvan-māyāṁ
dustyajāṁ mohitāḥ svayam
Synonyms
vayam — we; ca — and; tatra — within that material creation; bhagavan — O Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarpāḥ — serpents; jāti — by species; uru-manyavaḥ — too much absorbed in anger; katham — how; tyajāmaḥ — we can give up; tvat-māyām — Your illusory potency; dustyajām — which is impossible to give up; mohitāḥ — bewildered; svayam — on our own.

Translation
O Supreme Personality of Godhead, among all the species within Your material creation, we serpents are by nature always enraged. Being thus deluded by Your illusory energy, which is very difficult to give up, how can we possibly give it up on our own?

Text 59
भवान् हि कारणं तत्र सर्वज्ञो जगदीश्वर: ।
अनुग्रहं निग्रहं वा मन्यसे तद् विधेहि न: ॥ ५९ ॥
bhavān hi kāraṇaṁ tatra
sarva-jño jagad-īśvaraḥ
anugrahaṁ nigrahaṁ vā
manyase tad vidhehi naḥ
Synonyms
bhavān — Your good self; hi — certainly; kāraṇam — the cause; tatra — in that matter (the removal of illusion); sarva-jñaḥ — the knower of everything; jagat-īśvaraḥ — the supreme controller of the universe; anugraham — favor; nigraham — punishment; vā — or; manyase — (whatever) You consider; tat — that; vidhehi — arrange; naḥ — for us.

Translation
O Lord, since You are the omniscient Lord of the universe, You are the actual cause of freedom from illusion. Please arrange for us whatever You consider proper, whether it be mercy or punishment.

Text 60
श्रीशुक उवाच
इत्याकर्ण्य वच: प्राह भगवान् कार्यमानुष: ।
नात्र स्थेयं त्वया सर्प समुद्रं याहि मा चिरम् ।
स्वज्ञात्यपत्यदाराढ्यो गोनृभिर्भुज्यते नदी ॥ ६० ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
ity ākarṇya vacaḥ prāha
bhagavān kārya-mānuṣaḥ
nātra stheyaṁ tvayā sarpa
samudraṁ yāhi mā ciram
sva-jñāty-apatya-dārāḍhyo
go-nṛbhir bhujyate nadī
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti — thus; ākarṇya — hearing; vacaḥ — these words; prāha — then spoke; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kārya-mānuṣaḥ — who was acting like a human being; na — not; atra — here; stheyam — should remain; tvayā — you; sarpa — My dear serpent; samudram — to the ocean; yāhi — go; mā ciram — without delay; sva — your own; jñāti — by the companions; apatya — children; dāra — and wife; āḍhyaḥ — adequately accompanied; go — by the cows; nṛbhiḥ — and the humans; bhujyate — let it be enjoyed; nadī — the river Yamunā.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: After hearing Kāliya’s words, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who was acting the role of a human being, replied: O serpent, you may not remain here any longer. Go back to the ocean immediately, accompanied by your retinue of children, wives, other relatives and friends. Let this river be enjoyed by the cows and humans.

Text 61
य एतत् संस्मरेन्मर्त्यस्तुभ्यं मदनुशासनम् ।
कीर्तयन्नुभयो: सन्ध्योर्न युष्मद् भयमाप्नुयात् ॥ ६१ ॥
ya etat saṁsmaren martyas
tubhyaṁ mad-anuśāsanam
kīrtayann ubhayoḥ sandhyor
na yuṣmad bhayam āpnuyāt
Synonyms
yaḥ — who; etat — this; saṁsmaret — remembers; martyaḥ — a mortal; tubhyam — to you; mat — My; anuśāsanam — command; kīrtayan — chanting; ubhayoḥ — at both; sandhyoḥ — junctures of the day; na — not; yuṣmat — from you; bhayam — fear; āpnuyāt — obtains.

Translation
If a mortal being attentively remembers My command to you — to leave Vṛndāvana and go to the ocean — and narrates this account at sunrise and sunset, he will never be afraid of you.

Text 62
योऽस्मिन् स्‍नात्वा मदाक्रीडे देवादींस्तर्पयेज्जलै: ।
उपोष्य मां स्मरन्नर्चेत् सर्वपापै: प्रमुच्यते ॥ ६२ ॥
yo ’smin snātvā mad-ākrīḍe
devādīṁs tarpayej jalaiḥ
upoṣya māṁ smarann arcet
sarva-pāpaiḥ pramucyate
Synonyms
yaḥ — who; asmin — in this (Kāliya’s lake in the Yamunā River); snātvā — bathing; mat-ākrīḍe — the place of My pastime; deva-ādīn — the demigods and other worshipable personalities; tarpayet — gratifies; jalaiḥ — with the water (of that lake); upoṣya — observing a fast; mām — Me; smaran — remembering; arcet — performs worship; sarva-pāpaiḥ — from all sinful reactions; pramucyate — he becomes freed.

Translation
If one bathes in this place of My pastimes and offers the water of this lake to the demigods and other worshipable personalities, or if one observes a fast and duly worships and remembers Me, he is sure to become free from all sinful reactions.

Text 63
द्वीपं रमणकं हित्वा ह्रदमेतमुपाश्रित: ।
यद्भ‍यत्स सुपर्णस्त्वां नाद्यान्मत्पादलाञ्छितम् ॥ ६३ ॥
dvīpaṁ ramaṇakaṁ hitvā
hradam etam upāśritaḥ
yad-bhayāt sa suparṇas tvāṁ
nādyān mat-pāda-lāñchitam
Synonyms
dvīpam — the great island; ramaṇakam — named Ramaṇaka; hitvā — abandoning; hradam — the small lake; etam — this; upāśritaḥ — taken shelter of; yat — of whom; bhayāt — because of the fear; saḥ — that; suparṇaḥ — Garuḍa; tvām — you; na adyāt — will not eat; mat-pāda — with My feet; lāñchitam — marked.

Translation
Out of fear of Garuḍa, you left Ramaṇaka Island and came to take shelter of this lake. But because you are now marked with My footprints, Garuḍa will no longer try to eat you.

Text 64
श्रीऋषिरुवाच
मुक्तो भगवता राजन् कृष्णेनाद्भुतकर्मणा ।
तं पूजयामास मुदा नागपत्‍न्यश्च सादरम् ॥ ६४ ॥
śrī-ṛṣir uvāca
mukto bhagavatā rājan
kṛṣṇenādbhuta-karmaṇā
taṁ pūjayām āsa mudā
nāga-patnyaś ca sādaram
Synonyms
śrī-ṛṣiḥ uvāca — the sage (Śukadeva) said; muktaḥ — freed; bhagavatā — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rājan — O King Parīkṣit; kṛṣṇena — by Lord Kṛṣṇa; adbhuta-karmaṇā — whose activities are very wonderful; tam — Him; pūjayām āsa — worshiped; mudā — with pleasure; nāga — of the serpent; patnyaḥ — the wives; ca — and; sa-ādaram — with reverence.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, having been released by Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose activities are wonderful, Kāliya joined his wives in worshiping Him with great joy and reverence.

Texts 65-67
दिव्याम्बरस्रङ्‌मणिभि: परार्ध्यैरपि भूषणै: ।
दिव्यगन्धानुलेपैश्च महत्योत्पलमालया ॥ ६५ ॥
पूजयित्वा जगन्नाथं प्रसाद्य गरुडध्वजम् ।
तत: प्रीतोऽभ्यनुज्ञात: परिक्रम्याभिवन्द्य तम् ॥ ६६ ॥
सकलत्रसुहृत्पुत्रो द्वीपमब्धेर्जगाम ह ।
तदैव सामृतजला यमुना निर्विषाभवत् ।
अनुग्रहाद् भगवत: क्रीडामानुषरूपिण: ॥ ६७ ॥
divyāmbara-sraṅ-maṇibhiḥ
parārdhyair api bhūṣaṇaiḥ
divya-gandhānulepaiś ca
mahatyotpala-mālayā
pūjayitvā jagan-nāthaṁ
prasādya garuḍa-dhvajam
tataḥ prīto ’bhyanujñātaḥ
parikramyābhivandya tam
sa-kalatra-suhṛt-putro
dvīpam abdher jagāma ha
tadaiva sāmṛta-jalā
yamunā nirviṣābhavat
anugrahād bhagavataḥ
krīḍā-mānuṣa-rūpiṇaḥ
Synonyms
divya — divine; ambara — with clothing; srak — garlands; maṇibhiḥ — and jewels; para-ardhyaiḥ — most valuable; api — also; bhūṣaṇaiḥ — ornaments; divya — divine; gandha — with scents; anulepaiḥ — and ointments; ca — as well; mahatyā — fine; utpala — of lotuses; mālayā — with a garland; pūjayitvā — worshiping; jagat-nātham — the Lord of the universe; prasādya — satisfying; garuḍa-dhvajam — Him whose flag is marked with the emblem of Garuḍa; tataḥ — then; prītaḥ — feeling happy; abhyanujñātaḥ — given permission to leave; parikramya — circumambulating; abhivandya — offering obeisances; tam — to Him; sa — along with; kalatra — his wives; suhṛt — friends; putraḥ — and children; dvīpam — to the island; abdheḥ — in the sea; jagāma — he went; ha — indeed; tadā eva — at that very moment; sa-amṛta — nectarean; jalā — her water; yamunā — the river Yamunā; nirviṣā — free from poison; abhavat — she became; anugrahāt — by the mercy; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; krīḍā — for pleasure pastimes; mānuṣa — humanlike; rūpiṇaḥ — manifesting a form.

Translation
Kāliya worshiped the Lord of the universe by offering Him fine garments, along with necklaces, jewels and other valuable ornaments, wonderful scents and ointments, and a large garland of lotus flowers. Having thus pleased the Lord, whose flag is marked with the emblem of Garuḍa, Kāliya felt satisfied. Receiving the Lord’s permission to leave, Kāliya circumambulated Him and offered Him obeisances. Then, taking his wives, friends and children, he went to his island in the sea. The very moment Kāliya left, the Yamunā was immediately restored to her original condition, free from poison and full of nectarean water. This happened by the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who was manifesting a humanlike form to enjoy His pastimes.