Text 1
श्रीराजोवाच
नागालयं रमणकं कथं तत्याज कालिय: ।
कृतं किं वा सुपर्णस्य तेनैकेनासमञ्जसम् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-rājovāca
nāgālayaṁ ramaṇakaṁ
kathaṁ tatyāja kāliyaḥ
kṛtaṁ kiṁ vā suparṇasya
tenaikenāsamañjasam
Synonyms
śrī-rājā uvāca — the King said; nāga — of the serpents; ālayam — the residence; ramaṇakam — the island named Ramaṇaka; katham — why; tatyāja — gave up; kāliyaḥ — Kāliya; kṛtam — was made; kim vā — and why; suparṇasya — of Garuḍa; tena — with him, Kāliya; ekena — alone; asamañjasam — enmity.

Translation
[Having thus heard how Lord Kṛṣṇa chastised Kāliya,] King Parīkṣit inquired: Why did Kāliya leave Ramaṇaka Island, the abode of the serpents, and why did Garuḍa become so antagonistic toward him alone?

Texts 2-3
श्रीशुक उवाच
उपहार्यै: सर्पजनैर्मासि मासीह यो बलि: ।
वानस्पत्यो महाबाहो नागानां प्राङ्‍‍‍‍‍‍निरूपित: ॥ २ ॥
स्वं स्वं भागं प्रयच्छन्ति नागा: पर्वणि पर्वणि ।
गोपीथायात्मन: सर्वे सुपर्णाय महात्मने ॥ ३ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
upahāryaiḥ sarpa-janair
māsi māsīha yo baliḥ
vānaspatyo mahā-bāho
nāgānāṁ prāṅ-nirūpitaḥ
svaṁ svaṁ bhāgaṁ prayacchanti
nāgāḥ parvaṇi parvaṇi
gopīthāyātmanaḥ sarve
suparṇāya mahātmane
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; upahāryaiḥ — who were qualified to make offerings; sarpa-janaiḥ — by the serpent race; māsi māsi — each month; iha — here (in Nāgālaya); yaḥ — which; baliḥ — offering of tribute; vānaspatyaḥ — at the base of a tree; mahā-bāho — O mighty-armed Parīkṣit; nāgānām — for the serpents; prāk — previously; nirūpitaḥ — ordained; svam svam — each his own; bhāgam — portion; prayacchanti — they present; nāgāḥ — the serpents; parvaṇi parvaṇi — once each month; gopīthāya — for the protection; ātmanaḥ — of themselves; sarve — all of them; suparṇāya — to Garuḍa; mahā-ātmane — the powerful.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: To avoid being eaten by Garuḍa, the serpents had previously made an arrangement with him whereby they would each make a monthly offering of tribute at the base of a tree. Thus every month on schedule, O mighty-armed King Parīkṣit, each serpent would duly make his offering to that powerful carrier of Viṣṇu as a purchase of protection.

Text 4
विषवीर्यमदाविष्ट: काद्रवेयस्तु कालिय: ।
कदर्थीकृत्य गरुडं स्वयं तं बुभुजे बलिम् ॥ ४ ॥
viṣa-vīrya-madāviṣṭaḥ
kādraveyas tu kāliyaḥ
kadarthī-kṛtya garuḍaṁ
svayaṁ taṁ bubhuje balim
Synonyms
viṣa — because of his poison; vīrya — and his strength; mada — in intoxication; āviṣṭaḥ — absorbed; kādraveyaḥ — the son of Kadru; tu — on the other hand; kāliyaḥ — Kāliya; kadarthī-kṛtya — disregarding; garuḍam — Garuḍa; svayam — himself; tam — that; bubhuje — ate; balim — the offering.

Translation
Although all the other serpents were dutifully making offerings to Garuḍa, one serpent — the arrogant Kāliya, son of Kadru — would eat all these offerings before Garuḍa could claim them. Thus Kāliya directly defied the carrier of Lord Viṣṇu.

Text 5
तच्छ्रुत्वा कुपितो राजन् भगवान् भगवत्प्रिय: ।
विजिघांसुर्महावेग: कालियं समुपाद्रवत् ॥ ५ ॥
tac chrutvā kupito rājan
bhagavān bhagavat-priyaḥ
vijighāṁsur mahā-vegaḥ
kāliyaṁ samapādravat
Synonyms
tat — that; śrutvā — hearing; kupitaḥ — angered; rājan — O King; bhagavān — the powerful Garuḍa; bhagavat-priyaḥ — the dear devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vijighāṁsuḥ — desiring to kill; mahā-vegaḥ — the greatly swift; kāliyam — to Kāliya; samupādravat — he rushed.

Translation
O King, the greatly powerful Garuḍa, who is very dear to the Supreme Lord, became angry when he heard of this. Desiring to kill Kāliya, he rushed toward the serpent with tremendous speed.

Text 6
तमापतन्तं तरसा विषायुध:
प्रत्यभ्ययादुत्थितनैकमस्तक: ।
दद्भ‍ि: सुपर्णं व्यदशद् ददायुध:
करालजिह्वोच्छ्वसितोग्रलोचन: ॥ ६ ॥
tam āpatantaṁ tarasā viṣāyudhaḥ
pratyabhyayād utthita-naika-mastakaḥ
dadbhiḥ suparṇaṁ vyadaśad dad-āyudhaḥ
karāla-jihrocchvasitogra-locanaḥ
Synonyms
tam — him, Garuḍa; āpatantam — attacking; tarasā — swiftly; viṣa — of poison; āyudhaḥ — who possessed the weapon; prati — towards; abhyayāt — ran; utthita — raised; na eka — many; mastakaḥ — his heads; dadbhiḥ — with his fangs; suparṇam — Garuḍa; vyadaśat — he bit; dat-āyudhaḥ — whose fangs were weapons; karāla — fearsome; jihvā — his tongues; ucchvasita — expanded; ugra — and terrible; locanaḥ — his eyes.

Translation
As Garuḍa swiftly fell upon him, Kāliya, who had the weapon of poison, raised his numerous heads to counterattack. Showing his ferocious tongues and expanding his horrible eyes, Kāliya then bit Garuḍa with the weapons of his fangs.

Text 7
तं तार्क्ष्यपुत्र: स निरस्य मन्युमान्
प्रचण्डवेगो मधुसूदनासन: ।
पक्षेण सव्येन हिरण्यरोचिषा
जघान कद्रुसुतमुग्रविक्रम: ॥ ७ ॥
taṁ tārkṣya-putraḥ sa nirasya manyumān
pracaṇḍa-vego madhusūdanāsanaḥ
pakṣeṇa savyena hiraṇya-rociṣā
jaghāna kadru-sutam ugra-vikramaḥ
Synonyms
tam — him, Kāliya; tārkṣya-putraḥ — the son of Kaśyapa; saḥ — he, Garuḍa; nirasya — warding off; manyu-mān — full of anger; pracaṇḍa-vegaḥ — moving with terrible swiftness; madhusūdana-āsanaḥ — the carrier of Lord Madhusūdana, Kṛṣṇa; pakṣeṇa — with his wing; savyena — left; hiraṇya — like gold; rociṣā — the effulgence of which; jaghāna — he struck; kadru-sutam — the son of Kadru (Kāliya); ugra — mighty; vikramaḥ — his prowess.

Translation
The angry son of Tārkṣya moved with overwhelming speed in repelling Kāliya’s attack. That terribly powerful carrier of Lord Madhusūdana struck the son of Kadru with his left wing, which shone like gold.

Text 8
सुपर्णपक्षाभिहत: कालियोऽतीव विह्वल: ।
ह्रदं विवेश कालिन्द्यास्तदगम्यं दुरासदम् ॥ ८ ॥
suparṇa-pakṣābhihataḥ
kāliyo ’tīva vihvalaḥ
hradaṁ viveśa kālindyās
tad-agamyaṁ durāsadam
Synonyms
suparṇa — of Garuḍa; pakṣa — by the wing; abhihataḥ — beaten; kāliyaḥ — Kāliya; atīva — extremely; vihvalaḥ — distraught; hradam — a lake; viveśa — he entered; kālindyāḥ — of the river Yamunā; tat-agamyam — unapproachable by Garuḍa; durāsadam — difficult to enter.

Translation
Beaten by Garuḍa’s wing, Kāliya was extremely distraught, and thus he took shelter of a lake adjoining the river Yamunā. Garuḍa could not enter this lake. Indeed, he could not even approach it.

Text 9
तत्रैकदा जलचरं गरुडो भक्ष्यमीप्सितम् ।
निवारित: सौभरिणा प्रसह्य क्षुधितोऽहरत् ॥ ९ ॥
tatraikadā jala-caraṁ
garuḍo bhakṣyam īpsitam
nivāritaḥ saubhariṇā
prasahya kṣudhito ’harat
Synonyms
tatra — there (in that lake); ekadā — once; jala-caram — an aquatic creature; garuḍaḥ — Garuḍa; bhakṣyam — his proper food; īpsitam — desired; nivāritaḥ — forbidden; saubhariṇā — by Saubhari Muni; prasahya — taking courage; kṣudhitaḥ — feeling hunger; aharat — he took.

Translation
In that very lake Garuḍa had once desired to eat a fish — fish being, after all, his normal food. Although forbidden by the sage Saubhari, who was meditating there within the water, Garuḍa took courage and, feeling hungry, seized the fish.

Text 10
मीनान्सुदु:खितान्‍द‍ृष्ट्वा दीनान्मीनपतौ हते ।
कृपया सौभरि: प्राह तत्रत्यक्षेममाचरन् ॥ १० ॥
mīnān su-duḥkhitān dṛṣṭvā
dīnān mīna-patau hate
kṛpayā saubhariḥ prāha
tatratya-kṣemam ācaran
Synonyms
mīnān — the fish; su-duḥkhitān — most unhappy; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; dīnān — wretched; mīna-patau — the lord of the fish; hate — being killed; kṛpayā — out of compassion; saubhariḥ — Saubhari; prāha — spoke; tatratya — for those living there; kṣemam — the welfare; ācaran — trying to enact.

Translation
Seeing how the unfortunate fish in that lake had become most unhappy at the death of their leader, Saubhari uttered the following curse under the impression that he was mercifully acting for the benefit of the lake’s residents.

Text 11
अत्र प्रविश्य गरुडो यदि मत्स्यान् स खादति ।
सद्य: प्राणैर्वियुज्येत सत्यमेतद् ब्रवीम्यहम् ॥ ११ ॥
atra praviśya garuḍo
yadi matsyān sa khādati
sadyaḥ prāṇair viyujyeta
satyam etad bravīmy aham
Synonyms
atra — in this lake; praviśya — entering; garuḍaḥ — Garuḍa; yadi — if; matsyān — the fish; saḥ — he; khādati — eats; sadyaḥ — immediately; prāṇaiḥ — of his force of life; viyujyeta — will become deprived; satyam — truthfully; etat — this; bravīmi — am speaking; aham — I.

Translation
If Garuḍa ever again enters this lake and eats the fish here, he will immediately lose his life. What I am saying is the truth.

Text 12
तत् कालिय: परं वेद नान्य: कश्चन लेलिह: ।
अवात्सीद् गरुडाद् भीत: कृष्णेन च विवासित: ॥ १२ ॥
tat kāliyaḥ paraṁ veda
nānyaḥ kaścana lelihaḥ
avātsīd garuḍād bhītaḥ
kṛṣṇena ca vivāsitaḥ
Synonyms
tam — that; kāliyaḥ — Kāliya; param — only; veda — knew; na — not; anyaḥ — other; kaścana — any; lelihaḥ — serpent; avātsīt — he dwelt; garuḍāt — of Garuḍa; bhītaḥ — afraid; kṛṣṇena — by Kṛṣṇa; ca — and; vivāsitaḥ — expelled.

Translation
Of all the serpents, only Kāliya came to know of this affair, and in fear of Garuḍa he took up residence in that Yamunā lake. Later Lord Kṛṣṇa drove him out.

Texts 13-14
कृष्णं ह्रदाद्विनिष्क्रान्तं दिव्यस्रग्गन्धवाससम् ।
महामणिगणाकीर्णं जाम्बूनदपरिष्कृतम् ॥ १३ ॥
उपलभ्योत्थिता: सर्वे लब्धप्राणा इवासव: ।
प्रमोदनिभृतात्मानो गोपा: प्रीत्याभिरेभिरे ॥ १४ ॥
kṛṣṇaṁ hradād viniṣkrāntaṁ
divya-srag-gandha-vāsasam
mahā-maṇi-gaṇākīrṇaṁ
jāmbūnada-pariṣkṛtam
upalabhyotthitāḥ sarve
labdha-prāṇā ivāsavaḥ
pramoda-nibhṛtātmāno
gopāḥ prītyābhirebhire
Synonyms
kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; hradāt — from out of the lake; viniṣkrāntam — rising up; divya — divine; srak — wearing garlands; gandha — fragrances; vāsasam — and garments; mahā-maṇi-gaṇa — by many fine jewels; ākīrṇam — covered; jāmbūnada — with gold; pariṣkṛtam — decorated; upalabhya — seeing; utthitāḥ — rising up; sarve — all of them; labdha-prāṇāḥ — which have regained their vital force; iva — just as; asavaḥ — senses; pramoda — with joy; nibhṛta-ātmānaḥ — being filled; gopāḥ — the cowherds; prītyā — with affection; abhirebhire — embraced Him.

Translation
[Resuming his description of Kṛṣṇa’s chastisement of Kāliya, Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Kṛṣṇa rose up out of the lake wearing divine garlands, fragrances and garments, covered with many fine jewels, and decorated with gold. When the cowherds saw Him they all stood up immediately, just like an unconscious person’s senses coming back to life. Filled with great joy, they affectionately embraced Him.

Text 15
यशोदा रोहिणी नन्दो गोप्यो गोपाश्च कौरव ।
कृष्णं समेत्य लब्धेहा आसन् शुष्का नगा अपि ॥ १५ ॥
yaśodā rohiṇī nando
gopyo gopāś ca kaurava
kṛṣṇaṁ sametya labdhehā
āsan śuṣkā nagā api
Synonyms
yaśodā rohiṇī nandaḥ — Yaśodā, Rohiṇī and Nanda Mahārāja; gopyaḥ — the cowherd ladies; gopāḥ — the cowherd men; ca — and; kaurava — O Parīkṣit, descendant of Kuru; kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; sametya — meeting; labdha — having regained; īhāḥ — their conscious functions; āsan — they became; śuṣkāḥ — dried up; nagāḥ — the trees; api — even.

Translation
Having regained their vital functions, Yaśodā, Rohiṇī, Nanda and all the other cowherd women and men went up to Kṛṣṇa. O descendant of Kuru, even the dried-up trees came back to life.

Text 16
रामश्चाच्युतमालिङ्‌‌ग्य जहासास्यानुभाववित् ।
प्रेम्णा तमङ्कमारोप्य पुन: पुनरुदैक्षत ।
गावो वृषा वत्सतर्यो लेभिरे परमां मुदम् ॥ १६ ॥
rāmaś cācyutam āliṅgya
jahāsāsyānubhāva-vit
premṇā tam aṅkam āropya
punaḥ punar udaikṣata
gāvo vṛṣā vatsataryo
lebhire paramāṁ mudam
Synonyms
rāmaḥ — Lord Balarāma; ca — and; acyutam — Kṛṣṇa, the infallible Supreme Personality of Godhead; āliṅgya — embracing; jahāsa — laughed; asya — His; anubhāva-vit — knowing well the omnipotence; premṇā — out of love; tam — Him; aṅkam — up on His own lap; āropya — raising; punaḥ punaḥ — again and again; udaikṣata — looked upon; gāvaḥ — the cows; vṛṣāḥ — the bulls; vatsataryaḥ — the female calves; lebhire — they attained; paramām — supreme; mudam — pleasure.

Translation
Lord Balarāma embraced His infallible brother and laughed, knowing well the extent of Kṛṣṇa’s potency. Out of great feelings of love, Balarāma lifted Kṛṣṇa up on His lap and repeatedly looked at Him. The cows, bulls and young female calves also achieved the highest pleasure.

Text 17
नन्दं विप्रा: समागत्य गुरव: सकलत्रका: ।
ऊचुस्ते कालियग्रस्तो दिष्ट्या मुक्तस्तवात्मज: ॥ १७ ॥
nandaṁ viprāḥ samāgatya
guravaḥ sa-kalatrakāḥ
ūcus te kāliya-grasto
diṣṭyā muktas tavātmajaḥ
Synonyms
nandam — to Nanda Mahārāja; viprāḥ — the brāhmaṇas; samāgatya — coming up; guravaḥ — respectable personalities; sa-kalatrakāḥ — along with their wives; ūcuḥ — said; te — they; kāliya-grastaḥ — seized by Kāliya; diṣṭyā — by Providence; muktaḥ — freed; tava — your; ātma-jaḥ — son.

Translation
All the respectable brāhmaṇas, together with their wives, came forward to greet Nanda Mahārāja. They said to him, “Your son was in the grips of Kāliya, but by the grace of Providence He is now free.”

Text 18
देहि दानं द्विजातीनां कृष्णनिर्मुक्तिहेतवे ।
नन्द: प्रीतमना राजन् गा: सुवर्णं तदादिशत् ॥ १८ ॥
dehi dānaṁ dvi-jātīnāṁ
kṛṣṇa-nirmukti-hetave
nandaḥ prīta-manā rājan
gāḥ suvarṇaṁ tadādiśat
Synonyms
dehi — you should give; dānam — charity; dvi-jātīnām — to the brāhmaṇas; kṛṣṇa-nirmukti — the safety of Kṛṣṇa; hetave — for the purpose of; nandaḥ — Nanda Mahārāja; prīta-manāḥ — satisfied within his mind; rājan — O King Parīkṣit; gāḥ — cows; suvarṇam — gold; tadā — then; ādiśat — gave.

Translation
The brāhmaṇas then advised Nanda Mahārāja, “To assure that your son Kṛṣṇa will always be free from danger, you should give charity to the brāhmaṇas.” With a satisfied mind, O King, Nanda Mahārāja then very gladly gave them gifts of cows and gold.

Text 19
यशोदापि महाभागा नष्टलब्धप्रजा सती ।
परिष्वज्याङ्कमारोप्य मुमोचाश्रुकलां मुहु: ॥ १९ ॥
yaśodāpi mahā-bhāgā
naṣṭa-labdha-prajā satī
pariṣvajyāṅkam āropya
mumocāśru-kalāṁ muhuḥ
Synonyms
yaśodā — mother Yaśodā; api — and; mahā-bhāgā — the greatly fortunate; naṣṭa — having lost; labdha — and regained; prajā — her son; satī — the chaste lady; pariṣvajya — embracing

Translation
The greatly fortunate mother Yaśodā, having lost her son and then regained Him, placed Him on her lap. That chaste lady cried constant torrents of tears as she repeatedly embraced Him.

Text 20
तां रात्रिं तत्र राजेन्द्र क्षुत्तृड्भ्यां श्रमकर्षिता: ।
ऊषुर्व्रयौकसो गाव: कालिन्द्या उपकूलत: ॥ २० ॥
tāṁ rātriṁ tatra rājendra
kṣut-tṛḍbhyāṁ śrama-karṣitāḥ
ūṣur vrayaukaso gāvaḥ
kālindyā upakūlataḥ
Synonyms
tām — that; rātrim — night; tatra — there; rāja-indra — O most exalted of kings; kṣut-tṛḍbhyām — by hunger and thirst; śrama — and by fatigue; karṣitāḥ — weakened; ūṣuḥ — they remained; vraja-okasaḥ — the people of Vṛndāvana; gāvaḥ — and the cows; kālindyāḥ — of the Yamunā; upakūlataḥ — near the shore.

Translation
O best of kings [Parīkṣit], because the residents of Vṛndāvana were feeling very weak from hunger, thirst and fatigue, they and the cows spent the night where they were, lying down near the bank of the Kālindī.

Text 21
तदा शुचिवनोद्भ‍ूतो दावाग्नि: सर्वतो व्रजम् ।
सुप्तं निशीथ आवृत्य प्रदग्धुमुपचक्रमे ॥ २१ ॥
tadā śuci-vanodbhūto
dāvāgniḥ sarvato vrajam
suptaṁ niśītha āvṛtya
pradagdhum upacakrame
Synonyms
tadā — then; śuci — of the summer; vana — in the forest; udbhūtaḥ — arising; dāva-agniḥ — a conflagration; sarvataḥ — on all sides; vrajam — the people of Vṛndāvana; suptam — sleeping; niśīthe — in the middle of the night; āvṛtya — surrounding; pradagdhum — to burn; upacakrame — began.

Translation
During the night, while all the people of Vṛndāvana were asleep, a great fire blazed up within the dry summer forest. The fire surrounded the inhabitants of Vraja on all sides and began to scorch them.

Text 22
तत उत्थाय सम्भ्रान्ता दह्यमाना व्रजौकस: ।
कृष्णं ययुस्ते शरणं मायामनुजमीश्वरम् ॥ २२ ॥
tata utthāya sambhrāntā
dahyamānā vrajaukasaḥ
kṛṣṇaṁ yayus te śaraṇaṁ
māyā-manujam īśvaram
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; utthāya — waking up; sambhrāntāḥ — agitated; dahyamānāḥ — about to be burned; vraja-okasaḥ — the people of Vraja; kṛṣṇam — to Kṛṣṇa; yayuḥ — went; te — they; śaraṇam — for shelter; māyā — by His potency; manujam — appearing like a human being; īśvaram — the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
Then the residents of Vṛndāvana woke up, extremely disturbed by the great fire threatening to burn them. Thus they took shelter of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord, who by His spiritual potency appeared like an ordinary human being.

Text 23
कृष्ण कृष्ण महाभाग हे रामामितविक्रम ।
एष घोरतमो वह्निस्तावकान् ग्रसते हि न: ॥ २३ ॥
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa mahā-bhaga
he rāmāmita-vikrama
eṣa ghoratamo vahnis
tāvakān grasate hi naḥ
Synonyms
kṛṣṇa — O Kṛṣṇa; kṛṣṇa — O Kṛṣṇa; mahā-bhāga — O Lord of all opulence; he rāma — O Lord Balarāma, source of all happiness; amita-vikrama — You whose power is unlimited; eṣaḥ — this; ghora-tamaḥ — most terrible; vahniḥ — fire; tāvakān — who are Yours; grasate — is devouring; hi — indeed; naḥ — us.

Translation
[Vṛndāvana’s residents said:] Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, O Lord of all opulence! O Rāma, possessor of unlimited power! This most terrible fire is about to devour us, Your devotees!

Text 24
सुदुस्तरान्न: स्वान् पाहि कालाग्ने: सुहृद: प्रभो ।
न शक्नुमस्त्वच्चरणं सन्त्यक्तुमकुतोभयम् ॥ २४ ॥
su-dustarān naḥ svān pāhi
kālāgneḥ suhṛdaḥ prabho
na śaknumas tvac-caraṇaṁ
santyaktum akuto-bhayam
Synonyms
su-dustarāt — from the insurmountable; naḥ — us; svān — Your own devotees; pāhi — please protect; kāla-agneḥ — from the fire of death; suhṛdaḥ — Your true friends; prabho — O supreme master; na śaknumaḥ — we are incapable; tvat-caraṇam — Your feet; santyaktum — to give up; akutaḥ-bhayam — which drive away all fear.

Translation
O Lord, we are Your true friends and devotees. Please protect us from this insurmountable fire of death. We can never give up Your lotus feet, which drive away all fear.

Text 25
इत्थं स्वजनवैक्लव्यं निरीक्ष्य जगदीश्वर: ।
तमग्निमपिबत्तीव्रमनन्तोऽनन्तशक्तिधृक् ॥ २५ ॥
itthaṁ sva-jana-vaiklavyaṁ
nirīkṣya jagad-īśvaraḥ
tam agnim apibat tīvram
ananto ’nanta-śakti-dhṛk
Synonyms
ittham — in this manner; sva-jana — of His own devotees; vaiklavyam — the disturbed condition; nirīkṣya — seeing; jagat-īśvaraḥ — the Lord of the universe; tam — that; agnim — fire; apibat — drank; tīvram — terrible; anantaḥ — the unlimited Lord; ananta-śakti-dhṛk — the possessor of unlimited potencies.

Translation
Seeing His devotees so disturbed, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the infinite Lord of the universe and possessor of infinite power, then swallowed the terrible forest fire.