Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
अथ कृष्ण: परिवृतो ज्ञातिभिर्मुदितात्मभि: ।
अनुगीयमानो न्यविशद्‌‌व्रजं गोकुलमण्डितम् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
atha kṛṣṇaḥ parivṛto
jñātibhir muditātmabhiḥ
anugīyamāno nyaviśad
vrajaṁ gokula-maṇḍitam
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; atha — next; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; parivṛtaḥ — surrounded; jñātibhiḥ — by His companions; mudita-ātmabhiḥ — who were joyful by nature; anugīyamānaḥ — His glories being chanted; nyaviśat — entered; vrajam — Vraja; go-kula — by the herds of cows; maṇḍitam — decorated.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Surrounded by His blissful companions, who constantly chanted His glories, Śrī Kṛṣṇa then entered the village of Vraja, which was decorated with herds of cows.

Text 2
व्रजे विक्रीडतोरेवं गोपालच्छद्ममायया ।
ग्रीष्मो नामर्तुरभवन्नातिप्रेयाञ्छरीरिणाम् ॥ २ ॥
vraje vikrīḍator evaṁ
gopāla-cchadma-māyayā
grīṣmo nāmartur abhavan
nāti-preyāñ charīriṇām
Synonyms
vraje — in Vṛndāvana; vikrīḍatoḥ — while the two of Them were sporting; evam — in this way; gopāla — as cowherd boys; chadma — of the disguise; māyayā — by the illusion; grīṣmaḥ — summer; nāma — thus designated; ṛtuḥ — the season; abhavat — came about; na — not; ati-preyān — very much favored; śarīriṇām — by embodied beings.

Translation
While Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were thus enjoying life in Vṛndāvana in the guise of ordinary cowherd boys, the summer season gradually appeared. This season is not very pleasing to embodied souls.

Text 3
स च वृन्दावनगुणैर्वसन्त इव लक्षित: ।
यत्रास्ते भगवान् साक्षाद् रामेण सह केशव: ॥ ३ ॥
sa ca vṛndāvana-guṇair
vasanta iva lakṣitaḥ
yatrāste bhagavān sākṣād
rāmeṇa saha keśavaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — this (hot season); ca — nevertheless; vṛndāvana — of Śrī Vṛndāvana; guṇaiḥ — by the transcendental qualities; vasantaḥ — springtime; iva — as if; lakṣitaḥ — manifesting symptoms; yatra — in which (Vṛndāvana); āste — remains; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sākṣāt — personally; rāmeṇa saha — together with Lord Balarāma; keśavaḥ — Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Translation
Nevertheless, because the Supreme Personality of Godhead was personally staying in Vṛndāvana along with Balarāma, summer manifested the qualities of spring. Such are the features of the land of Vṛndāvana.

Text 4
यत्र निर्झरनिर्ह्रादनिवृत्तस्वनझिल्लिकम् ।
शश्वत्तच्छीकरर्जीषद्रुममण्डलमण्डितम् ॥ ४ ॥
yatra nirjhara-nirhrāda-
nivṛtta-svana-jhillikam
śaśvat tac-chīkararjīṣa-
druma-maṇḍala-maṇḍitam
Synonyms
yatra — in which (Vṛndāvana); nirjhara — of the waterfalls; nirhrāda — by the resounding; nivṛtta — stopped; svana — the sound; jhillikam — of the crickets; śaśvat — constant; tat — of those (waterfalls); śīkara — by the drops of water; ṛjīṣa — moistened; druma — of trees; maṇḍala — with the groups; maṇḍitam — decorated.

Translation
In Vṛndāvana, the loud sound of waterfalls covered the crickets’ noise, and clusters of trees constantly moistened by spray from those waterfalls beautified the entire area.

Text 5
सरित्सर:प्रस्रवणोर्मिवायुना
कह्लारकुञ्जोत्पलरेणुहारिणा ।
न विद्यते यत्र वनौकसां दवो
निदाघवह्न्यर्कभवोऽतिशाद्वले ॥ ५ ॥
sarit-saraḥ-prasravaṇormi-vāyunā
kahlāra-kañjotpala-reṇu-hāriṇā
na vidyate yatra vanaukasāṁ davo
nidāgha-vahny-arka-bhavo ’ti-śādvale
Synonyms
sarit — of the rivers; saraḥ — and the lakes; prasravaṇa — (coming into contact with) the currents; ūrmi — and waves; vāyunā — by the wind; kahlāra-kañja-utpala — of the kahlāra, kañja and utpala lotuses; reṇu — the pollen; hāriṇā — which was taking away; na vidyate — there was not; yatra — in which; vana-okasām — for the residents of the forest; davaḥ — tormenting heat; nidāgha — of the summer season; vahni — by forest fires; arka — and the sun; bhavaḥ — generated; ati-śādvale — where there was an abundance of green grass.

Translation
The wind wafting over the waves of the lakes and flowing rivers carried away the pollen of many varieties of lotuses and water lilies and then cooled the entire Vṛndāvana area. Thus the residents there did not suffer from the heat generated by the blazing summer sun and seasonal forest fires. Indeed, Vṛndāvana was abundant with fresh green grass.

Text 6
अगाधतोयह्रदिनीतटोर्मिभि-
र्द्रवत्पुरीष्या: पुलिनै: समन्तत: ।
न यत्र चण्डांशुकरा विषोल्बणा
भुवो रसं शाद्वलितं च गृह्णते ॥ ६ ॥
agādha-toya-hradinī-taṭormibhir
dravat-purīṣyāḥ pulinaiḥ samantataḥ
na yatra caṇḍāṁśu-karā viṣolbaṇā
bhuvo rasaṁ śādvalitaṁ ca gṛhṇate
Synonyms
agādha — very deep; toya — whose water; hradinī — of the rivers; taṭa — upon the shores; ūrmibhiḥ — by the waves; dravat — liquefied; purīṣyāḥ — whose mud; pulinaiḥ — by the sandy banks; samantataḥ — on all sides; na — not; yatra — upon which; caṇḍa — of the sun; aṁśu-karāḥ — the rays; viṣa — like poison; ulbaṇāḥ — fierce; bhuvaḥ — of the earth; rasam — the juice; śādvalitam — the greenness; ca — and; gṛhṇate — take away.

Translation
With their flowing waves the deep rivers drenched their banks, making them damp and muddy. Thus the rays of the sun, which were as fierce as poison, could not evaporate the earth’s sap or parch its green grass.

Text 7
वनं कुसुमितं श्रीमन्नदच्चित्रमृगद्विजम् ।
गायन्मयूरभ्रमरं कूजत्कोकिलसारसम् ॥ ७ ॥
vanaṁ kusumitaṁ śrīman
nadac-citra-mṛga-dvijam
gāyan mayūra-bhramaraṁ
kūjat-kokila-sārasam
Synonyms
vanam — the forest; kusumitam — full of flowers; śrīmat — very beautiful; nadat — making sounds; citra — variegated; mṛga — animals; dvijam — and birds; gāyan — singing; mayūra — peacocks; bhramaram — and bees; kūjat — cooing; kokila — cuckoos; sārasam — and cranes.

Translation
Flowers beautifully decorated the forest of Vṛndāvana, and many varieties of animals and birds filled it with sound. The peacocks and bees sang, and the cuckoos and cranes cooed.

Text 8
क्रीडिष्यमाणस्तन् कृष्णो भगवान् बलसंयुत: ।
वेणुं विरणयन् गोपैर्गोधनै: संवृतोऽविशत् ॥ ८ ॥
krīḍiṣyamāṇas tat krṣṇo
bhagavān bala-saṁyutaḥ
veṇuṁ viraṇayan gopair
go-dhanaiḥ saṁvṛto ’viśat
Synonyms
krīḍiṣyamāṇaḥ — intending to play; tat — that (Vṛndāvana forest); kṛṣṇaḥ — Kṛṣṇa; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bala-saṁyutaḥ — accompanied by Balarāma; veṇum — His flute; viraṇayan — sounding; gopaiḥ — by the cowherd boys; go-dhanaiḥ — and the cows, who are their wealth; saṁvṛtaḥ — surrounded; aviśat — He entered.

Translation
Intending to engage in pastimes, Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, accompanied by Lord Balarāma and surrounded by the cowherd boys and the cows, entered the forest of Vṛndāvana as He played His flute.

Text 9
प्रवालबर्हस्तबकस्रग्धातुकृतभूषणा: ।
रामकृष्णादयो गोपा ननृतुर्युयुधुर्जगु: ॥ ९ ॥
pravāla-barha-stabaka-
srag-dhātu-kṛta-bhūṣaṇāḥ
rāma-kṛṣṇādayo gopā
nanṛtur yuyudhur jaguḥ
Synonyms
pravāla — newly grown leaves; barha — peacock feathers; stabaka — bunches of small flowers; srak — garlands; dhātu — and colored minerals; kṛta-bhūṣaṇāḥ — wearing as their ornaments; rāma-kṛṣṇa-ādayaḥ — headed by Lord Balarāma and Lord Kṛṣṇa; gopāḥ — the cowherd boys; nanṛtuḥ — danced; yuyudhuḥ — fought; jaguḥ — sang.

Translation
Decorating themselves with newly grown leaves, along with peacock feathers, garlands, clusters of flower buds, and colored minerals, Balarāma, Kṛṣṇa and Their cowherd friends danced, wrestled and sang.

Text 10
कृष्णस्य नृत्यत: केचिज्जगु: केचिदवादयन् ।
वेणुपाणितलै: श‍ृङ्गै: प्रशशंसुरथापरे ॥ १० ॥
kṛṣṇasya nṛtyataḥ kecij
jaguḥ kecid avādayan
veṇu-pāṇitalaiḥ śṛṅgaiḥ
praśaśaṁsur athāpare
Synonyms
kṛṣṇasya nṛtyataḥ — while Kṛṣṇa was dancing; kecit — some of them; jaguḥ — sang; kecit — some; avādayan — accompanied musically; veṇu — with flutes; pāṇi-talaiḥ — and hand cymbals; śṛṅgaiḥ — with buffalo horns; praśaśaṁsuḥ — offered praise; atha — and; apare — others.

Translation
As Kṛṣṇa danced, some of the boys accompanied Him by singing, and others by playing flutes, hand cymbals and buffalo horns, while still others praised His dancing.

Text 11
गोपजातिप्रतिच्छन्ना देवा गोपालरूपिणौ ।
ईडिरे कृष्णरामौ च नटा इव नटं नृप ॥ ११ ॥
gopa-jāti-praticchannā
devā gopāla-rūpiṇau
īḍire kṛṣṇa-rāmau ca
naṭā iva naṭaṁ nṛpa
Synonyms
gopa-jāti — as members of the cowherd community; praticchannāḥ — disguised; devāḥ — demigods; gopāla-rūpiṇau — who had assumed the forms of cowherd boys; īḍire — they worshiped; kṛṣṇa-rāmau — Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Rāma; ca — and; naṭāḥ — professional dancers; iva — just as; naṭam — another dancer; nṛpa — O King.

Translation
O King, demigods disguised themselves as members of the cowherd community and, just as dramatic dancers praise another dancer, worshiped Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, who were also appearing as cowherd boys.

Text 12
भ्रमणैर्लङ्घनै: क्षेपैरास्फोटनविकर्षणै: ।
चिक्रीडतुर्नियुद्धेन काकपक्षधरौ क्‍वचित् ॥ १२ ॥
bhramaṇair laṅghanaiḥ kṣepair
āsphoṭana-vikarṣaṇaiḥ
cikrīḍatur niyuddhena
kāka-pakṣa-dharau kvacit
Synonyms
bhramaṇaiḥ — with whirling about; laṅghanaiḥ — jumping; kṣepaiḥ — throwing; āsphoṭana — slapping; vikarṣaṇaiḥ — and dragging; cikṛīḍatuḥ — They (Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma) played; niyuddhena — with fighting; kāka-pakṣa — the locks of hair on the sides of Their heads; dharau — holding; kvacit — sometimes.

Translation
Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma played with their cowherd boyfriends by whirling about, leaping, hurling, slapping and fighting. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma would pull the hair on the boys’ heads.

Text 13
क्‍वचिन्नृत्यत्सु चान्येषु गायकौ वादकौ स्वयम् ।
शशंसतुर्महाराज साधु साध्विति वादिनौ ॥ १३ ॥
kvacin nṛtyatsu cānyeṣu
gāyakau vādakau svayam
śaśaṁsatur mahā-rāja
sādhu sādhv iti vādinau
Synonyms
kvacit — sometimes; nṛtyatsu — while they were dancing; ca — and; anyeṣu — others; gāyakau — the two of Them (Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma) singing; vādakau — both playing musical instruments; svayam — Themselves; śaśaṁsatuḥ — They praised; mahā-rāja — O great King; sādhu sādhu iti — “very good, very good”; vādinau — speaking.

Translation
While the other boys were dancing, O King, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma would sometimes accompany them with song and instrumental music, and sometimes the two Lords would praise the boys, saying, “Very good! Very good!”

Text 14
क्‍वचिद्ब‍िल्वै: क्‍वचित्कुम्भै: क्‍वचामलकमुष्टिभि: ।
अस्पृश्यनेत्रबन्धाद्यै: क्‍वचिन्मृगखगेहया ॥ १४ ॥
kvacid bilvaiḥ kvacit kumbhaiḥ
kvacāmalaka-muṣṭibhiḥ
aspṛśya-netra-bandhādyaiḥ
kvacin mṛga-khagehayā
Synonyms
kvacit — sometimes; bilvaiḥ — with bilva fruits; kvacit — sometimes; kumbhaiḥ — with kumbha fruits; kvaca — and sometimes; āmalaka-muṣṭibhiḥ — with palmfuls of āmalaka fruits; aspṛśya — with games such as tṛying to touch one another; netra-bandha — trying to identify another when one is blindfolded; ādyaiḥ — and so on; kvacit — sometimes; mṛga — like animals; khaga — and birds; īhayā — acting.

Translation
Sometimes the cowherd boys would play with bilva or kumbha fruits, and sometimes with handfuls of āmalaka fruits. At other times they would play the games of trying to touch one another or of trying to identify somebody while one is blindfolded, and sometimes they would imitate animals and birds.

Text 15
क्‍वचिच्च दर्दुरप्लावैर्विविधैरुपहासकै: ।
कदाचित् स्यन्दोलिकया कर्हिचिन्नृपचेष्टया ॥ १५ ॥
kvacic ca dardura-plāvair
vividhair upahāsakaiḥ
kadācit syandolikayā
karhicin nṛpa-ceṣṭayā
Synonyms
kvacit — sometimes; ca — and; dardura — like frogs; plāvaiḥ — with jumping; vividhaiḥ — various; upahāsakaiḥ — with jokes; kadācit — sometimes; syandolikayā — with riding in swings; karhicit — and sometimes; nṛpa-ceṣṭayā — with pretending to be kings.

Translation
They would sometimes jump around like frogs, sometimes play various jokes, sometimes ride in swings and sometimes imitate monarchs.

Text 16
एवं तौ लोकसिद्धाभि: क्रीडाभिश्चेरतुर्वने ।
नद्यद्रिद्रोणिकुञ्जेषु काननेषु सर:सु च ॥ १६ ॥
evaṁ tau loka-siddhābhiḥ
krīḍābhiś ceratur vane
nady-adri-droṇi-kuñjeṣu
kānaneṣu saraḥsu ca
Synonyms
evam — in this way; tau — the two of Them, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma; loka-siddhābhiḥ — which are well known in human society; krīḍābhiḥ — with games; ceratuḥ — They wandered; vane — in the forest; nadī — among the rivers; adri — mountains; droṇi — valleys; kuñjeṣu — and groves; kānaneṣu — in the smaller forests; saraḥsu — along the lakes; ca — and.

Translation
In this way Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma played all sorts of well-known games as They wandered among the rivers, hills, valleys, bushes, trees and lakes of Vṛndāvana.

Text 17
पशूंश्चारयतोर्गोपैस्तद्वने रामकृष्णयो: ।
गोपरूपी प्रलम्बोऽगादसुरस्तज्जिहीर्षया ॥ १७ ॥
paśūṁś cārayator gopais
tad-vane rāma-kṛṣṇayoḥ
gopa-rūpī pralambo ’gād
asuras taj-jihīrṣayā
Synonyms
paśūn — the animals; cārayatoḥ — while the two of Them were herding; gopaiḥ — along with the cowherd boys; tat-vane — in that forest, Vṛndāvana; rāma-kṛṣṇayoḥ — Lord Rāma and Lord Kṛṣṇa; gopa-rūpī — assuming the form of a cowherd boy; pralambaḥ — Pralamba; agāt — came; asuraḥ — the demon; tat — Them; jihīrṣayā — with the desire of kidnapping.

Translation
While Rāma, Kṛṣṇa and Their cowherd friends were thus tending the cows in that Vṛndāvana forest, the demon Pralamba entered their midst. He had assumed the form of a cowherd boy with the intention of kidnapping Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma.

Text 18
तं विद्वानपि दाशार्हो भगवान् सर्वदर्शन: ।
अन्वमोदत तत्सख्यं वधं तस्य विचिन्तयन् ॥ १८ ॥
taṁ vidvān api dāśārho
bhagavān sarva-darśanaḥ
anvamodata tat-sakhyaṁ
vadhaṁ tasya vicintayan
Synonyms
tam — him, Pralambāsura; vidvān — knowing quite well; api — even though; dāśārhaḥ — the descendant of Daśārha; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarva-darśanaḥ — the omniscient; anvamodata — accepted; tat — with him; sakhyam — friendship; vadham — the killing; tasya — of him; vicintayan — meditating upon.

Translation
Since the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa, who had appeared in the Daśārha dynasty, sees everything, He understood who the demon was. Still, the Lord pretended to accept the demon as a friend, while at the same time seriously considering how to kill him.

Text 19
तत्रोपाहूय गोपालान् कृष्ण: प्राह विहारवित् ।
हे गोपा विहरिष्यामो द्वन्द्वीभूय यथायथम् ॥ १९ ॥
tatropāhūya gopālān
kṛṣṇaḥ prāha vihāra-vit
he gopā vihariṣyāmo
dvandvī-bhūya yathā-yatham
Synonyms
tatra — thereupon; upāhūya — calling; gopālān — the cowherd boys; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; prāha — spoke; vihāra-vit — the knower of all sports and games; he gopāḥ — O cowherd boys; vihariṣyāmaḥ — let us play; dvandvī-bhūya — dividing into two groups; yathā-yatham — suitably.

Translation
Kṛṣṇa, who knows all sports and games, then called together the cowherd boys and spoke as follows: “Hey cowherd boys! Let’s play now! We’ll divide ourselves into two even teams.”

Text 20
तत्र चक्रु: परिवृढौ गोपा रामजनार्दनौ ।
कृष्णसङ्घट्टिन: केचिदासन् रामस्य चापरे ॥ २० ॥
tatra cakruḥ parivṛḍhau
gopā rāma-janārdanau
kṛṣṇa-saṅghaṭṭinaḥ kecid
āsan rāmasya cāpare
Synonyms
tatra — in that game; cakruḥ — they made; parivṛḍhau — the two leaders; gopāḥ — the cowherd boys; rāma-janārdanau — Lord Balarāma and Kṛṣṇa; kṛṣṇa-saṅghaṭṭinaḥ — members of Kṛṣṇa’s party; kecit — some of them; āsan — became; rāmasya — of Balarāma; ca — and; apare — others.

Translation
The cowherd boys chose Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma as the leaders of the two parties. Some of the boys were on Kṛṣṇa’s side, and others joined Balarāma.

Text 21
आचेरुर्विविधा: क्रीडा वाह्यवाहकलक्षणा: ।
यत्रारोहन्ति जेतारो वहन्ति च पराजिता: ॥ २१ ॥
ācerur vividhāḥ krīḍā
vāhya-vāhaka-lakṣaṇāḥ
yatrārohanti jetāro
vahanti ca parājitāḥ
Synonyms
āceruḥ — they performed; vividhāḥ — various; krīḍāḥ — sports; vāhya — by the carried; vāhaka — the carrier; lakṣaṇāḥ — characterized; yatra — in which; ārohanti — climb; jetāraḥ — the winners; vahanti — carry; ca — and; parājitāḥ — the defeated.

Translation
The boys played various games involving carriers and passengers. In these games the winners would climb up on the backs of the losers, who would have to carry them.

Text 22
वहन्तो वाह्यमानाश्च चारयन्तश्च गोधनम् ।
भाण्डीरकं नाम वटं जग्मु: कृष्णपुरोगमा: ॥ २२ ॥
vahanto vāhyamānāś ca
cārayantaś ca go-dhanam
bhāṇḍīrakaṁ nāma vaṭaṁ
jagmuḥ kṛṣṇa-purogamāḥ
Synonyms
vahantaḥ — carrying; vāhyamānāḥ — being carried; ca — and; cārayantaḥ — tending; ca — also; go-dhanam — the cows; bhāṇḍīrakam nāma — named Bhāṇḍīraka; vaṭam — to the banyan tree; jagmuḥ — they went; kṛṣṇa-puraḥ-gamāḥ — led by Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Translation
Thus carrying and being carried by one another, and at the same time tending the cows, the boys followed Kṛṣṇa to a banyan tree known as Bhāṇḍīraka.

Text 23
रामसङ्घट्टिनो यर्हि श्रीदामवृषभादय: ।
क्रीडायां जयिनस्तांस्तानूहु: कृष्णादयो नृप ॥ २३ ॥
rāma-saṅghaṭṭino yarhi
śrīdāma-vṛṣabhādayaḥ
krīḍāyāṁ jayinas tāṁs tān
ūhuḥ kṛṣṇādayo nṛpa
Synonyms
rāma-saṅghaṭṭinaḥ — the members of Lord Balarāma’s party; yarhi — when; śrīdāma-vṛṣabha-ādayaḥ — Śrīdāmā, Vṛṣabha and others (such as Subala); krīḍāyām — in the games; jayinaḥ — victorious; tān tān — each of them; ūhuḥ — carried; kṛṣṇa-ādayaḥ — Kṛṣṇa and the members of His party; nṛpa — O King.

Translation
My dear King Parīkṣit, when Śrīdāmā, Vṛṣabha and the other members of Lord Balarāma’s party were victorious in these games, Kṛṣṇa and His followers had to carry them.

Text 24
उवाह कृष्णो भगवान् श्रीदामानं पराजित: ।
वृषभं भद्रसेनस्तु प्रलम्बो रोहिणीसुतम् ॥ २४ ॥
uvāha kṛṣṇo bhagavān
śrīdāmānaṁ parājitaḥ
vṛṣabhaṁ bhadrasenas tu
pralambo rohiṇī-sutam
Synonyms
uvāha — carried; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śrīdāmānam — His devotee and friend Śrīdāmā; parājitaḥ — being defeated; vṛṣabham — Vṛṣabha; bhadrasenaḥ — Bhadrasena; tu — and; pralambaḥ — Pralamba; rohiṇī-sutam — the son of Rohiṇī (Balarāma).

Translation
Defeated, the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa carried Śrīdāmā. Bhadrasena carried Vṛṣabha, and Pralamba carried Balarāma, the son of Rohiṇī.

Text 25
अविषह्यं मन्यमान: कृष्णं दानवपुङ्गव: ।
वहन् द्रुततरं प्रागादवरोहणत: परम् ॥ २५ ॥
aviṣahyaṁ manyamānaḥ
kṛṣṇaṁ dānava-puṅgavaḥ
vahan drutataraṁ prāgād
avarohaṇataḥ param
Synonyms
aviṣahyam — invincible; manyamānaḥ — considering; kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; dānava-puṅgavaḥ — that foremost demon; vahan — carrying; druta-taram — very quickly; prāgāt — he went off; avarohaṇataḥ param — beyond the place marked for climbing down.

Translation
Considering Lord Kṛṣṇa invincible, that foremost demon [Pralamba] quickly carried Balarāma far beyond the spot where he was supposed to put his passenger down.

Text 26
तमुद्वहन् धरणिधरेन्द्रगौरवं
महासुरो विगतरयो निजं वपु: ।
स आस्थित: पुरटपरिच्छदो बभौ
तडिद्‌‌द्युमानुडुपतिवाडिवाम्बुद: ॥ २६ ॥
tam udvahan dharaṇi-dharendra-gauravaṁ
mahāsuro vigata-rayo nijaṁ vapuḥ
sa āsthitaḥ puraṭa-paricchado babhau
taḍid-dyumān uḍupati-vāḍ ivāmbudaḥ
Synonyms
tam — Him, Lord Baladeva; udvahan — carrying high; dharaṇi-dhara-indra — like the king of the mountains, Sumeru; gauravam — whose weight; mahā-asuraḥ — the great demon; vigata-rayaḥ — losing his momentum; nijam — his original; vapuḥ — body; saḥ — he; āsthitaḥ — becoming situated in; puraṭa — golden; paricchadaḥ — having ornaments; babhau — he shone; taḍit — like lightning; dyu-mān — flashing; uḍu-pati — the moon; vāṭ — carrying; iva — just as; ambu-daḥ — a cloud.

Translation
As the great demon carried Balarāma, the Lord became as heavy as massive Mount Sumeru, and Pralamba had to slow down. He then resumed his actual form — an effulgent body that was covered with golden ornaments and that resembled a cloud flashing with lightning and carrying the moon.

Text 27
निरीक्ष्य तद्वपुरलमम्बरे चरत्
प्रदीप्तद‍ृग् भ्रुकुटितटोग्रदंष्ट्रकम् ।
ज्वलच्छिखं कटककिरीटकुण्डल-
त्विषाद्भ‍ुतं हलधर ईषदत्रसत् ॥ २७ ॥
nirīkṣya tad-vapur alam ambare carat
pradīpta-dṛg bhru-kuṭi-taṭogra-daṁṣṭrakam
jvalac-chikhaṁ kaṭaka-kirīṭa-kuṇḍala-
tviṣādbhutaṁ haladhara īṣad atrasat
Synonyms
nirīkṣya — seeing; tat — of Pralambāsura; vapuḥ — the body; alam — quickly; ambare — in the sky; carat — moving; pradīpta — blazing; dṛk — his eyes; bhru-kuṭi — of his frown upon his eyebrows; taṭa — on the edge; ugra — terrible; daṁṣṭrakam — his teeth; jvalat — fiery; śikham — hair; kaṭaka — of his armlets; kirīṭa — crown; kuṇḍala — and earrings; tviṣā — by the effulgence; adbhutam — astonishing; hala-dharaḥ — Lord Balarāma, the carrier of the plow weapon; īṣat — a little; atrasat — became frightened.

Translation
When Lord Balarāma, who carries the plow weapon, saw the gigantic body of the demon as he moved swiftly in the sky — with his blazing eyes, fiery hair, terrible teeth reaching toward his scowling brows, and an amazing effulgence generated by his armlets, crown and earrings — the Lord seemed to become a little frightened.

Text 28
अथागतस्मृतिरभयो रिपुं बलो
विहायसार्थमिव हरन्तमात्मन: ।
रुषाहनच्छिरसि द‍ृढेन मुष्टिना
सुराधिपो गिरिमिव वज्ररंहसा ॥ २८ ॥
athāgata-smṛtir abhayo ripuṁ balo
vihāya sārtham iva harantam ātmanaḥ
ruṣāhanac chirasi dṛḍhena muṣṭinā
surādhipo girim iva vajra-raṁhasā
Synonyms
atha — then; āgata-smṛtiḥ — remembering Himself; abhayaḥ — without fear; ripum — His enemy; balaḥ — Lord Balarāma; vihāya — leaving aside; sārtham — the company; iva — indeed; harantam — kidnapping; ātmanaḥ — Himself; ruṣā — angrily; ahanat — He struck; śirasi — upon the head; dṛḍhena — hard; muṣṭinā — with His fist; sura-adhipaḥ — the king of the demigods, Indra; girim — a mountain; iva — just as; vajra — of his thunderbolt weapon; raṁhasā — with the swiftness.

Translation
Remembering the actual situation, the fearless Balarāma understood that the demon was tṛying to kidnap Him and take Him away from His companions. The Lord then became furious and struck the demon’s head with His hard fist, just as Indra, the king of the demigods, strikes a mountain with his thunderbolt weapon.

Text 29
स आहत: सपदि विशीर्णमस्तको
मुखाद् वमन् रुधिरमपस्मृतोऽसुर: ।
महारवं व्यसुरपतत् समीरयन्
गिरिर्यथा मघवत आयुधाहत: ॥ २९ ॥
sa āhataḥ sapadi viśīrṇa-mastako
mukhād vaman rudhiram apasmṛto ’suraḥ
mahā-ravaṁ vyasur apatat samīrayan
girir yathā maghavata āyudhāhataḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he, Pralambāsura; āhataḥ — struck; sapadi — at once; viśīrṇa — split; mastakaḥ — his head; mukhāt — from his mouth; vaman — vomiting; rudhiram — blood; apasmṛtaḥ — unconscious; asuraḥ — the demon; mahā-ravam — a great noise; vyasuḥ — lifeless; apatat — he fell; samīrayan — sounding; giriḥ — a mountain; yathā — as; maghavataḥ — of Lord Indra; āyudha — by the weapon; āhataḥ — hit.

Translation
Thus smashed by Balarāma’s fist, Pralamba’s head immediately cracked open. The demon vomited blood from his mouth and lost all consciousness, and then with a great noise he fell lifeless on the ground, like a mountain devastated by Indra.

Text 30
द‍ृष्ट्वा प्रलम्बं निहतं बलेन बलशालिना ।
गोपा: सुविस्मिता आसन्साधु साध्विति वादिन: ॥ ३० ॥
dṛṣṭvā pralambaṁ nihataṁ
balena bala-śālinā
gopāḥ su-vismitā āsan
sādhu sādhv iti vādinaḥ
Synonyms
dṛṣṭvā — seeing; pralambam — Pralambāsura; nihatam — killed; balena — by Lord Balarāma; bala-śālinā — who is by nature very powerful; gopāḥ — the cowherd boys; su-vismitāḥ — most astonished; āsan — became; sādhu sādhu — “very wonderful, very wonderful”; iti — these words; vādinaḥ — speaking.

Translation
The cowherd boys were most astonished to see how the powerful Balarāma had killed the demon Pralamba, and they exclaimed, “Excellent! Excellent!”

Text 31
आशिषोऽभिगृणन्तस्तं प्रशशंसुस्तदर्हणम् ।
प्रेत्यागतमिवालिङ्‌‌ग्य प्रेमविह्वलचेतस: ॥ ३१ ॥
āśiṣo ’bhigṛṇantas taṁ
praśaśaṁsus tad-arhaṇam
pretyāgatam ivāliṅgya
prema-vihvala-cetasaḥ
Synonyms
āśiṣaḥ — benedictions; abhigṛṇantaḥ — offering profusely; tam — to Him; praśaśaṁsuḥ — they praised; tat-arhaṇam — Him who was worthy of such; pretya — having died; āgatam — come back; iva — as if; ālingya — embracing; prema — out of love; vihvala — overwhelmed; cetasaḥ — their minds.

Translation
They offered Balarāma profuse benedictions and then glorified Him, who deserves all glorification. Their minds overwhelmed with ecstatic love, they embraced Him as if He had come back from the dead.

Text 32
पापे प्रलम्बे निहते देवा: परमनिर्वृता: ।
अभ्यवर्षन् बलं माल्यै: शशंसु: साधु साध्विति ॥ ३२ ॥
pāpe pralambe nihate
devāḥ parama-nirvṛtāḥ
abhyavarṣan balaṁ mālyaiḥ
śaśaṁsuḥ sādhu sādhv iti
Synonyms
pāpe — the sinful; pralambe — Pralambāsura; nihate — being killed; devāḥ — the demigods; parama — extremely; nirvṛtāḥ — satisfied; abhyavarṣan — showered; balam — Lord Balarāma; mālyaiḥ — with flower garlands; śaśaṁsuḥ — they offered prayers; sādhu sādhu iti — crying “excellent, excellent.”

Translation
The sinful Pralamba having been killed, the demigods felt extremely happy, and they showered flower garlands upon Lord Balarāma and praised the excellence of His deed.