Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
तयोस्तदद्भ‍ुतं कर्म दावाग्नेर्मोक्षमात्मन: ।
गोपा: स्त्रीभ्य: समाचख्यु: प्रलम्बवधमेव च ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
tayos tad adbhutaṁ karma
dāvāgner mokṣam ātmanaḥ
gopāḥ strībhyaḥ samācakhyuḥ
pralamba-vadham eva ca
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tayoḥ — of the two of Them, Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Balarāma; tat — that; adbhutam — amazing; karma — action; dāva-agneḥ — from the forest fire; mokṣam — the deliverance; ātmanaḥ — of themselves; gopāḥ — the cowherd boys; strībhyaḥ — to the ladies; samācakhyuḥ — they described in detail; pralamba-vadham — the killing of Pralambāsura; eva — indeed; ca — also.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:To the ladies of Vṛndāvana, the cowherd boys then related in full detail Kṛṣṇa’s and Balarāma’s wonderful activities of delivering them from the forest fire and killing the demon Pralamba.

Text 2
गोपवृद्धाश्च गोप्यश्च तदुपाकर्ण्य विस्मिता: ।
मेनिरे देवप्रवरौ कृष्णरामौ व्रजं गतौ ॥ २ ॥
gopa-vṛddhāś ca gopyaś ca
tad upākarṇya vismitāḥ
menire deva-pravarau
kṛṣṇa-rāmau vrajaṁ gatau
Synonyms
gopa-vṛddhāḥ — the elder cowherd men; ca — and; gopyaḥ — the cowherd ladies; ca — also; tat — that; upākarṇya — hearing; vismitāḥ — surprised; menire — they considered; deva-pravarau — two eminent demigods; kṛṣṇa-rāmau — the brothers Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma; vrajam — to Vṛndāvana; gatau — come.

Translation
The elder cowherd men and ladies were amazed to hear this account, and they concluded that Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma must be exalted demigods who had appeared in Vṛndāvana.

Text 3
तत: प्रावर्तत प्रावृट् सर्वसत्त्वसमुद्भ‍वा ।
विद्योतमानपरिधिर्विस्फूर्जितनभस्तला ॥ ३ ॥
tataḥ prāvartata prāvṛṭ
sarva-sattva-samudbhavā
vidyotamāna-paridhir
visphūrjita-nabhas-talā
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; prāvartata — began; prāvṛṭ — the rainy season; sarva-sattva — of all living beings; samudbhavā — the source of generation; vidyotamāna — flashing with lightning; paridhiḥ — its horizon; visphūrjita — agitated (by thunder); nabhaḥ-talā — the sky.

Translation
Then the rainy season began, giving life and sustenance to all living beings. The sky began to rumble with thunder, and lightning flashed on the horizon.

Text 4
सान्द्रनीलाम्बुदैर्व्योम सविद्युत्स्तनयित्नुभि: ।
अस्पष्टज्योतिराच्छन्नं ब्रह्मेव सगुणं बभौ ॥ ४ ॥
sāndra-nīlāmbudair vyoma
sa-vidyut-stanayitnubhiḥ
aspaṣṭa-jyotir ācchannaṁ
brahmeva sa-guṇaṁ babhau
Synonyms
sāndra — dense; nīla — blue; ambudaiḥ — by the clouds; vyoma — the sky; sa-vidyut — along with lightning; stanayitnubhiḥ — and thunder; aspaṣṭa — diffuse; jyotiḥ — its illumination; ācchannam — covered; brahma — the spirit soul; iva — as if; sa-guṇam — with the material qualities of nature; babhau — was manifest.

Translation
The sky was then covered by dense blue clouds accompanied by lightning and thunder. Thus the sky and its natural illumination were covered in the same way that the spirit soul is covered by the three modes of material nature.

Text 5
अष्टौ मासान् निपीतं यद् भूम्याश्चोदमयं वसु ।
स्वगोभिर्मोक्तुमारेभे पर्जन्य: काल आगते ॥ ५ ॥
aṣṭau māsān nipītaṁ yad
bhūmyāś coda-mayaṁ vasu
sva-gobhir moktum ārebhe
parjanyaḥ kāla āgate
Synonyms
aṣṭau — eight; māsān — during months; nipītam — drunk; yat — which; bhūmyāḥ — of the earth; ca — and; uda-mayam — consisting of water; vasu — the wealth; sva-gobhiḥ — by his own rays; moktum — to release; ārebhe — began; parjanyaḥ — the sun; kāle — the proper time; āgate — when it arrived.

Translation
With its rays, the sun had for eight months drunk up the earth’s wealth in the form of water. Now that the proper time had arrived, the sun began releasing this accumulated wealth.

Text 6
तडिद्वन्तो महामेघाश्चण्डश्वसनवेपिता: ।
प्रीणनं जीवनं ह्यस्य मुमुचु: करुणा इव ॥ ६ ॥
taḍidvanto mahā-meghāś
caṇḍa-śvasana-vepitāḥ
prīṇanaṁ jīvanaṁ hy asya
mumucuḥ karuṇā iva
Synonyms
taḍit-vantaḥ — displaying lightning; mahā-meghāḥ — the great clouds; caṇḍa — fierce; śvasana — by the wind; vepitāḥ — shaken; prīṇanam — the gratification; jīvanam — their life (their water); hi — indeed; asya — of this world; mumucuḥ — they released; karuṇāḥ — merciful personalities; iva — just as.

Translation
Flashing with lightning, great clouds were shaken and swept about by fierce winds. Just like merciful persons, the clouds gave their lives for the pleasure of this world.

Text 7
तप:कृशा देवमीढा आसीद् वर्षीयसी मही ।
यथैव काम्यतपसस्तनु: सम्प्राप्य तत्फलम् ॥ ७ ॥
tapaḥ-kṛśā deva-mīḍhā
āsīd varṣīyasī mahī
yathaiva kāmya-tapasas
tanuḥ samprāpya tat-phalam
Synonyms
tapaḥ-kṛśā — emaciated by the summer heat; deva-mīḍhā — mercifully sprinkled by the god of rain; āsīt — became; varṣīyasī — fully nourished; mahī — the earth; yathā eva — just as; kāmya — based on sense gratification; tapasaḥ — of one whose austerities; tanuḥ — the body; samprāpya — after obtaining; tat — of those austere practices; phalam — the fruit.

Translation
The earth had been emaciated by the summer heat, but she became fully nourished again when moistened by the god of rain. Thus the earth was like a person whose body has been emaciated by austerities undergone for a material purpose, but who again becomes fully nourished when he achieves the fruit of those austerities.

Text 8
निशामुखेषु खद्योतास्तमसा भान्ति न ग्रहा: ।
यथा पापेन पाषण्डा न हि वेदा: कलौ युगे ॥ ८ ॥
niśā-mukheṣu khadyotās
tamasā bhānti na grahāḥ
yathā pāpena pāṣaṇḍā
na hi vedāḥ kalau yuge
Synonyms
niśā-mukheṣu — during the moments of evening twilight; khadyotāḥ — the glowworms; tamasā — because of the darkness; bhānti — shine; na — not; grahāḥ — the planets; yathā — as; pāpena — because of sinful activities; pāṣaṇḍāḥ — atheistic doctrines; na — and not; hi — certainly; vedāḥ — the Vedas; kalau yuge — in the Age of Kali.

Translation
In the evening twilight during the rainy season, the darkness allowed the glowworms but not the stars to shine forth, just as in the Age of Kali the predominance of sinful activities allows atheistic doctrines to overshadow the true knowledge of the Vedas.

Text 9
श्रुत्वा पर्जन्यनिनदं मण्डुका: ससृजुर्गिर: ।
तूष्णीं शयाना: प्राग् यद्वद्ब्राह्मणा नियमात्यये ॥ ९ ॥
śrutvā parjanya-ninadaṁ
maṇḍukāḥ sasṛjur giraḥ
tūṣṇīṁ śayānāḥ prāg yadvad
brāhmaṇā niyamātyaye
Synonyms
śrutvā — hearing; parjanya — of the rain clouds; ninadam — the resounding; maṇḍukāḥ — the frogs; sasṛjuḥ — emitted; giraḥ — their sounds; tūṣṇīm — silently; śayānāḥ — lying; prāk — previously; yadvat — just as; brāhmaṇāḥ — brāhmaṇa students; niyama-atyaye — after finishing their morning duties.

Translation
The frogs, who had all along been lying silent, suddenly began croaking when they heard the rumbling of the rain clouds, in the same way that brāhmaṇa students, who perform their morning duties in silence begin reciting their lessons when called by their teacher.

Text 10
आसन्नुत्पथगामिन्य: क्षुद्रनद्योऽनुशुष्यती: ।
पुंसो यथास्वतन्त्रस्य देहद्रविणसम्पद: ॥ १० ॥
āsann utpatha-gāminyaḥ
kṣudra-nadyo ’nuśuṣyatīḥ
puṁso yathāsvatantrasya
deha-draviṇa-sampadaḥ
Synonyms
āsan — they became; utpatha-gāminyaḥ — strayed from their courses; kṣudra — insignificant; nadyaḥ — the rivers; anuśuṣyatīḥ — drying up; puṁsaḥ — of a person; yathā — as; asvatantrasya — who is not independent (that is, who is under the control of his senses); deha — the body; draviṇa — physical property; sampadaḥ — and riches.

Translation
With the advent of the rainy season, the insignificant streams, which had become dry, began to swell and then strayed from their proper courses, like the body, property and money of a man controlled by the urges of his senses.

Text 11
हरिता हरिभि: शष्पैरिन्द्रगोपैश्च लोहिता ।
उच्छिलीन्ध्रकृतच्छाया नृणां श्रीरिव भूरभूत् ॥ ११ ॥
haritā haribhiḥ śaṣpair
indragopaiś ca lohitā
ucchilīndhra-kṛta-cchāyā
nṛṇāṁ śrīr iva bhūr abhūt
Synonyms
haritāḥ — greenish; haribhiḥ — which is green; śaṣpaiḥ — because of the newly grown grass; indragopaiḥ — because of the indragopa insects; ca — and; lohitā — reddish; ucchilīndhra — by the mushrooms; kṛta — afforded; chāyā — shelter; nṛṇām — of men; śrīḥ — the opulence; iva — just as; bhūḥ — the earth; abhūt — became.

Translation
The newly grown grass made the earth emerald green, the indragopa insects added a reddish hue, and white mushrooms added further color and circles of shade. Thus the earth appeared like a person who has suddenly become rich.

Text 12
क्षेत्राणि शष्यसम्पद्भ‍ि: कर्षकाणां मुदं ददु: ।
मानिनामनुतापं वै दैवाधीनमजानताम् ॥ १२ ॥
kṣetrāṇi śaṣya-sampadbhiḥ
karṣakāṇāṁ mudaṁ daduḥ
māninām anutāpaṁ vai
daivādhīnam ajānatām
Synonyms
kṣetrāṇi — the fields; śaṣya-sampadbhiḥ — with their wealth of grains; karṣakāṇām — to the farmers; mudam — joy; daduḥ — gave; māninām — to others who are falsely proud; anutāpam — remorse; vai — indeed; daiva-adhīnam — the control of destiny; ajānatām — not understanding.

Translation
With their wealth of grains, the fields gave joy to the farmers. But those fields created remorse in the hearts of those who were too proud to engage in farming and who failed to understand how everything is under the control of the Supreme.

Text 13
जलस्थलौकस: सर्वे नववारिनिषेवया ।
अबिभ्रन् रुचिरं रूपं यथा हरिनिषेवया ॥ १३ ॥
jala-sthalaukasaḥ sarve
nava-vāri-niṣevayā
abibhran ruciraṁ rūpaṁ
yathā hari-niṣevayā
Synonyms
jala — of the water; sthala — and the land; okasaḥ — the residents; sarve — all; nava — new; vāri — of the water; niṣevayā — by taking recourse; abibhran — they took on; ruciram — attractive; rūpam — form; yathā — just as; hari-niṣevayā — by rendering devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
As all creatures of the land and water took advantage of the newly fallen rainwater, their forms became attractive and pleasing, just as a devotee becomes beautiful by engaging in the service of the Supreme Lord.

Text 14
सरिद्भ‍ि: सङ्गत: सिन्धुश्चुक्षोभ श्वसनोर्मिमान् ।
अपक्‍वयोगिनश्चित्तं कामाक्तं गुणयुग् यथा ॥ १४ ॥
saridbhiḥ saṅgataḥ sindhuś
cukṣobha śvasanormimān
apakva-yoginaś cittaṁ
kāmāktaṁ guṇa-yug yathā
Synonyms
saridbhiḥ — with the rivers; saṅgataḥ — on account of meeting; sindhuḥ — the ocean; cukṣobha — became agitated; śvasana — blown by the wind; ūrmi-mān — having waves; apakva — immature; yoginaḥ — of a yogī; cittam — the mind; kāma-aktam — tainted with lust; guṇa-yuk — maintaining connection with objects of sense gratification; yathā — just as.

Translation
Where the rivers joined the ocean it became agitated, its waves blown about by the wind, just as the mind of an immature yogī becomes agitated because he is still tainted by lust and attached to the objects of sense gratification.

Text 15
गिरयो वर्षधाराभिर्हन्यमाना न विव्यथु: ।
अभिभूयमाना व्यसनैर्यथाधोक्षजचेतस: ॥ १५ ॥
girayo varṣa-dhārābhir
hanyamānā na vivyathuḥ
abhibhūyamānā vyasanair
yathādhokṣaja-cetasaḥ
Synonyms
girayaḥ — the mountains; varṣa-dhārābhiḥ — by the rain-bearing clouds; hanyamānāḥ — being struck; na vivyathuḥ — did not shake; abhibhūyamānāḥ — being attacked; vyasanaiḥ — by dangers; yathā — as; adhokṣaja-cetasaḥ — those whose minds are absorbed in the Supreme Lord.

Translation
Just as devotees whose minds are absorbed in the Personality of Godhead remain peaceful even when attacked by all sorts of dangers, the mountains in the rainy season were not at all disturbed by the repeated striking of the rain-bearing clouds.

Text 16
मार्गा बभूवु: सन्दिग्धस्तृणैश्छन्ना ह्यसंस्कृता: ।
नाभ्यस्यमाना: श्रुतयो द्विजै: कालेन चाहता: ॥ १६ ॥
mārgā babhūvuḥ sandigdhās
tṛṇaiś channā hy asaṁskṛtāḥ
nābhyasyamānāḥ śrutayo
dvijaiḥ kālena cāhatāḥ
Synonyms
mārgāḥ — the roads; babhūvuḥ — became; sandigdhāḥ — obscured; tṛṇaiḥ — by grass; channāḥ — covered over; hi — indeed; asaṁskṛtāḥ — not cleansed; na abhyasyamānāḥ — not being studied; śrutayaḥ — the scriptures; dvijaiḥ — by the brāhmaṇas; kālena — by the effects of time; ca — and; āhatāḥ — corrupted.

Translation
During the rainy season the roads, not being cleansed, became covered with grass and debris and were thus difficult to make out. These roads were like religious scriptures that brāhmaṇas no longer study and that thus become corrupted and covered over with the passage of time.

Text 17
लोकबन्धुषु मेघेषु विद्युतश्चलसौहृदा: ।
स्थैर्यं न चक्रु: कामिन्य: पुरुषेषु गुणिष्विव ॥ १७ ॥
loka-bandhuṣu megheṣu
vidyutaś cala-sauhṛdāḥ
sthairyaṁ na cakruḥ kāminyaḥ
puruṣeṣu guṇiṣv iva
Synonyms
loka — of all the world; bandhuṣu — who are the friends; megheṣu — among the clouds; vidyutaḥ — the lightning; cala-sauhṛdāḥ — fickle in their friendship; sthairyam — steadiness; na cakruḥ — did not maintain; kāminyaḥ — lusty women; puruṣeṣu — among men; guṇiṣu — who are virtuous; iva — as.

Translation
Though the clouds are the well-wishing friends of all living beings, the lightning, fickle in its affinities, moved from one group of clouds to another, like lusty women unfaithful even to virtuous men.

Text 18
धनुर्वियति माहेन्द्रं निर्गुणं च गुणिन्यभात् ।
व्यक्ते गुणव्यतिकरेऽगुणवान् पुरुषो यथा ॥ १८ ॥
dhanur viyati māhendraṁ
nirguṇaṁ ca guṇiny abhāt
vyakte guṇa-vyatikare
’guṇavān puruṣo yathā
Synonyms
dhanuḥ — the bow (rainbow); viyati — within the sky; māhā-indram — of Lord Indra; nirguṇam — without qualities (or without a bowstring); ca — although; guṇini — within the sky, which has definite qualities like sound; abhāt — appeared; vyakte — within the manifest material nature; guṇa-vyatikare — which consists of the interactions of material qualities; aguṇa-vān — He who has no contact with material qualities; puruṣaḥ — the Supreme Personality; yathā — just as.

Translation
When the curved bow of Indra [the rainbow] appeared in the sky, which had the quality of thundering sound, it was unlike ordinary bows because it did not rest upon a string. Similarly, when the Supreme Lord appears in this world, which is the interaction of the material qualities, He is unlike ordinary persons because He remains free from all material qualities and independent of all material conditions.

Text 19
न रराजोडुपश्छन्न: स्वज्योत्स्‍नाराजितैर्घनै: ।
अहंमत्या भासितया स्वभासा पुरुषो यथा ॥ १९ ॥
na rarājoḍupaś channaḥ
sva-jyotsnā-rājitair ghanaiḥ
ahaṁ-matyā bhāsitayā
sva-bhāsā puruṣo yathā
Synonyms
na rarāja — did not shine forth; uḍupaḥ — the moon; channaḥ — covered; sva-jyotsnā — by its own light; rājitaiḥ — which are illuminated; ghanaiḥ — by the clouds; aham-matyā — by false ego; bhāsitayā — which is illuminated; sva-bhāsā — by his own luster; puruṣaḥ — the living entity; yathā — as.

Translation
During the rainy season the moon was prevented from appearing directly by the covering of the clouds, which were themselves illumined by the moon’s rays. Similarly, the living being in material existence is prevented from appearing directly by the covering of the false ego, which is itself illumined by the consciousness of the pure soul.

Text 20
मेघागमोत्सवा हृष्टा: प्रत्यनन्दञ्छिखण्डिन: ।
गृहेषु तप्तनिर्विण्णा यथाच्युतजनागमे ॥ २० ॥
meghāgamotsavā hṛṣṭāḥ
pratyanandañ chikhaṇḍinaḥ
gṛheṣu tapta-nirviṇṇā
yathācyuta-janāgame
Synonyms
megha — of clouds; āgama — because of the arrival; utsavāḥ — who celebrate a festival; hṛṣṭāḥ — becoming joyful; pratyanandan — they cried out in greeting; śikhaṇḍinaḥ — the peacocks; gṛheṣu — within their homes; tapta — those who are distressed; nirviṇṇāḥ — and then become happy; yathā — just as; acyuta — of the infallible Personality of Godhead; jana — of the devotees; āgame — upon the arrival.

Translation
The peacocks became festive and cried out a joyful greeting when they saw the clouds arrive, just as people distressed in household life feel pleasure when the pure devotees of the infallible Supreme Lord visit them.

Text 21
पीत्वाप: पादपा: पद्भ‍िरासन्नानात्ममूर्तय: ।
प्राक् क्षामास्तपसा श्रान्ता यथा कामानुसेवया ॥ २१ ॥
pītvāpaḥ pādapāḥ padbhir
āsan nānātma-mūrtayaḥ
prāk kṣāmās tapasā śrāntā
yathā kāmānusevayā
Synonyms
pītvā — having drunk; āpaḥ — water; pāda-pāḥ — the trees; padbhiḥ — with their feet; āsan — assumed; nānā — various; ātma-mūrtayaḥ — bodily features; prāk — previously; kṣāmāḥ — emaciated; tapasā — by austerities; śrāntāḥ — fatigued; yathā — as; kāma-anusevayā — by enjoying acquired desired objects.

Translation
The trees had grown thin and dry, but after they drank the newly fallen rainwater through their feet, their various bodily features blossomed. Similarly, one whose body has grown thin and weak from austerity again exhibits his healthy bodily features upon enjoying the material objects gained through that austerity.

Text 22
सर:स्वशान्तरोध:सु न्यूषुरङ्गापि सारसा: ।
गृहेष्वशान्तकृत्येषु ग्राम्या इव दुराशया: ॥ २२ ॥
saraḥsv aśānta-rodhaḥsu
nyūṣur aṅgāpi sārasāḥ
gṛheṣv aśānta-kṛtyeṣu
grāmyā iva durāśayāḥ
Synonyms
saraḥsu — upon the lakes; aśānta — disturbed; rodhaḥsu — whose banks; nyūṣuḥ — continued to dwell; aṅga — my dear King; api — indeed; sārasāḥ — the cranes; gṛheṣu — in their homes; aśānta — feverish; kṛtyeṣu — where activities are performed; grāmyāḥ — materialistic men; iva — indeed; durāśayāḥ — whose minds are contaminated.

Translation
The cranes continued dwelling on the shores of the lakes, although the shores were agitated during the rainy season, just as materialistic persons with contaminated minds always remain at home, despite the many disturbances there.

Text 23
जलौघैर्निरभिद्यन्त सेतवो वर्षतीश्वरे ।
पाषण्डिनामसद्वादैर्वेदमार्गा: कलौ यथा ॥ २३ ॥
jalaughair nirabhidyanta
setavo varṣatīśvare
pāṣaṇḍinām asad-vādair
veda-mārgāḥ kalau yathā
Synonyms
jala-oghaiḥ — by the floodwater; nirabhidyanta — became broken; setavaḥ — the dikes; varṣati — when he is showering rain; īśvare — Lord Indra; pāṣaṇḍinām — of the atheists; asat-vādaiḥ — by the false theories; veda-mārgāḥ — the paths of the Vedas; kalau — in the Kali-yuga; yathā — as.

Translation
When Indra sent forth his rains, the floodwaters broke through the irrigation dikes in the agricultural fields, just as in the Kali-yuga the atheists’ false theories break down the boundaries of Vedic injunctions.

Text 24
व्यमुञ्चन् वायुभिर्नुन्ना भूतेभ्यश्चामृतं घना: ।
यथाशिषो विश्पतय: काले काले द्विजेरिता: ॥ २४ ॥
vyamuñcan vāyubhir nunnā
bhūtebhyaś cāmṛtaṁ ghanāḥ
yathāśiṣo viś-patayaḥ
kāle kāle dvijeritāḥ
Synonyms
vyamuñcan — they released; vāyubhiḥ — by the winds; nunnāḥ — impelled; bhūtebhyaḥ — to all living beings; ca — and; amṛtam — their nectarean water; ghanāḥ — the clouds; yathā — as; āśiṣaḥ — charitable benedictions; viṭ-patayaḥ — kings; kāle kāle — from time to time; dvija — by the brāhmaṇas; īritāḥ — encouraged.

Translation
The clouds, impelled by the winds, released their nectarean water for the benefit of all living beings, just as kings, instructed by their brāhmaṇa priests, dispense charity to the citizens.

Text 25
एवं वनं तद् वर्षिष्ठं पक्‍वखर्जुरजम्बुमत् ।
गोगोपालैर्वृतो रन्तुं सबल: प्राविशद्धरि: ॥ २५ ॥
evaṁ vanaṁ tad varṣiṣṭhaṁ
pakva-kharjura-jambumat
go-gopālair vṛto rantuṁ
sa-balaḥ prāviśad dhariḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; vanam — forest; tat — that; varṣiṣṭham — most resplendent; pakva — ripe; kharjura — dates; jambu — and jambu fruits; mat — having; go — by the cows; gopālaiḥ — and the cowherd boys; vṛtaḥ — surrounded; rantum — with the purpose of playing; sa-balaḥ — accompanied by Lord Balarāma; prāviśat — He entered; hariḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Translation
When the Vṛndāvana forest had thus become resplendent, filled with ripe dates and jambu fruits, Lord Kṛṣṇa, surrounded by His cows and cowherd boyfriends and accompanied by Śrī Balarāma, entered that forest to enjoy.

Text 26
धेनवो मन्दगामिन्य ऊधोभारेण भूयसा ।
ययुर्भगवताहूता द्रुतं प्रीत्या स्‍नुतस्तना: ॥ २६ ॥
dhenavo manda-gāminya
ūdho-bhāreṇa bhūyasā
yayur bhagavatāhūtā
drutaṁ prītyā snuta-stanāḥ
Synonyms
dhenavaḥ — the cows; manda-gāminyaḥ — moving slowly; ūdhaḥ — of their udders; bhāreṇa — because of the weight; bhūyasā — very great; yayuḥ — they went; bhagavatā — by the Lord; āhūtāḥ — being called; drutam — quickly; prītyā — out of affection; snuta — wet; stanāḥ — their udders.

Translation
The cows had to move slowly because of their weighty milk bags, but they quickly ran to the Supreme Personality of Godhead as soon as He called them, their affection for Him causing their udders to become wet.

Text 27
वनौकस: प्रमुदिता वनराजीर्मधुच्युत: ।
जलधारा गिरेर्नादादासन्ना दद‍ृशे गुहा: ॥ २७ ॥
vanaukasaḥ pramuditā
vana-rājīr madhu-cyutaḥ
jala-dhārā girer nādād
āsannā dadṛśe guhāḥ
Synonyms
vana-okasaḥ — the aborigine girls of the forest; pramuditāḥ — joyful; vana-rājīḥ — the trees of the forest; madhu-cyutaḥ — dripping sweet sap; jala-dhārāḥ — waterfalls; gireḥ — on the mountains; nādāt — from their resounding; āsannāḥ — nearby; dadṛśe — He observed; guhāḥ — caves.

Translation
The Lord saw the joyful aborigine girls of the forest, the trees dripping sweet sap, and the mountain waterfalls, whose resounding indicated that there were caves nearby.

Text 28
क्‍वचिद् वनस्पतिक्रोडे गुहायां चाभिवर्षति ।
निर्विश्य भगवान् रेमे कन्दमूलफलाशन: ॥ २८ ॥
kvacid vanaspati-kroḍe
guhāyāṁ cābhivarṣati
nirviśya bhagavān reme
kanda-mūla-phalāśanaḥ
Synonyms
kvacit — sometimes; vanaspati — of a tree; kroḍe — in the hollow; guhāyām — in a cave; ca — or; abhivarṣati — when it was raining; nirviśya — entering; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; reme — enjoyed; kanda-mūla — roots; phala — and fruits; aśanaḥ — eating.

Translation
When it rained, the Lord would sometimes enter a cave or the hollow of a tree to play and to eat roots and fruits.

Text 29
दध्योदनं समानीतं शिलायां सलिलान्तिके ।
सम्भोजनीयैर्बुभुजे गोपै: सङ्कर्षणान्वित: ॥ २९ ॥
dadhy-odanaṁ samānītaṁ
śilāyāṁ salilāntike
sambhojanīyair bubhuje
gopaiḥ saṅkarṣaṇānvitaḥ
Synonyms
dadhi-odanam — boiled rice mixed with yogurt; samānītam — sent; śīlāyām — on a stone; salila-antike — near the water; sambhojanīyaiḥ — who would take meals with Him; bubhuje — He ate; gopaiḥ — together with the cowherd boys; saṅkarṣaṇa-anvitaḥ — in the company of Lord Balarāma.

Translation
Lord Kṛṣṇa would take His meal of boiled rice and yogurt, sent from home, in the company of Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa and the cowherd boys who regularly ate with Him. They would all sit down to eat on a large stone near the water.

Texts 30-31
शाद्वलोपरि संविश्य चर्वतो मीलितेक्षणान् ।
तृप्तान् वृषान् वत्सतरान् गाश्च स्वोधोभरश्रमा: ॥ ३० ॥
प्रावृट्‍‍श्रियं च तां वीक्ष्य सर्वकालसुखावहाम् ।
भगवान् पूजयां चक्रे आत्मशक्त्युपबृंहिताम् ॥ ३१ ॥
śādvalopari saṁviśya
carvato mīlitekṣaṇān
tṛptān vṛṣān vatsatarān
gāś ca svodho-bhara-śramāḥ
prāvṛṭ-śriyaṁ ca tāṁ vīkṣya
sarva-kāla-sukhāvahām
bhagavān pūjayāṁ cakre
ātma-śakty-upabṛṁhitām
Synonyms
śādvala — a grassy patch; upari — upon; saṁviśya — sitting; carvataḥ — who were grazing; mīlita — closed; īkṣaṇān — their eyes; tṛptān — satisfied; vṛṣān — the bulls; vatsatarān — the calves; gāḥ — the cows; ca — and; sva — their own; ūdhaḥ — of the milk bags; bhara — by the weight; śramāḥ — fatigued; prāvṛṭ — of the rainy season; śriyam — the opulence; ca — and; tām — that; vīkṣya — seeing; sarva-kāla — always; sukha — pleasure; āvahām — giving; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pūjayām cakre — honored; ātma-śakti — from His internal potency; upabṛṁhitām — expanded.

Translation
Lord Kṛṣṇa watched the contented bulls, calves and cows sitting on the green grass and grazing with closed eyes, and He saw that the cows were tired from the burden of their heavy milk bags. Thus observing the beauty and opulence of Vṛndāvana’s rainy season, a perennial source of great happiness, the Lord offered all respect to that season, which was expanded from His own internal potency.

Text 32
एवं निवसतोस्तस्मिन् रामकेशवयोर्व्रजे ।
शरत्समभवद् व्यभ्रा स्वच्छाम्ब्वपरुषानिला ॥ ३२ ॥
evaṁ nivasatos tasmin
rāma-keśavayor vraje
śarat samabhavad vyabhrā
svacchāmbv-aparuṣānilā
Synonyms
evam — in this manner; nivasatoḥ — while the two of Them were dwelling; tasmin — in that; rāma-keśavayoḥ — Lord Rāma and Lord Keśava; vraje — in Vṛndāvana; śarat — the fall season; samabhavat — became fully manifest; vyabhrā — free from clouds in the sky; svaccha-ambu — in which the water was clear; aparuṣa-anilā — and the wind was gentle.

Translation
While Lord Rāma and Lord Keśava were thus dwelling in Vṛndāvana, the fall season arrived, when the sky is cloudless, the water clear and the wind gentle.

Text 33
शरदा नीरजोत्पत्त्या नीराणि प्रकृतिं ययु: ।
भ्रष्टानामिव चेतांसि पुनर्योगनिषेवया ॥ ३३ ॥
śaradā nīrajotpattyā
nīrāṇi prakṛtiṁ yayuḥ
bhraṣṭānām iva cetāṁsi
punar yoga-niṣevayā
Synonyms
śaradā — by the effect of the autumn season; nīraja — the lotus flowers; utpattyā — which regenerates; nīrāṇi — the bodies of water; prakṛtim — to their natural state (of cleanliness); yayuḥ — returned; bhraṣṭānām — of those who are fallen; iva — just as; cetāṁsi — the minds; punaḥ — once again; yoga — of devotional service; niṣevayā — by practice.

Translation
The autumn season, which regenerated the lotus flowers, also restored the various bodies of water to their original purity, just as the process of devotional service purifies the minds of the fallen yogīs when they return to it.

Text 34
व्योम्नोऽब्भ्रं भूतशाबल्यं भुव: पङ्कमपां मलम् ।
शरज्जहाराश्रमिणां कृष्णे भक्तिर्यथाशुभम् ॥ ३४ ॥
vyomno ’bbhraṁ bhūta-śābalyaṁ
bhuvaḥ paṅkam apāṁ malam
śaraj jahārāśramiṇāṁ
kṛṣṇe bhaktir yathāśubham
Synonyms
vyomnaḥ — in the sky; ap-bhram — the clouds; bhūta — of the animals; śābalyam — the crowded condition; bhuvaḥ — of the earth; paṅkam — the muddy covering; apām — of the water; malam — the contamination; śarat — the autumn season; jahāra — removed; āśramiṇām — of the members of the four different spiritual orders of human society; kṛṣṇe — for Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhaktiḥ — devotional service; yathā — just as; aśubham — all inauspiciousness.

Translation
Autumn cleared the sky of clouds, let the animals get out of their crowded living conditions, cleaned the earth of its covering of mud, and purified the water of contamination, in the same way that loving service rendered to Lord Kṛṣṇa frees the members of the four spiritual orders from their respective troubles.

Text 35
सर्वस्वं जलदा हित्वा विरेजु: शुभ्रवर्चस: ।
यथा त्यक्तैषणा: शान्ता मुनयो मुक्तकिल्बिषा: ॥ ३५ ॥
sarva-svaṁ jaladā hitvā
virejuḥ śubhra-varcasaḥ
yathā tyaktaiṣaṇāḥ śāntā
munayo mukta-kilbiṣāḥ
Synonyms
sarva-svam — everything they possess; jala-dāḥ — the clouds; hitvā — having given up; virejuḥ — shone forth; śubhra — pure; varcasaḥ — their effulgence; yathā — just as; tyakta-eṣaṇāḥ — who have given up all desires; śāntāḥ — pacified; munayaḥ — sages; mukta-kilbiṣāḥ — freed from evil propensities.

Translation
The clouds, having given up all they possessed, shone forth with purified effulgence, just like peaceful sages who have given up all material desires and are thus free of all sinful propensities.

Text 36
गिरयो मुमुचुस्तोयं क्‍वचिन्न मुमुचु: शिवम् ।
यथा ज्ञानामृतं काले ज्ञानिनो ददते न वा ॥ ३६ ॥
girayo mumucus toyaṁ
kvacin na mumucuḥ śivam
yathā jñānāmṛtaṁ kāle
jñānino dadate na vā
Synonyms
girayaḥ — the mountains; mumucuḥ — released; toyam — their water; kvacit — sometimes; na mumucuḥ — they did not release; śivam — pure; yathā — just as; jñāna — of transcendental knowledge; amṛtam — the nectar; kāle — at the appropriate time; jñāninaḥ — experts in spiritual knowledge; dadate — bestow; na vā — or not.

Translation
During this season the mountains sometimes released their pure water and sometimes did not, just as experts in transcendental science sometimes give the nectar of transcendental knowledge and sometimes do not.

Text 37
नैवाविदन् क्षीयमाणं जलं गाधजलेचरा: ।
यथायुरन्वहं क्षय्यं नरा मूढा: कुटुम्बिन: ॥ ३७ ॥
naivāvidan kṣīyamāṇaṁ
jalaṁ gādha-jale-carāḥ
yathāyur anv-ahaṁ kṣayyaṁ
narā mūḍhāḥ kuṭumbinaḥ
Synonyms
na — not; eva — indeed; avidan — appreciated; kṣīyamāṇam — diminishing; jalam — the water; gādha-jale — in shallow water; carāḥ — those who move; yathā — as; āyuḥ — their life span; anu-aham — every day; kṣayyam — diminishing; narāḥ — men; mūḍhāḥ — foolish; kuṭumbinaḥ — living with family members.

Translation
The fish swimming in the increasingly shallow water did not at all understand that the water was diminishing, just as foolish family men cannot see how the time they have left to live is diminishing with every passing day.

Text 38
गाधवारिचरास्तापमविन्दञ्छरदर्कजम् ।
यथा दरिद्र: कृपण: कुटुम्ब्यविजितेन्द्रिय: ॥ ३८ ॥
gādha-vāri-carās tāpam
avindañ charad-arka-jam
yathā daridraḥ kṛpaṇaḥ
kuṭumby avijitendriyaḥ
Synonyms
gādha-vāri-carāḥ — those who were moving in shallow water; tāpam — suffering; avindan — experienced; śarat-arka-jam — due to the sun in the autumn season; yathā — as; daridraḥ — a poor person; kṛpaṇaḥ — miserly; kuṭumbī — absorbed in family life; avijita-indriyaḥ — who has not controlled the senses.

Translation
Just as a miserly, poverty-stricken person overly absorbed in family life suffers because he cannot control his senses, the fish swimming in the shallow water had to suffer the heat of the autumn sun.

Text 39
शनै: शनैर्जहु: पङ्कं स्थलान्यामं च वीरुध: ।
यथाहंममतां धीरा: शरीरादिष्वनात्मसु ॥ ३९ ॥
śanaiḥ śanair jahuḥ paṅkaṁ
sthalāny āmaṁ ca vīrudhaḥ
yathāhaṁ-mamatāṁ dhīrāḥ
śarīrādiṣv anātmasu
Synonyms
śanaiḥ śanaiḥ — very gradually; jahuḥ — gave up; paṅkam — their mud; sthalāni — the places of land; āmam — their unripe condition; ca — and; vīrudhaḥ — the plants; yathā — as; aham-mamatām — egotism and possessiveness; dhīrāḥ — sober sages; śarīra-ādiṣu — focused upon the material body and other external objects; anātmasu — which are completely distinct from the real self.

Translation
Gradually the different areas of land gave up their muddy condition and the plants grew past their unripe stage, in the same way that sober sages give up egotism and possessiveness. These are based on things different from the real self, namely, the material body and its by-products.

Text 40
निश्चलाम्बुरभूत्तूष्णीं समुद्र: शरदागमे ।
आत्मन्युपरते सम्यङ्‍मुनिर्व्युपरतागम: ॥ ४० ॥
niścalāmbur abhūt tūṣṇīṁ
samudraḥ śarad-āgame
ātmany uparate samyaṅ
munir vyuparatāgamaḥ
Synonyms
niścala — motionless; ambuḥ — its water; abhūt — became; tūṣnīm — quiet; samudraḥ — the ocean; śarat — of the fall season; āgame — with the coming; ātmani — when the self; uparate — has desisted from material activities; samyak — completely; muniḥ — a sage; vyuparata — giving up; āgamaḥ — recitation of the Vedic mantras.

Translation
With the arrival of autumn, the ocean and the lakes became silent, their water still, just like a sage who has desisted from all material activities and given up his recitation of Vedic mantras.

Text 41
केदारेभ्यस्त्वपोऽगृह्णन् कर्षका द‍ृढसेतुभि: ।
यथा प्राणै: स्रवज्ज्ञानं तन्निरोधेन योगिन: ॥ ४१ ॥
kedārebhyas tv apo ’gṛhṇan
karṣakā dṛḍha-setubhiḥ
yathā prāṇaiḥ sravaj jñānaṁ
tan-nirodhena yoginaḥ
Synonyms
kedārebhyaḥ — from the flooded fields of rice paddy; tu — and; apaḥ — the water; agṛhṇan — took; karṣakāḥ — the farmers; dṛḍha — strong; setubhiḥ — with dikes; yathā — as; prāṇaiḥ — through the senses; sravat — flowing out; jñānam — consciousness; tat — of those senses; nirodhena — by the strict control; yoginaḥ — yogīs.

Translation
In the same way that the practitioners of yoga bring their senses under strict control to check their consciousness from flowing out through the agitated senses, the farmers erected strong mud banks to keep the water within their rice fields from draining out.

Text 42
शरदर्कांशुजांस्तापान् भूतानामुडुपोऽहरत् ।
देहाभिमानजं बोधो मुकुन्दो व्रजयोषिताम् ॥ ४२ ॥
śarad-arkāṁśu-jāṁs tāpān
bhūtānām uḍupo ’harat
dehābhimāna-jaṁ bodho
mukundo vraja-yoṣitām
Synonyms
śarat-arka — of the autumn sun; aṁśu — from the rays; jān — generated; tāpān — suffering; bhūtānām — of all creatures; uḍupaḥ — the moon; aharat — has taken away; deha — with the material body; abhimāna-jam — based on false identification; bodhaḥ — wisdom; mukundaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; vraja-yoṣitām — of the women of Vṛndāvana.

Translation
The autumn moon relieved all creatures of the suffering caused by the sun’s rays, just as wisdom relieves a person of the misery caused by his identifying with his material body and as Lord Mukunda relieves Vṛndāvana’s ladies of the distress caused by their separation from Him.

Text 43
खमशोभत निर्मेघं शरद्विमलतारकम् ।
सत्त्वयुक्तं यथा चित्तं शब्दब्रह्मार्थदर्शनम् ॥ ४३ ॥
kham aśobhata nirmeghaṁ
śarad-vimala-tārakam
sattva-yuktaṁ yathā cittaṁ
śabda-brahmārtha-darśanam
Synonyms
kham — the sky; aśobhata — shone brilliantly; nirmegham — free from clouds; śarat — in the fall; vimala — clear; tārakam — and starry; sattva-yuktam — endowed with (spiritual) goodness; yathā — just as; cittam — the mind; śabda-brahma — of the Vedic scripture; artha — the purport; darśanam — which directly experiences.

Translation
Free of clouds and filled with clearly visible stars, the autumn sky shone brilliantly, just like the spiritual consciousness of one who has directly experienced the purport of the Vedic scriptures.

Text 44
अखण्डमण्डलो व्योम्नि रराजोडुगणै: शशी ।
यथा यदुपति: कृष्णो वृष्णिचक्रावृतो भुवि ॥ ४४ ॥
akhaṇḍa-maṇḍalo vyomni
rarājoḍu-gaṇaiḥ śaśī
yathā yadu-patiḥ kṛṣṇo
vṛṣṇi-cakrāvṛto bhuvi
Synonyms
akhaṇḍa — unbroken; maṇḍalaḥ — its sphere; vyomni — in the sky; rarāja — shone forth; uḍu-gaṇaiḥ — along with the stars; śaśī — the moon; yathā — as; yadu-patiḥ — the master of the Yadu dynasty; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; vṛṣṇi-cakra — by the circle of Vṛṣṇis; āvṛtaḥ — surrounded; bhuvi — upon the earth.

Translation
The full moon shone in the sky, surrounded by stars, just as Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the Yadu dynasty, shone brilliantly on the earth, surrounded by all the Vṛṣṇis.

Text 45
आश्लिष्य समशीतोष्णं प्रसूनवनमारुतम् ।
जनास्तापं जहुर्गोप्यो न कृष्णहृतचेतस: ॥ ४५ ॥
āśliṣya sama-śītoṣṇaṁ
prasūna-vana-mārutam
janās tāpaṁ jahur gopyo
na kṛṣṇa-hṛta-cetasaḥ
Synonyms
āśliṣya — embracing; sama — equal; śīta-uṣṇam — between cold and heat; prasūna-vana — of the forest of flowers; mārutam — the wind; janāḥ — the people in general; tāpam — suffering; jahuḥ — were able to abandon; gopyaḥ — the gopīs; na — not; kṛṣṇa — by Lord Kṛṣṇa; hṛta — stolen; cetasaḥ — whose hearts.

Translation
Except for the gopīs, whose hearts had been stolen by Kṛṣṇa, the people could forget their suffering by embracing the wind coming from the flower-filled forest. This wind was neither hot nor cold.

Text 46
गावो मृगा: खगा नार्य: पुष्पिण्य: शरदाभवन् ।
अन्वीयमाना: स्ववृषै: फलैरीशक्रिया इव ॥ ४६ ॥
gāvo mṛgāḥ khagā nāryaḥ
puṣpiṇyaḥ śaradābhavan
anvīyamānāḥ sva-vṛṣaiḥ
phalair īśa-kriyā iva
Synonyms
gāvaḥ — the cows; mṛgāḥ — the female deer; khagāḥ — the female birds; nāryaḥ — the women; puṣpiṇyaḥ — in their fertile periods; śaradā — because of the autumn; abhavan — became; anvīyamānāḥ — followed; sva-vṛṣaiḥ — by their respective mates; phalaiḥ — by good results; īśa-kriyāḥ — activities performed in service to the Supreme Lord; iva — as.

Translation
By the influence of the autumn season, all the cows, doe, women and female birds became fertile and were followed by their respective mates in search of sexual enjoyment, just as activities performed for the service of the Supreme Lord are automatically followed by all beneficial results.

Text 47
उदहृष्यन् वारिजानि सूर्योत्थाने कुमुद् विना ।
राज्ञा तु निर्भया लोका यथा दस्यून् विना नृप ॥ ४७ ॥
udahṛṣyan vārijāni
sūryotthāne kumud vinā
rājñā tu nirbhayā lokā
yathā dasyūn vinā nṛpa
Synonyms
udahṛṣyan — blossomed abundantly; vāri-jāni — the lotuses; sūrya — the sun; utthāne — when it had arisen; kumut — the night-blooming kumut lotus; vinā — except; rājñā — because of the presence of a king; tu — indeed; nirbhayāḥ — fearless; lokāḥ — the populace; yathā — as; dasyūn — the thieves; vinā — except for; nṛpa — O King.

Translation
O King Parīkṣit, when the autumn sun rose, all the lotus flowers blossomed happily, except the night-blooming kumut, just as in the presence of a strong ruler everyone becomes fearless, except the thieves.

Text 48
पुरग्रामेष्वाग्रयणैरिन्द्रियैश्च महोत्सवै: ।
बभौ भू: पक्‍वशष्याढ्या कलाभ्यां नितरां हरे: ॥ ४८ ॥
pura-grāmeṣv āgrayaṇair
indriyaiś ca mahotsavaiḥ
babhau bhūḥ pakva-śaṣyāḍhyā
kalābhyāṁ nitarāṁ hareḥ
Synonyms
pura — in the towns; grāmeṣu — and villages; āgrayaṇaiḥ — with performances of the Vedic sacrifice for tasting the first grains of the new harvest; indriyaiḥ — with other (worldly) celebrations; ca — and; mahā-utsavaiḥ — great celebrations; babhau — shone; bhūḥ — the earth; pakva — ripe; śaṣya — with her grains; āḍhyā — rich; kalā — she who is the expansion of the Lord; ābhyām — with those two (Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma); nitarām — very much; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
In all the towns and villages people held great festivals, performing the Vedic fire sacrifice for honoring and tasting the first grains of the new harvest, along with similar celebrations that followed local custom and tradition. Thus the earth, rich with newly grown grain and especially beautified by the presence of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, shone beautifully as an expansion of the Supreme Lord.

Text 49
वणिङ्‍मुनिनृपस्‍नाता निर्गम्यार्थान् प्रपेदिरे ।
वर्षरुद्धा यथा सिद्धा: स्वपिण्डान् काल आगते ॥ ४९ ॥
vaṇiṅ-muni-nṛpa-snātā
nirgamyārthān prapedire
varṣa-ruddhā yathā siddhāḥ
sva-piṇḍān kāla āgate
Synonyms
vaṇik — the merchants; muni — renunciant sages; nṛpa — kings; snātāḥ — and brahmacārī students; nirgamya — going out; arthān — their desired objects; prapedire — obtained; varṣa — by the rain; ruddhāḥ — checked; yathā — as; siddhāḥ — perfected persons; sva-piṇḍān — the forms they aspire for; kāle — when the time; āgate — has come.

Translation
The merchants, sages, kings and brahmacārī students, kept in by the rain, were at last free to go out and attain their desired objects, just as those who achieve perfection in this life can, when the proper time comes, leave the material body and attain their respective forms.