Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
इत्थं शरत्स्वच्छजलं पद्माकरसुगन्धिना ।
न्यविशद् वायुना वातं सगोगोपालकोऽच्युत: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
itthaṁ śarat-svaccha-jalaṁ
padmākara-sugandhinā
nyaviśad vāyunā vātaṁ
sa-go-gopālako ’cyutaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ittham — in this way; śarat — of the fall season; svaccha — clear; jalam — having water; padma-ākara — from the lake filled with lotus flowers; su-gandhinā — with the sweet fragrance; nyaviśat — He entered; vāyunā — by the breeze; vātam — ventilated; sa — with; go — the cows; gopālakaḥ — and the cowherd boys; acyutaḥ — the infallible Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus the Vṛndāvana forest was filled with transparent autumnal waters and cooled by breezes perfumed with the fragrance of lotus flowers growing in the clear lakes. The infallible Lord, accompanied by His cows and cowherd boyfriends, entered that Vṛndāvana forest.

Text 2
कुसुमितवनराजिशुष्मिभृङ्ग-
द्विजकुलघुष्टसर:सरिन्महीध्रम् ।
मधुपतिरवगाह्य चारयन् गा:
सहपशुपालबलश्चुकूज वेणुम् ॥ २ ॥
kusumita-vanarāji-śuṣmi-bhṛṅga
dvija-kula-ghuṣṭa-saraḥ-sarin-mahīdhram
madhupatir avagāhya cārayan gāḥ
saha-paśu-pāla-balaś cukūja veṇum
Synonyms
kusumita — flowering; vana-rāji — among the groups of trees; śuṣmi — maddened; bhṛṅga — with bees; dvija — of birds; kula — and flocks; ghuṣṭa — resounding; saraḥ — its lakes; sarit — rivers; mahīdhram — and hills; madhu-patiḥ — the Lord of Madhu (Kṛṣṇa); avagāhya — entering; cārayan — while tending; gāḥ — the cows; saha-paśu-pāla-balaḥ — in the company of the cowherd boys and Lord Balarāma; cukūja — vibrated; veṇum — His flute.

Translation
The lakes, rivers and hills of Vṛndāvana resounded with the sounds of maddened bees and flocks of birds moving about the flowering trees. In the company of the cowherd boys and Balarāma, Madhupati [Śrī Kṛṣṇa] entered that forest, and while herding the cows He began to vibrate His flute.

Text 3
तद् व्रजस्त्रिय आश्रुत्य वेणुगीतं स्मरोदयम् ।
काश्चित्परोक्षं कृष्णस्य स्वसखीभ्योऽन्ववर्णयन् ॥ ३ ॥
tad vraja-striya āśrutya
veṇu-gītaṁ smarodayam
kāścit parokṣaṁ kṛṣṇasya
sva-sakhībhyo ’nvavarṇayan
Synonyms
tat — that; vraja-striyaḥ — the ladies in the cowherd village; āśrutya — hearing; veṇu-gītam — the song of the flute; smara-udayam — which gives rise to the influence of Cupid; kāścit — some of them; parokṣam — privately; kṛṣṇasya — about Kṛṣṇa; sva-sakhībhyaḥ — to their intimate companions; anvavarṇayan — described.

Translation
When the young ladies in the cowherd village of Vraja heard the song of Kṛṣṇa’s flute, which arouses the influence of Cupid, some of them privately began describing Kṛṣṇa’s qualities to their intimate friends.

Text 4
तद्वर्णयितुमारब्धा: स्मरन्त्य: कृष्णचेष्टितम् ।
नाशकन् स्मरवेगेन विक्षिप्तमनसो नृप ॥ ४ ॥
tad varṇayitum ārabdhāḥ
smarantyaḥ kṛṣṇa-ceṣṭitam
nāśakan smara-vegena
vikṣipta-manaso nṛpa
Synonyms
tat — that; varṇayitum — to describe; ārabdhāḥ — beginning; smarantyaḥ — remembering; kṛṣṇa-ceṣṭitam — the activities of Kṛṣṇa; na aśakan — they were incapable; smara-vegena — by the force of Cupid; vikṣipta — agitated; manasaḥ — whose minds; nṛpa — O King Parīkṣit.

Translation
The cowherd girls began to speak about Kṛṣṇa, but when they remembered His activities, O King, the power of Cupid disturbed their minds, and thus they could not speak.

Text 5
बर्हापीडं नटवरवपु: कर्णयो: कर्णिकारं
बिभ्रद् वास: कनककपिशं वैजयन्तीं च मालाम् ।
रन्ध्रान् वेणोरधरसुधया पूरयन्गोपवृन्दै-
र्वृन्दारण्यं स्वपदरमणं प्राविशद् गीतकीर्ति: ॥ ५ ॥
barhāpīḍaṁ naṭa-vara-vapuḥ karṇayoḥ karṇikāraṁ
bibhrad vāsaḥ kanaka-kapiśaṁ vaijayantīṁ ca mālām
randhrān veṇor adhara-sudhayāpūrayan gopa-vṛndair
vṛndāraṇyaṁ sva-pada-ramaṇaṁ prāviśad gīta-kīrtiḥ
Synonyms
barha — a peacock feather; āpīḍam — as the decoration of His head; naṭa-vara — of the best of dancers; vapuḥ — the transcendental body; karṇayoḥ — on the ears; karṇikāram — a particular kind of blue lotuslike flower; bibhrat — wearing; vāsaḥ — garments; kanaka — like gold; kapiśam — yellowish; vaijayantīm — named Vaijayantī; ca — and; mālām — the garland; randhrān — the holes; veṇoḥ — of His flute; adhara — of His lips; sudhayā — with the nectar; āpūrayan — filling up; gopa-vṛndaiḥ — by the cowherd boys; vṛndā-araṇyam — the forest of Vṛndāvana; sva-pada — because of the marks of His lotus feet; ramaṇam — enchanting; prāviśat — He entered; gīta — being sung; kīrtiḥ — His glories.

Translation
Wearing a peacock-feather ornament upon His head, blue karṇikāra flowers on His ears, a yellow garment as brilliant as gold, and the Vaijayantī garland, Lord Kṛṣṇa exhibited His transcendental form as the greatest of dancers as He entered the forest of Vṛndāvana, beautifying it with the marks of His footprints. He filled the holes of His flute with the nectar of His lips, and the cowherd boys sang His glories.

Text 6
इति वेणुरवं राजन् सर्वभूतमनोहरम् ।
श्रुत्वा व्रजस्त्रिय: सर्वा वर्णयन्त्योऽभिरेभिरे ॥ ६ ॥
iti veṇu-ravaṁ rājan
sarva-bhūta-manoharam
śrutvā vraja-striyaḥ sarvā
varṇayantyo ’bhirebhire
Synonyms
iti — thus; veṇu-ravam — the vibration of the flute; rājan — O King Parīkṣit; sarva-bhūta — of all living beings; manaḥ-haram — stealing the minds; śrutvā — hearing; vraja-striyaḥ — the ladies standing in the village of Vraja; sarvāḥ — all of them; varṇayantyaḥ — engaged in describing; abhirebhire — embraced one another.

Translation
O King, when the young ladies in Vraja heard the sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute, which captivates the minds of all living beings, they all embraced one another and began describing it.

Text 7
श्रीगोप्य ऊचु:
अक्षण्वतां फलमिदं न परं विदाम:
सख्य: पशूननु विवेशयतोर्वयस्यै: ।
वक्त्रं व्रजेशसुतयोरनवेणु जुष्टं
यैर्वा निपीतमनुरक्तकटाक्षमोक्षम् ॥ ७ ॥
śrī-gopya ūcuḥ
akṣaṇvatāṁ phalam idaṁ na paraṁ vidāmaḥ
sakhyaḥ paśūn anuviveśayator vayasyaiḥ
vaktraṁ vrajeśa-sutayor anaveṇu-juṣṭaṁ
yair vā nipītam anurakta-kaṭākṣa-mokṣam
Synonyms
śrī-gopyaḥ ūcuḥ — the gopīs said; akṣaṇvatām — of those who have eyes; phalam — the fruit; idam — this; na — not; param — other; vidāmaḥ — we know; sakhyaḥ — O friends; paśūn — the cows; anuviveśayatoḥ — causing to enter one forest after another; vayasyaiḥ — with Their friends of the same age; vaktram — the faces; vraja-īśa — of Mahārāja Nanda; sutayoḥ — of the two sons; anu-veṇu-juṣṭam — possessed of flutes; yaiḥ — by which; vā — or; nipītam — imbibed; anurakta — loving; kaṭa-akṣa — glances; mokṣam — giving off.

Translation
The cowherd girls said: O friends, those eyes that see the beautiful faces of the sons of Mahārāja Nanda are certainly fortunate. As these two sons enter the forest, surrounded by Their friends, driving the cows before Them, They hold Their flutes to Their mouths and glance lovingly upon the residents of Vṛndāvana. For those who have eyes, we think there is no greater object of vision.

Text 8
चूतप्रवालबर्हस्तबकोत्पलाब्ज-
मालानुपृक्तपरिधानविचित्रवेशौ ।
मध्ये विरेजतुरलं पशुपालगोष्ठ्यां
रङ्गे यथा नटवरौ क्‍व च गायमानौ ॥ ८ ॥
cūta-pravāla-barha-stabakotpalābja
mālānupṛkta-paridhāna-vicitra-veśau
madhye virejatur alaṁ paśu-pāla-goṣṭhyāṁ
raṅge yathā naṭa-varau kvaca gāyamānau
Synonyms
cūta — of a mango tree; pravāla — with young sprouts; barha — peacock feathers; stabaka — bunches of flowers; utpala — lotuses; abja — and lilies; mālā — with garlands; anupṛkta — touched; paridhāna — Their garments; vicitra — with great variety; veśau — being dressed; madhye — in the midst; virejatuḥ — the two of Them shone forth; alam — magnificently; paśu-pāla — of the cowherd boys; goṣṭhyām — within the assembly; raṅge — upon a stage; yathā — just as; naṭa-varau — two most excellent dancers; kvaca — sometimes; gāyamānau — Themselves singing.

Translation
Dressed in a charming variety of garments, upon which Their garlands rest, and decorating Themselves with peacock feathers, lotuses, lilies, newly grown mango sprouts and clusters of flower buds, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma shine forth magnificently among the assembly of cowherd boys. They look just like the best of dancers appearing on a dramatic stage, and sometimes They sing.

Text 9
गोप्य: किमाचरदयं कुशलं स्म वेणु-
र्दामोदराधरसुधामपि गोपिकानाम् ।
भुङ्क्ते स्वयं यदवशिष्टरसं ह्रदिन्यो
हृष्यत्त्वचोऽश्रु मुमुचुस्तरवो यथार्या: ॥ ९ ॥
gopyaḥ kim ācarad ayaṁ kuśalaṁ sma veṇur
dāmodarādhara-sudhām api gopikānām
bhuṅkte svayaṁ yad avaśiṣṭa-rasaṁ hradinyo
hṛṣyat-tvaco ’śru mumucus taravo yathāryaḥ
Synonyms
gopyaḥ — O gopīs; kim — what; ācarat — performed; ayam — this; kuśalam — auspicious activities; sma — certainly; veṇuḥ — the flute; dāmodara — of Kṛṣṇa; adhara-sudhām — the nectar of the lips; api — even; gopikānām — which is owed to the gopīs; bhuṅkte — enjoys; svayam — independently; yat — from which; avaśiṣṭa — remaining; rasam — the taste only; hradinyaḥ — the rivers; hṛṣyat — feeling jubilant; tvacaḥ — whose bodies; aśru — tears; mumucuḥ — shed; taravaḥ — the trees; yathā — exactly like; āryāḥ — old forefathers.

Translation
My dear gopīs, what auspicious activities must the flute have performed to enjoy the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s lips independently and leave only a taste for us gopīs, for whom that nectar is actually meant! The forefathers of the flute, the bamboo trees, shed tears of pleasure. His mother, the river on whose bank the bamboo was born, feels jubilation, and therefore her blooming lotus flowers are standing like hair on her body.

Text 10
वृन्दावनं सखि भुवो वितनोति कीर्तिं
यद् देवकीसुतपदाम्बुजलब्धलक्ष्मि ।
गोविन्दवेणुमनु मत्तमयूरनृत्यं
प्रेक्ष्याद्रिसान्ववरतान्यसमस्तसत्त्वम् ॥ १० ॥
vṛndāvanaṁ sakhi bhuvo vitanoti kīṛtiṁ
yad devakī-suta-padāmbuja-labdha-lakṣmi
govinda-veṇum anu matta-mayūra-nṛtyaṁ
prekṣyādri-sānv-avaratānya-samasta-sattvam
Synonyms
vṛndāvanam — Vṛndāvana; sakhi — O friend; bhuvaḥ — of the earth; vitanoti — spreads; kīrtim — the glories; yat — because; devakī-suta — of the son of Devakī; pada-ambuja — from the lotus feet; labdha — received; lakṣmi — the treasure; govinda-veṇum — the flute of Govinda; anu — upon hearing; matta — maddened; mayūra — of the peacocks; nṛtyam — in which there is the dancing; prekṣya — seeing; adri-sānu — upon the peaks of the hills; avarata — stunned; anya — other; samasta — all; sattvam — creatures.

Translation
O friend, Vṛndāvana is spreading the glory of the earth, having obtained the treasure of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī. The peacocks dance madly when they hear Govinda’s flute, and when other creatures see them from the hilltops, they all become stunned.

Text 11
धन्या: स्म मूढगतयोऽपि हरिण्य एता
या नन्दनन्दनमुपात्तविचित्रवेशम् ।
आकर्ण्य वेणुरणितं सहकृष्णसारा:
पूजां दधुर्विरचितां प्रणयावलोकै: ॥ ११ ॥
dhanyāḥ sma mūḍha-gatayo ’pi hariṇya etā
yā nanda-nandanam upātta-vicitra-veśam
ākarṇya veṇu-raṇitaṁ saha-kṛṣṇa-sārāḥ
pūjāṁ dadhur viracitāṁ praṇayāvalokaiḥ
Synonyms
dhanyāḥ — fortunate, blessed; sma — certainly; mūḍha-gatayaḥ — having taken birth in an ignorant animal species; api — although; hariṇyaḥ — she-deer; etāḥ — these; yāḥ — who; nanda-nandanam — the son of Mahārāja Nanda; upātta-vicitra-veśam — dressed very attractively; ākarṇya — hearing; veṇu-raṇitam — the sound of His flute; saha-kṛṣṇa-sārāḥ — accompanied by the black deer (their husbands); pūjām dadhuḥ — they worshiped; viracitām — performed; praṇaya-avalokaiḥ — by their affectionate glances.

Translation
Blessed are all these foolish deer because they have approached Mahārāja Nanda’s son, who is gorgeously dressed and is playing on His flute. Indeed, both the doe and the bucks worship the Lord with looks of love and affection.

Text 12
कृष्णं निरीक्ष्य वनितोत्सवरूपशीलं
श्रुत्वा च तत्‍क्‍वणितवेणुविविक्तगीतम् ।
देव्यो विमानगतय: स्मरनुन्नसारा
भ्रश्यत्प्रसूनकबरा मुमुहुर्विनीव्य: ॥ १२ ॥
kṛṣṇaṁ nirīkṣya vanitotsava-rūpa-śīlaṁ
śrutvā ca tat-kvaṇita-veṇu-vivikta-gītam
devyo vimāna-gatayaḥ smara-nunna-sārā
bhraśyat-prasūna-kabarā mumuhur vinīvyaḥ
Synonyms
kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; nirīkṣya — observing; vanitā — for all women; utsava — a festival; rūpa — whose beauty; śīlam — and character; śrutvā — hearing; ca — and; tat — by Him; kvaṇita — vibrated; veṇu — of the flute; vivikta — clear; gītam — song; devyaḥ — the wives of the demigods; vimāna-gatayaḥ — traveling in their airplanes; smara — by Cupid; nunna — agitated; sārāḥ — their hearts; bhraśyat — slipping; prasūna-kabarāḥ — the flowers tied in their hair; mumuhuḥ — they became bewildered; vinīvyaḥ — their belts loosening.

Translation
Kṛṣṇa’s beauty and character create a festival for all women. Indeed, when the demigods’ wives flying in airplanes with their husbands catch sight of Him and hear His resonant flute-song, their hearts are shaken by Cupid, and they become so bewildered that the flowers fall out of their hair and their belts loosen.

Text 13
गावश्च कृष्णमुखनिर्गतवेणुगीत-
पीयूषमुत्तभितकर्णपुटै: पिबन्त्य: ।
शावा: स्‍नुतस्तनपय:कवला: स्म तस्थु-
र्गोविन्दमात्मनि द‍ृशाश्रुकला: स्पृशन्त्य: ॥ १३ ॥
gāvaś ca kṛṣṇa-mukha-nirgata-veṇu-gīta
pīyūṣam uttabhita-karṇa-puṭaiḥ pibantyaḥ
śāvāḥ snuta-stana-payaḥ-kavalāḥ sma tasthur
govindam ātmani dṛśāśru-kalāḥ spṛśantyaḥ
Synonyms
gāvaḥ — the cows; ca — and; kṛṣṇa-mukha — from the mouth of Lord Kṛṣṇa; nirgata — emitted; veṇu — of the flute; gīta — of the song; pīyūṣam — the nectar; uttabhita — raised high; karṇa — with their ears; puṭaiḥ — which were acting as vessels; pibantyaḥ — drinking; śāvāḥ — the calves; snuta — exuding; stana — from their udders; payaḥ — the milk; kavalāḥ — whose mouthfuls; sma — indeed; tasthuḥ — stood still; govindam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; ātmani — within their minds; dṛśā — with their vision; aśru-kalāḥ — their eyes full of tears; spṛśantyaḥ — touching.

Translation
Using their upraised ears as vessels, the cows are drinking the nectar of the flute-song flowing out of Kṛṣṇa’s mouth. The calves, their mouths full of milk from their mothers’ moist nipples, stand still as they take Govinda within themselves through their tear-filled eyes and embrace Him within their hearts.

Text 14
प्रायो बताम्ब विहगा मुनयो वनेऽस्मिन्
कृष्णेक्षितं तदुदितं कलवेणुगीतम् ।
आरुह्य ये द्रुमभुजान् रुचिरप्रवालान्
श‍ृण्वन्ति मीलितद‍ृशो विगतान्यवाच: ॥ १४ ॥
prāyo batāmba vihagā munayo vane ’smin
kṛṣṇekṣitaṁ tad-uditaṁ kala-veṇu-gītam
āruhya ye druma-bhujān rucira-pravālān
śṛṇvanti mīlita-dṛśo vigatānya-vācaḥ
Synonyms
prāyaḥ — almost; bata — certainly; amba — O mother; vihagāḥ — the birds; munayaḥ — great sages; vane — in the forest; asmin — this; kṛṣṇa-īkṣitam — in order to see Kṛṣṇa; tat-uditam — created by Him; kala-veṇu-gītam — sweet vibrations made by playing the flute; āruhya — rising; ye — who; druma-bhujān — to the branches of the trees; rucira-pravālān — having beautiful creepers and twigs; śṛṇvanti — they hear; mīlita-dṛśaḥ — closing their eyes; vigata-anya-vācaḥ — stopping all other sounds.

Translation
O mother, in this forest all the birds have risen onto the beautiful branches of the trees to see Kṛṣṇa. With closed eyes they are simply listening in silence to the sweet vibrations of His flute, and they are not attracted by any other sound. Surely these birds are on the same level as great sages.

Text 15
नद्यस्तदा तदुपधार्य मुकुन्दगीत-
मावर्तलक्षितमनोभवभग्नवेगा: ।
आलिङ्गनस्थगितमूर्मिभुजैर्मुरारे-
र्गृह्णन्ति पादयुगलं कमलोपहारा: ॥ १५ ॥
nadyas tadā tad upadhārya mukunda-gītam
āvarta-lakṣita-manobhava-bhagna-vegāḥ
āliṅgana-sthagitam ūrmi-bhujair murārer
gṛhṇanti pāda-yugalaṁ kamalopahārāḥ
Synonyms
nadyaḥ — the rivers; tadā — then; tat — that; upadhārya — perceiving; mukunda — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; gītam — the song of His flute; āvarta — by their whirlpools; lakṣita — manifest; manaḥ-bhava — by their conjugal desire; bhagna — broken; vegāḥ — their currents; āliṅgana — by their embrace; sthagitam — held stationary; ūrmi-bhujaiḥ — by the arms of their waves; murāreḥ — of Lord Murāri; gṛhṇanti — they seize; pāda-yugalam — the two lotus feet; kamala-upahārāḥ — carrying offerings of lotus flowers.

Translation
When the rivers hear the flute-song of Kṛṣṇa, their minds begin to desire Him, and thus the flow of their currents is broken and their waters are agitated, moving around in whirlpools. Then with the arms of their waves the rivers embrace Murāri’s lotus feet and, holding on to them, present offerings of lotus flowers.

Text 16
द‍ृष्ट्वातपे व्रजपशून् सह रामगोपै:
सञ्चारयन्तमनु वेणुमुदीरयन्तम् ।
प्रेमप्रवृद्ध उदित: कुसुमावलीभि:
सख्युर्व्यधात् स्ववपुषाम्बुद आतपत्रम् ॥ १६ ॥
dṛṣṭvātape vraja-paśūn saha rāma-gopaiḥ
sañcārayantam anu veṇum udīrayantam
prema-pravṛddha uditaḥ kusumāvalībhiḥ
sakhyur vyadhāt sva-vapuṣāmbuda ātapatram
Synonyms
dṛṣṭvā — seeing; ātape — in the full heat of the sun; vraja-paśūn — the domestic animals of Vraja; saha — together with; rāma-gopaiḥ — Lord Balarāma and the cowherd boys; sañcārayantam — herding together; anu — repeatedly; veṇum — His flute; udīrayantam — loudly playing; prema — out of love; pravṛddhaḥ — expanded; uditaḥ — rising high; kusuma-āvalībhiḥ — (with droplets of water vapor, which are like) groups of flowers; sakhyuḥ — for his friend; vyadhāt — he constructed; sva-vapuṣā — out of his own body; ambudaḥ — the cloud; ātapatram — an umbrella.

Translation
In the company of Balarāma and the cowherd boys, Lord Kṛṣṇa is continually vibrating His flute as He herds all the animals of Vraja, even under the full heat of the summer sun. Seeing this, the cloud in the sky has expanded himself out of love. He is rising high and constructing out of his own body, with its multitude of flower-like droplets of water, an umbrella for the sake of his friend.

Text 17
पूर्णा: पुलिन्द्य उरुगायपदाब्जराग-
श्रीकुङ्कुमेन दयितास्तनमण्डितेन ।
तद्दर्शनस्मररुजस्तृणरूषितेन
लिम्पन्त्य आननकुचेषु जहुस्तदाधिम् ॥ १७ ॥
pūrṇāḥ pulindya urugāya-padābja-rāga
śrī-kuṅkumena dayitā-stana-maṇḍitena
tad-darśana-smara-rujas tṛṇa-rūṣitena
limpantya ānana-kuceṣu jahus tad-ādhim
Synonyms
pūrṇāḥ — fully satisfied; pulindyaḥ — the wives of the Śabara tribe; urugāya — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; pada-abja — from the lotus feet; rāga — of reddish color; śrī-kuṅkumena — by the transcendental kuṅkuma powder; dayitā — of His girlfriends; stana — the breasts; maṇḍitena — which had decorated; tat — of that; darśana — by the sight; smara — of Cupid; rujaḥ — feeling the torment; tṛṇa — upon the blades of grass; rūṣitena — attached; limpantyaḥ — smearing; ānana — upon their faces; kuceṣu — and breasts; jahuḥ — they gave up; tat — that; ādhim — mental pain.

Translation
The aborigine women of the Vṛndāvana area become disturbed by lust when they see the grass marked with reddish kuṅkuma powder. Endowed with the color of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, this powder originally decorated the breasts of His beloveds, and when the aborigine women smear it on their faces and breasts, they feel fully satisfied and give up all their anxiety.

Text 18
हन्तायमद्रिरबला हरिदासवर्यो
यद् रामकृष्णचरणस्परशप्रमोद: ।
मानं तनोति सहगोगणयोस्तयोर्यत्
पानीयसूयवसकन्दरकन्दमूलै: ॥ १८ ॥
hantāyam adrir abalā hari-dāsa-varyo
yad rāma-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa-sparaśa-pramodaḥ
mānaṁ tanoti saha-go-gaṇayos tayor yat
pānīya-sūyavasa-kandara-kandamūlaiḥ
Synonyms
hanta — oh; ayam — this; adriḥ — hill; abalāḥ — O friends; hari-dāsa-varyaḥ — the best among the servants of the Lord; yat — because; rāma-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa — of the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma; sparaśa — by the touch; pramodaḥ — jubilant; mānam — respect; tanoti — offers; saha — with; go-gaṇayoḥ — the cows, calves and cowherd boys; tayoḥ — to Them (Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma); yat — because; pānīya — with drinking water; sūyavasa — very soft grass; kandara — caves; kanda-mūlaiḥ — and edible roots.

Translation
Of all the devotees, this Govardhana Hill is the best! O my friends, this hill supplies Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, along with Their calves, cows and cowherd friends, with all kinds of necessities — water for drinking, very soft grass, caves, fruits, flowers and vegetables. In this way the hill offers respects to the Lord. Being touched by the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, Govardhana Hill appears very jubilant.

Text 19
गा गोपकैरनुवनं नयतोरुदार-
वेणुस्वनै: कलपदैस्तनुभृत्सु सख्य: ।
अस्पन्दनं गतिमतां पुलकस्तरुणां
निर्योगपाशकृतलक्षणयोर्विचित्रम् ॥ १९ ॥
gā gopakair anu-vanaṁ nayator udāra
veṇu-svanaiḥ kala-padais tanu-bhṛtsu sakhyaḥ
aspandanaṁ gati-matāṁ pulakas taruṇāṁ
niryoga-pāśa-kṛta-lakṣaṇayor vicitram
Synonyms
gāḥ — the cows; gopakaiḥ — with the cowherd boys; anu-vanam — to each forest; nayatoḥ — leading; udāra — very liberal; veṇu-svanaiḥ — by the vibrations of the Lord’s flute; kala-padaiḥ — having sweet tones; tanubhṛtsu — among the living entities; sakhyaḥ — O friends; aspandanam — the lack of movement; gati-matām — of those living entities that can move; pulakaḥ — the ecstatic jubilation; taruṇam — of the otherwise nonmoving trees; niryoga-pāśa — the ropes for binding the rear legs of the cows; kṛta-lakṣaṇayoḥ — of those two (Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma), who are characterized by; vicitram — wonderful.

Translation
My dear friends, as Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma pass through the forest with Their cowherd friends, leading Their cows, They carry ropes to bind the cows’ rear legs at the time of milking. When Lord Kṛṣṇa plays on His flute, the sweet music causes the moving living entities to become stunned and the nonmoving trees to tremble with ecstasy. These things are certainly very wonderful.

Text 20
एवंविधा भगवतो या वृन्दावनचारिण: ।
वर्णयन्त्यो मिथो गोप्य: क्रीडास्तन्मयतां ययु: ॥ २० ॥
evaṁ-vidhā bhagavato
yā vṛndāvana-cāriṇaḥ
varṇayantyo mitho gopyaḥ
krīḍās tan-mayatāṁ yayuḥ
Synonyms
evam-vidhāḥ — such; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yāḥ — which; vṛndāvana-cāriṇaḥ — who was wandering in the Vṛndāvana forest; varṇayantyaḥ — engaged in describing; mithaḥ — among one another; gopyaḥ — the gopīs; krīḍaḥ — the pastimes; tat-mayatām — fullness in ecstatic meditation upon Him; yayuḥ — they attained.

Translation
Thus narrating to one another the playful pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead as He wandered about in the Vṛndāvana forest, the gopīs became fully absorbed in thoughts of Him.