Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
हेमन्ते प्रथमे मासि नन्दव्रजकुमारिका: ।
चेरुर्हविष्यं भुञ्जाना: कात्यायन्यर्चनव्रतम् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
hemante prathame māsi
nanda-vraja-kumārikāḥ
cerur haviṣyaṁ bhuñjānāḥ
kātyāyany-arcana-vratam
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; hemante — during the winter; prathame — in the first; māsi — month; nanda-vraja — of the cowherd village of Nanda Mahārāja; kumārikāḥ — the unmarried young girls; ceruḥ — performed; haviṣyam — unseasoned khichrī; bhuñjānāḥ — subsisting on; kātyāyanī — of the goddess Kātyāyanī; arcana-vratam — the vow of worship.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: During the first month of the winter season, the young unmarried girls of Gokula observed the vow of worshiping goddess Kātyāyanī. For the entire month they ate only unspiced khichrī.

Texts 2-3
आप्लुत्याम्भसि कालिन्द्या जलान्ते चोदितेऽरुणे ।
कृत्वा प्रतिकृतिं देवीमानर्चुर्नृप सैकतीम् ॥ २ ॥
गन्धैर्माल्यै: सुरभिभिर्बलिभिर्धूपदीपकै: ।
उच्चावचैश्चोपहारै: प्रवालफलतण्डुलै: ॥ ३ ॥
āplutyāmbhasi kālindyā
jalānte codite ’ruṇe
kṛtvā pratikṛtiṁ devīm
ānarcur nṛpa saikatīm
gandhair mālyaiḥ surabhibhir
balibhir dhūpa-dīpakaiḥ
uccāvacaiś copahāraiḥ
pravāla-phala-taṇḍulaiḥ
Synonyms
āplutya — bathing; ambhasi — in the water; kālindyāḥ — of the Yamunā; jala-ante — on the shore of the river; ca — and; udite — as was arising; aruṇe — the dawn; kṛtva — making; prati-kṛtim — a deity; devīm — the goddess; ānarcuḥ — they worshiped; nṛpa — O King Parīkṣit; saikatīm — made of earth; gandhaiḥ — with sandalwood pulp and other fragrant articles; mālyaiḥ — with garlands; surabhibhiḥ — fragrant; balibhiḥ — with gifts; dhūpa-dīpakaiḥ — with incense and lamps; ucca-avacaiḥ — opulent and also simple; ca — and; upahāraiḥ — with presentations; pravāla — newly grown leaves; phala — fruit; taṇḍulaiḥ — and betel nuts.

Translation
My dear King, after they had bathed in the water of the Yamunā just as the sun was rising, the gopīs made an earthen deity of goddess Durgā on the riverbank. Then they worshiped her with such aromatic substances as sandalwood pulp, along with other items both opulent and simple, including lamps, fruits, betel nuts, newly grown leaves, and fragrant garlands and incense.

Text 4
कात्यायनि महामाये महायोगिन्यधीश्वरि ।
नन्दगोपसुतं देवि पतिं मे कुरु ते नम: ।
इति मन्त्रं जपन्त्यस्ता: पूजां चक्रु: कुमारिका: ॥ ४ ॥
kātyāyani mahā-māye
mahā-yoginy adhīśvari
nanda-gopa-sutaṁ devi
patiṁ me kuru te namaḥ
iti mantraṁ japantyas tāḥ
pūjāṁ cakruḥ kumārikāḥ
Synonyms
kātyāyanī — O goddess Kātyāyanī; mahā-māye — O great potency; mahā-yogini — O possessor of great mystic power; adhīśvari — O mighty controller; nanda-gopa-sutam — the son of Mahārāja Nanda; devi — O goddess; patim — the husband; me — my; kuru — please make; te — unto you; namaḥ — my obeisances; iti — with these words; mantram — the hymn; japantyaḥ — chanting; tāḥ — they; pūjām — worship; cakruḥ — performed; kumārikāḥ — the unmarried girls.

Translation
Each of the young unmarried girls performed her worship while chanting the following mantra. “O goddess Kātyāyanī, O great potency of the Lord, O possessor of great mystic power and mighty controller of all, please make the son of Nanda Mahārāja my husband. I offer my obeisances unto you.”

Text 5
एवं मासं व्रतं चेरु: कुमार्य: कृष्णचेतस: ।
भद्रकालीं समानर्चुर्भूयान्नन्दसुत: पति: ॥ ५ ॥
evaṁ māsaṁ vrataṁ ceruḥ
kumāryaḥ kṛṣṇa-cetasaḥ
bhadrakālīṁ samānarcur
bhūyān nanda-sutaḥ patiḥ
Synonyms
evam — in this manner; māsam — an entire month; vratam — their vow; ceruḥ — they executed; kumāryaḥ — the girls; kṛṣṇa-cetasaḥ — their minds absorbed in Kṛṣṇa; bhadra-kālīm — the goddess Kātyāyanī; samānarcuḥ — they properly worshiped; bhūyāt — may He become; nanda-sutaḥ — the son of King Nanda; patiḥ — my husband.

Translation
Thus for an entire month the girls carried out their vow and properly worshiped the goddess Bhadrakālī, fully absorbing their minds in Kṛṣṇa and meditating upon the following thought: “May the son of King Nanda become my husband.”

Text 6
ऊषस्युत्थाय गोत्रै: स्वैरन्योन्याबद्धबाहव: ।
कृष्णमुच्चैर्जगुर्यान्त्य: कालिन्द्यां स्‍नातुमन्वहम् ॥ ६ ॥
ūṣasy utthāya gotraiḥ svair
anyonyābaddha-bāhavaḥ
kṛṣṇam uccair jagur yāntyaḥ
kālindyāṁ snātum anvaham
Synonyms
ūṣasi — at dawn; utthāya — rising; gotraiḥ — by their names; svaiḥ — proper; anyonya — one with another; ābaddha — holding; bāhavaḥ — their hands; kṛṣṇam — in glorification of Kṛṣṇa; uccaiḥ — loudly; jaguḥ — they sang; yāntyaḥ — while going; kālindyām — to the Yamunā; snātum — in order to bathe; anu-aham — each day.

Translation
Each day they rose at dawn. Calling out to one another by name, they all held hands and loudly sang the glories of Kṛṣṇa while going to the Kālindī to take their bath.

Text 7
नद्या: कदाचिदागत्य तीरे निक्षिप्य पूर्ववत् ।
वासांसि कृष्णं गायन्त्यो विजह्रु: सलिले मुदा ॥ ७ ॥
nadyāḥ kadācid āgatya
tīre nikṣipya pūrva-vat
vāsāṁsi kṛṣṇaṁ gāyantyo
vijahruḥ salile mudā
Synonyms
nadyāḥ — of the river; kadācit — once; āgatya — coming; tīre — to the shore; nikṣipya — throwing down; pūrva-vat — as previously; vāsāṁsi — their clothing; kṛṣṇam — about Kṛṣṇa; gāyantyaḥ — singing; vijahruḥ — they played; salile — in the water; mudā — with pleasure.

Translation
One day they came to the riverbank and, putting aside their clothing as they had done before, happily played in the water while singing the glories of Kṛṣṇa.

Text 8
भगवांस्तदभिप्रेत्य कृष्णो योगेश्वरेश्वर: ।
वयस्यैरावृतस्तत्र गतस्तत्कर्मसिद्धये ॥ ८ ॥
bhagavāṁs tad abhipretya
kṛṣno yogeśvareśvaraḥ
vayasyair āvṛtas tatra
gatas tat-karma-siddhaye
Synonyms
bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat — that; abhipretya — seeing; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; yoga-īśvara-īśvaraḥ — the master of all masters of mystic power; vayasyaiḥ — by young companions; āvṛtaḥ — surrounded; tatra — there; gataḥ — went; tat — of those girls; karma — the ritualistic activities; siddhaye — for assuring the result.

Translation
Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead and master of all masters of mystic yoga, was aware of what the gopīs were doing, and thus He went there surrounded by His young companions to award the gopīs the perfection of their endeavor.

Text 9
तासां वासांस्युपादाय नीपमारुह्य सत्वर: ।
हसद्भ‍ि: प्रहसन् बालै: परिहासमुवाच ह ॥ ९ ॥
tāsāṁ vāsāṁsy upādāya
nīpam āruhya satvaraḥ
hasadbhiḥ prahasan bālaiḥ
parihāsam uvāca ha
Synonyms
tāsām — of those girls; vāsāṁsi — the garments; upādāya — taking; nīpam — a kadamba tree; āruhya — climbing; satvaraḥ — quickly; hasadbhiḥ — who were laughing; prahasan — Himself laughing loudly; bālaiḥ — with the boys; parihāsam — joking words; uvāca ha — He spoke.

Translation
Taking the girls’ garments, He quickly climbed to the top of a kadamba tree. Then, as He laughed loudly and His companions also laughed, He addressed the girls jokingly.

Text 10
अत्रागत्याबला: कामं स्वं स्वं वास: प्रगृह्यताम् ।
सत्यं ब्रुवाणि नो नर्म यद् यूयं व्रतकर्शिता: ॥ १० ॥
atrāgatyābalāḥ kāmaṁ
svaṁ svaṁ vāsaḥ pragṛhyatām
satyaṁ bravāṇi no narma
yad yūyaṁ vrata-karśitāḥ
Synonyms
atra — here; āgatya — coming; abalāḥ — O girls; kāmam — as you wish; svam svam — each your own; vāsaḥ — clothing; pragṛhyatām — please take; satyam — the truth; bruvāṇi — I am speaking; na — not; u — rather; narma — jest; yat — because; yūyam — you; vrata — by your vow of austerity; karśitāḥ — fatigued.

Translation
[Lord Kṛṣṇa said:] My dear girls, you may each come here as you wish and take back your garments. I’m telling you the truth and am not joking with you, since I see you’re fatigued from executing austere vows.

Text 11
न मयोदितपूर्वं वा अनृतं तदिमे विदु: ।
एकैकश: प्रतीच्छध्वं सहैवेति सुमध्यमा: ॥ ११ ॥
na mayodita-pūrvaṁ vā
anṛtaṁ tad ime viduḥ
ekaikaśaḥ pratīcchadhvaṁ
sahaiveti su-madhyamāḥ
Synonyms
na — never; mayā — by Me; udita — spoken; pūrvam — previously; vai — definitely; anṛtam — anything false; tat — that; ime — these young boys; viduḥ — know; eka-ekaśaḥ — one by one; pratīcchadhvam — pick out (your garments); saha — or all together; eva — indeed; iti — thus; su-madhyamāḥ — O slender-waisted girls.

Translation
I have never before spoken a lie, and these boys know it. Therefore, O slender-waisted girls, please come forward, either one by one or all together, and pick out your clothes.

Text 12
तस्य तत् क्ष्वेलितं द‍ृष्ट्वा गोप्य: प्रेमपरिप्लुता: ।
व्रीडिता: प्रेक्ष्य चान्योन्यं जातहासा न निर्ययु: ॥ १२ ॥
tasya tat kṣvelitaṁ dṛṣṭvā
gopyaḥ prema-pariplutāḥ
vrīḍitāḥ prekṣya cānyonyaṁ
jāta-hāsā na niryayuḥ
Synonyms
tasya — His; tat — that; kṣvelitam — joking behavior; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; gopyaḥ — the gopīs; prema-pariplutāḥ — fully immersed in pure love of Godhead; vrīḍitāḥ — embarrassed; prekṣya — glancing; ca — and; anyonyam — upon one another; jāta-hāsāḥ — beginning to laugh; na niryayuḥ — they did not come out.

Translation
Seeing how Kṛṣṇa was joking with them, the gopīs became fully immersed in love for Him, and as they glanced at each other they began to laugh and joke among themselves, even in their embarrassment. But still they did not come out of the water.

Text 13
एवं ब्रुवति गोविन्दे नर्मणाक्षिप्तचेतस: ।
आकण्ठमग्ना: शीतोदे वेपमानास्तमब्रुवन् ॥ १३ ॥
evaṁ bruvati govinde
narmaṇākṣipta-cetasaḥ
ā-kaṇṭha-magnāḥ śītode
vepamānās tam abruvan
Synonyms
evam — thus; bruvati — speaking; govinde — Lord Govinda; narmaṇā — by His joking words; ākṣipta — agitated; cetasaḥ — their minds; ā-kaṇṭha — up to their necks; magnāḥ — submerged; śīta — cold; ude — in the water; vepamānāḥ — shivering; tam — to Him; abruvan — they spoke.

Translation
As Śrī Govinda spoke to the gopīs in this way, His joking words completely captivated their minds. Submerged up to their necks in the cold water, they began to shiver. Thus they addressed Him as follows.

Text 14
मानयं भो: कृथास्त्वां तु नन्दगोपसुतं प्रियम् ।
जानीमोऽङ्ग व्रजश्लाघ्यं देहि वासांसि वेपिता: ॥ १४ ॥
mānayaṁ bhoḥ kṛthās tvāṁ tu
nanda-gopa-sutaṁ priyam
jānīmo ’ṅga vraja-ślāghyaṁ
dehi vāsāṁsi vepitāḥ
Synonyms
mā — do not; anayam — injustice; bhoḥ — our dear Kṛṣṇa; kṛthāḥ — do; tvām — You; tu — on the other hand; nanda-gopa — of Mahārāja Nanda; sutam — the son; priyam — loved; jānīmaḥ — we know; aṅga — O dear one; vraja-ślāghyam — renowned throughout Vraja; dehi — please give; vāsāṁsi — our garments; vepitāḥ — (to us) who are shivering.

Translation
[The gopīs said:] Dear Kṛṣṇa, don’t be unfair! We know that You are the respectable son of Nanda and that You are honored by everyone in Vraja. You are also very dear to us. Please give us back our clothes. We are shivering in the cold water.

Text 15
श्यामसुन्दर ते दास्य: करवाम तवोदितम् ।
देहि वासांसि धर्मज्ञ नो चेद् राज्ञे ब्रुवाम हे ॥ १५ ॥
śyāmasundara te dāsyaḥ
karavāma tavoditam
dehi vāsāṁsi dharma-jña
no ced rājñe bruvāma he
Synonyms
śyāmasundara — O Lord Śyāmasundara; te — Your; dāsyaḥ — maidservants; karavāma — we shall do; tava — by You; uditam — what is spoken; dehi — please give; vāsāṁsi — our clothing; dharma-jña — O knower of religion; na — not; u — indeed; cet — if; rājñe — to the king; bruvāmaḥ — we shall tell; he — O Kṛṣṇa.

Translation
O Śyāmasundara, we are Your maidservants and must do whatever You say. But give us back our clothing. You know what the religious principles are, and if You don’t give us our clothes we will have to tell the king. Please!

Text 16
श्रीभगवानुवाच
भवत्यो यदि मे दास्यो मयोक्तं वा करिष्यथ ।
अत्रागत्य स्ववासांसि प्रतीच्छत शुचिस्मिता: ।
नो चेन्नाहं प्रदास्ये किं क्रुद्धो राजा करिष्यति ॥ १६ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
bhavatyo yadi me dāsyo
mayoktaṁ vā kariṣyatha
atrāgatya sva-vāsāṁsi
pratīcchata śuci-smitāḥ
no cen nāhaṁ pradāsye kiṁ
kruddho rājā kariṣyati
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; bhavatyaḥ — you; yadi — if; me — My; dāsyaḥ — servants; mayā — by Me; uktam — what has been spoken; vā — or; kariṣyatha — you will do; atra — here; āgatya — coming; sva-vāsāṁsi — your own garments; pratīcchata — pick out; śuci — fresh; smitāḥ — whose smiles; na u — not; cet — if; na — not; aham — I; pradāsye — will give; kim — what; kruddhaḥ — angry; rājā — the king; kariṣyati — will be able to do.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: If you girls are actually My maidservants, and if you will really do what I say, then come here with your innocent smiles and let each girl pick out her clothes. If you don’t do what I say, I won’t give them back to you. And even if the king becomes angry, what can he do?

Text 17
ततो जलाशयात् सर्वा दारिका: शीतवेपिता: ।
पाणिभ्यां योनिमाच्छाद्य प्रोत्तेरु: शीतकर्शिता: ॥ १७ ॥
tato jalāśayāt sarvā
dārikāḥ śīta-vepitāḥ
pāṇibhyāṁ yonim ācchādya
protteruḥ śīta-karśitāḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; jala-āśayāt — out of the river; sarvāḥ — all; dārikāḥ — the young girls; śīta-vepitāḥ — shivering from the cold; pāṇibhyām — with their hands; yonim — their pubic area; ācchādya — covering; protteruḥ — they came up; śīta-karśitāḥ — pained by the cold.

Translation
Then, shivering from the painful cold, all the young girls rose up out of the water, covering their pubic area with their hands.

Text 18
भगवानाहता वीक्ष्य शुद्धभावप्रसादित: ।
स्कन्धे निधाय वासांसि प्रीत: प्रोवाच सस्मितम् ॥ १८ ॥
bhagavān āhatā vīkṣya
śuddha-bhāva-prasāditaḥ
skandhe nidhāya vāsāṁsi
prītaḥ provāca sa-smitam
Synonyms
bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; āhatāḥ — struck; vīkṣya — seeing; śuddha — pure; bhāva — by their loving affection; prasāditaḥ — satisfied; skandhe — upon His shoulder; nidhāya — placing; vāsāṁsi — their garments; prītaḥ — lovingly; provāca — spoke; sa-smitam — while smiling.

Translation
When the Supreme Lord saw how the gopīs were struck with embarrassment, He was satisfied by their pure loving affection. Putting their clothes on His shoulder, the Lord smiled and spoke to them with affection.

Text 19
यूयं विवस्त्रा यदपो धृतव्रता
व्यगाहतैतत्तदु देवहेलनम् ।
बद्ध्वाञ्जलिं मूध्‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‍‌‌र्न्यपनुत्तयेऽहस:
कृत्वा नमोऽधोवसनं प्रगृह्यताम् ॥ १९ ॥
yūyaṁ vivastrā yad apo dhṛta-vratā
vyagāhataitat tad u deva-helanam
baddhvāñjaliṁ mūrdhny apanuttaye ’ṁhasaḥ
kṛtvā namo ’dho-vasanaṁ pragṛhyatām
Synonyms
yūyam — you; vivastrāḥ — naked; yat — because; apaḥ — in the water; dhṛta-vratāḥ — while executing a Vedic ritualistic vow; vyagāhata — bathed; etat tat — this; u — indeed; deva-helanam — an offense against Varuṇa and the other gods; baddhvā añjalim — with palms joined together; mūrdhni — upon your heads; apanuttaye — for counteracting; aṁhasaḥ — your sinful action; kṛtvā namaḥ — paying obeisances; adhaḥ-vasanam — your lower garments; pragṛhyatām — please take back.

Translation
[Lord Kṛṣṇa said:] You girls bathed naked while executing your vow, and that is certainly an offense against the demigods. To counteract your sin you should offer obeisances while placing your joined palms above your heads. Then you should take back your lower garments.

Text 20
इत्यच्युतेनाभिहितं व्रजाबला
मत्वा विवस्त्राप्लवनं व्रतच्युतिम् ।
तत्पूर्तिकामास्तदशेषकर्मणां
साक्षात्कृतं नेमुरवद्यमृग् यत: ॥ २० ॥
ity acyutenābhihitaṁ vrajābalā
matvā vivastrāplavanaṁ vrata-cyutim
tat-pūrti-kāmās tad-aśeṣa-karmaṇāṁ
sākṣāt-kṛtaṁ nemur avadya-mṛg yataḥ
Synonyms
iti — in these words; acyutena — by the infallible Supreme Lord; abhihitam — indicated; vraja-abalāḥ — the girls of Vraja; matvā — considering; vivastra — naked; āplavanam — the bathing; vrata-cyutim — a falldown from their vow; tat-pūrti — the successful completion of that; kāmāḥ — intently desiring; tat — of that performance; aśeṣa-karmarṇām — and of unlimited other pious activities; sākṣāt-kṛtam — to the directly manifest fruit; nemuḥ — they offered their obeisances; avadya-mṛk — the cleanser of all sins; yataḥ — because.

Translation
Thus the young girls of Vṛndāvana, considering what Lord Acyuta had told them, accepted that they had suffered a falldown from their vow by bathing naked in the river. But they still desired to successfully complete their vow, and since Lord Kṛṣṇa is Himself the ultimate result of all pious activities, they offered their obeisances to Him to cleanse away all their sins.

Text 21
तास्तथावनता द‍ृष्ट्वा भगवान् देवकीसुत: ।
वासांसि ताभ्य: प्रायच्छत्करुणस्तेन तोषित: ॥ २१ ॥
tās tathāvanatā dṛṣṭvā
bhagavān devakī-sutaḥ
vāsāṁsi tābhyaḥ prāyacchat
karuṇas tena toṣitaḥ
Synonyms
tāḥ — then; tathā — thus; avanatāḥ — bowed down; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; devakī-sutaḥ — Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī; vāsāṁsi — the garments; tābhyaḥ — to them; prāyacchat — He returned; karuṇaḥ — compassionate; tena — by that act; toṣitaḥ — satisfied.

Translation
Seeing them bow down like that, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the son of Devakī, gave them back their garments, feeling compassionate toward them and satisfied by their act.

Text 22
द‍ृढं प्रलब्धास्त्रपया च हापिता:
प्रस्तोभिता: क्रीडनवच्च कारिता: ।
वस्त्राणि चैवापहृतान्यथाप्यमुं
ता नाभ्यसूयन् प्रियसङ्गनिर्वृता: ॥ २२ ॥
dṛḍhaṁ pralabdhās trapayā ca hāpitāḥ
prastobhitāḥ krīḍana-vac ca kāritāḥ
vastrāṇi caivāpahṛtāny athāpy amuṁ
tā nābhyasūyan priya-saṅga-nirvṛtāḥ
Synonyms
dṛḍham — thoroughly; pralabdhāḥ — cheated; trapayā — of their shame; ca — and; hāpitāḥ — deprived; prastobhitāḥ — laughed at; krīḍana-vat — just like toy dolls; ca — and; kāritāḥ — made to act; vastrāṇi — their clothing; ca — and; eva — indeed; apahṛtāni — stolen; atha api — nevertheless; amum — toward Him; tāḥ — they; na abhyasūyan — did not feel inimical; priya — of their beloved; saṅga — by the association; nirvṛtāḥ — joyful.

Translation
Although the gopīs had been thoroughly cheated, deprived of their modesty, ridiculed and made to act just like toy dolls, and although their clothing had been stolen, they did not feel at all inimical toward Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Rather, they were simply joyful to have this opportunity to associate with their beloved.

Text 23
परिधाय स्ववासांसि प्रेष्ठसङ्गमसज्जिता: ।
गृहीतचित्ता नो चेलुस्तस्मिन्लज्जायितेक्षणा: ॥ २३ ॥
paridhāya sva-vāsāṁsi
preṣṭha-saṅgama-sajjitāḥ
gṛhīta-cittā no celus
tasmin lajjāyitekṣaṇāḥ
Synonyms
paridhāya — putting on; sva-vāsāṁsi — their own garments; preṣṭha — of their beloved; saṅgama — by this association; sajjitāḥ — becoming completely attached to Him; gṛhīta — taken away; cittāḥ — whose minds; na — could not; u — indeed; celuḥ — move; tasmin — upon Him; lajjāyita — full of shyness; īkṣaṇāḥ — whose glances.

Translation
The gopīs were addicted to associating with their beloved Kṛṣṇa, and thus they became captivated by Him. Thus, even after putting their clothes on they did not move. They simply remained where they were, shyly glancing at Him.

Text 24
तासां विज्ञाय भगवान् स्वपादस्पर्शकाम्यया ।
धृतव्रतानां सङ्कल्पमाह दामोदरोऽबला: ॥ २४ ॥
tāsāṁ vijñāya bhagavān
sva-pāda-sparśa-kāmyayā
dhṛta-vratānāṁ saṅkalpam
āha dāmodaro ’balāḥ
Synonyms
tāsām — of these girls; vijñāya — understanding; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sva-pāda — of His own feet; sparśa — for the touch; kāmyayā — with the desire; dhṛta-vratānām — who had taken their vow; saṅkalpam — the motivation; āha — spoke; dāmodaraḥ — Lord Dāmodara; abalāḥ — to the girls.

Translation
The Supreme Lord understood the determination of the gopīs in executing their strict vow. The Lord also knew that the girls desired to touch His lotus feet, and thus Lord Dāmodara, Kṛṣṇa, spoke to them as follows.

Text 25
सङ्कल्पो विदित: साध्व्यो भवतीनां मदर्चनम् ।
मयानुमोदित: सोऽसौ सत्यो भवितुमर्हति ॥ २५ ॥
saṅkalpo viditaḥ sādhvyo
bhavatīnāṁ mad-arcanam
mayānumoditaḥ so ’sau
satyo bhavitum arhati
Synonyms
saṅkalpaḥ — the motivation; viditaḥ — understood; sādhvyaḥ — O pious girls; bhavatīnām — your; mat-arcanam — worship of Me; mayā — by Me; anumoditaḥ — approved of; saḥ asau — that; satyaḥ — true; bhavitum — to become; arhati — must.

Translation
[Lord Kṛṣṇa said:] O saintly girls, I understand that your real motive in this austerity has been to worship Me. That intent of yours is approved of by Me, and indeed it must come to pass.

Text 26
न मय्यावेशितधियां काम: कामाय कल्पते ।
भर्जिता क्‍वथिता धाना: प्रायो बीजाय नेशते ॥ २६ ॥
na mayy āveśita-dhiyāṁ
kāmaḥ kāmāya kalpate
bharjitā kvathitā dhānāḥ
prāyo bījāya neśate
Synonyms
na — not; mayi — in Me; āveśita — fully absorbed; dhiyām — of those whose consciousness; kāmaḥ — desire; kāmāya — to material lust; kalpate — leads; bharjitāḥ — burned; kvathitāḥ — cooked; dhānāḥ — grains; prāyaḥ — for the most part; bījāya — new growth; na iṣyate — are not capable of causing.

Translation
The desire of those who fix their minds on Me does not lead to material desire for sense gratification, just as barleycorns burned by the sun and then cooked can no longer grow into new sprouts.

Text 27
याताबला व्रजं सिद्धा मयेमा रंस्यथा क्षपा: ।
यदुद्दिश्य व्रतमिदं चेरुरार्यार्चनं सती: ॥ २७ ॥
yātābalā vrajaṁ siddhā
mayemā raṁsyathā kṣapāḥ
yad uddiśya vratam idaṁ
cerur āryārcanaṁ satīḥ
Synonyms
yāta — go now; abalāḥ — My dear girls; vrajam — to Vraja; siddhāḥ — having achieved your desire; mayā — with Me; imāḥ — these; raṁsyatha — you will enjoy; kṣapāḥ — the nights; yat — which; uddiśya — having in mind; vratam — vow; idam — this; ceruḥ — you executed; āryā — of goddess Kātyāyanī; arcanam — the worship; satīḥ — being pure.

Translation
Go now, girls, and return to Vraja. Your desire is fulfilled, for in My company you will enjoy the coming nights. After all, this was the purpose of your vow to worship goddess Kātyāyanī, O pure-hearted ones.

Text 28
श्रीशुक उवाच
इत्यादिष्टा भगवता लब्धकामा: कुमारिका: ।
ध्यायन्त्यस्तत्पदाम्भोजं कृच्छ्रान्निर्विविशुर्व्रजम् ॥ २८ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
ity ādiṣṭā bhagavatā
labdha-kāmāḥ kumārikāḥ
dhyāyantyas tat-padāmbhojam
kṛcchrān nirviviśur vrajam
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti — thus; ādiṣṭāḥ — instructed; bhagavatā — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; labdha — having obtained; kāmāḥ — their desire; kumārikāḥ — the young girls; dhyāyantyaḥ — meditating; tat — His; pada-ambhojam — upon the lotus feet; kṛcchrāt — with difficulty; nirviviśuḥ — they returned; vrajam — to the cowherd village.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus instructed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the young girls, their desire now fulfilled, could bring themselves only with great difficulty to return to the village of Vraja, meditating all the while upon His lotus feet.

Text 29
अथ गोपै: परिवृतो भगवान् देवकीसुत: ।
वृन्दावनाद्गतो दूरं चारयन् गा: सहाग्रज: ॥ २९ ॥
atha gopaiḥ parivṛto
bhagavān devakī-sutaḥ
vṛndāvanād gato dūraṁ
cārayan gāḥ sahāgrajaḥ
Synonyms
atha — some time later; gopaiḥ — by the cowherd boys; parivṛtaḥ — surrounded; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; devakī-sutaḥ — the son of Devakī; vṛndāvanāt — from Vṛndāvana; gataḥ — He went; dūram — a distance; cārayan — grazing; gāḥ — the cows; saha-agrajaḥ — together with His brother Balarāma.

Translation
Some time later Lord Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī, surrounded by His cowherd friends and accompanied by His elder brother, Balarāma, went a good distance away from Vṛndāvana, herding the cows.

Text 30
निदघार्कातपे तिग्मे छायाभि: स्वाभिरात्मन: ।
आतपत्रायितान् वीक्ष्य द्रुमानाह व्रजौकस: ॥ ३० ॥
nidaghārkātape tigme
chāyābhiḥ svābhir ātmanaḥ
ātapatrāyitān vīkṣya
drumān āha vrajaukasaḥ
Synonyms
nidāgha — of the hot season; arka — of the sun; ātape — in the heat; tigme — fierce; chayabhiḥ — with the shade; svābhiḥ — their own; ātmanaḥ — for Himself; ātapatrāyitān — serving as umbrellas; vīkṣya — observing; drumān — the trees; aha — He said; vraja-okasaḥ — to the boys of Vraja.

Translation
When the sun’s heat became intense, Lord Kṛṣṇa saw that the trees were acting as umbrellas by shading Him, and thus He spoke as follows to His boyfriends.

Texts 31-32
हे स्तोककृष्ण हे अंशो श्रीदामन् सुबलार्जुन ।
विशाल वृषभौजस्विन् देवप्रस्थ वरूथप ॥ ३१ ॥
पश्यतैतान् महाभागान् परार्थैकान्तजीवितान् ।
वातवर्षातपहिमान् सहन्तो वारयन्ति न: ॥ ३२ ॥
he stoka-kṛṣṇa he aṁśo
śrīdāman subalārjuna
viśāla vṛṣabhaujasvin
devaprastha varūthapa
paśyataitān mahā-bhāgān
parārthaikānta-jīvitān
vāta-varṣātapa-himān
sahanto vārayanti naḥ
Synonyms
he stoka-kṛṣṇa — O Stoka-kṛṣṇa; he aṁśo — O Aṁśu; śrīdāman subala arjuna — O Śrīdāmā, Subala and Arjuna; viśāla vṛṣabha ojasvin — O Viśāla, Vṛṣabha and Ojasvī; devaprastha varūthapa — O Devaprastha and Varūthapa; paśyata — just see; etān — these; mahā-bhāgān — most fortunate; para-artha — for the benefit of others; ekānta — exclusively; jīvitān — whose life; vāta — the wind; varṣa — rain; ātapa — heat of the sun; himān — and snow; sahantaḥ — tolerating; vārayanti — keep off; naḥ — for us.

Translation
[Lord Kṛṣṇa said:] O Stoka Kṛṣṇa and Aṁśu, O Śrīdāma, Subala and Arjuna, O Viśāla, Vṛṣabha, Ojasvī, Devaprastha and Varūthapa, just see these greatly fortunate trees, whose lives are completely dedicated to the benefit of others. Even while tolerating the wind, rain, heat and snow, they protect us from these elements.

Text 33
अहो एषां वरं जन्म सर्वप्राण्युपजीवनम् ।
सुजनस्येव येषां वै विमुखा यान्ति नार्थिन: ॥ ३३ ॥
aho eṣāṁ varaṁ janma
sarva-prāṇy-upajīvanam
su-janasyeva yeṣāṁ vai
vimukhā yānti nārthinaḥ
Synonyms
aho — oh, just see; eṣām — of these trees; varam — superior; janma — birth; sarva — for all; prāṇi — living entities; upajīvinam — who provide maintenance; su-janasya iva — like a great personality; yeṣām — from whom; vai — certainly; vimukhāḥ — disappointed; yānti — go away; na — never; arthinaḥ — those who are asking for something.

Translation
Just see how these trees are maintaining every living entity! Their birth is successful. Their behavior is just like that of great personalities, for anyone who asks anything from a tree never goes away disappointed.

Text 34
पत्रपुष्पफलच्छायामूलवल्कलदारुभि: ।
गन्धनिर्यासभस्मास्थितोक्मै: कामान्वितन्वते ॥ ३४ ॥
patra-puṣpa-phala-cchāyā-
mūla-valkala-dārubhiḥ
gandha-niryāsa-bhasmāsthi-
tokmaiḥ kāmān vitanvate
Synonyms
patra — by their leaves; puṣpa — flowers; phala — fruits; chāyā — shade; mūla — roots; valkala — bark; dārubhiḥ — and wood; gandha — by their fragrance; niryāsa — sap; bhasma — ashes; asthi — pulp; tokmaiḥ — and young shoots; kāmān — desirable things; vitanvate — they award.

Translation
These trees fulfill one’s desires with their leaves, flowers and fruits, their shade, roots, bark and wood, and also with their fragrance, sap, ashes, pulp and shoots.

Text 35
एतावज्जन्मसाफल्यं देहिनामिह देहिषु ।
प्राणैरर्थैर्धिया वाचा श्रेयआचरणं सदा ॥ ३५ ॥
etāvaj janma-sāphalyaṁ
dehinām iha dehiṣu
prāṇair arthair dhiyā vācā
śreya-ācaraṇaṁ sadā
Synonyms
etāvat — up to this; janma — of birth; sāphalyam — perfection; dehinām — of every living being; iha — in this world; dehiṣu — toward those who are embodied; prāṇaiḥ — by life; arthaiḥ — by wealth; dhiyā — by intelligence; vācā — by words; śreyaḥ — eternal good fortune; ācaraṇam — acting practically; sadā — always.

Translation
It is the duty of every living being to perform welfare activities for the benefit of others with his life, wealth, intelligence and words.

Text 36
इति प्रवालस्तबकफलपुष्पदलोत्करै: ।
तरूणां नम्रशाखानां मध्यतो यमुनां गत: ॥ ३६ ॥
iti pravāla-stabaka-
phala-puṣpa-dalotkaraiḥ
tarūṇāṁ namra-śākhānāṁ
madhyato yamunāṁ gataḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus speaking; pravāla — of new branches; stabaka — by the clusters; phala — of fruit; puṣpa — flowers; dala — and leaves; utkaraiḥ — by the abundance; tarūṇām — of the trees; namra — bowed down; śākhānām — whose branches; madhyataḥ — from within the midst; yamunām — the Yamunā River; gataḥ — He came upon.

Translation
Thus moving among the trees, whose branches were bent low by their abundance of twigs, fruits, flowers and leaves, Lord Kṛṣṇa came to the Yamunā River.

Text 37
तत्र गा: पाययित्वाप: सुमृष्टा: शीतला: शिवा: ।
ततो नृप स्वयं गोपा: कामं स्वादु पपुर्जलम् ॥ ३७ ॥
tatra gāḥ pāyayitvāpaḥ
su-mṛṣṭāḥ śītalāḥ śivāḥ
tato nṛpa svayaṁ gopāḥ
kāmaṁ svādu papur jalam
Synonyms
tatra — there; gāḥ — the cows; pāyayitvā — making drink; apaḥ — the water; su-mṛṣṭāḥ — very clear; śītalāḥ — cool; śivāḥ — wholesome; tataḥ — then; nṛpa — O King Parīkṣit; svayam — themselves; gopāḥ — the cowherd boys; kāmam — freely; svādu — sweet-tasting; papuḥ — they drank; jalam — the water.

Translation
The cowherd boys let the cows drink the clear, cool and wholesome water of the Yamunā. O King Parīkṣit, the cowherd boys themselves also drank that sweet water to their full satisfaction.

Text 38
तस्या उपवने कामं चारयन्त: पशून् नृप ।
कृष्णरामावुपागम्य क्षुधार्ता इदमब्रुवन् ॥ ३८ ॥
tasyā upavane kāmaṁ
cārayantaḥ paśūn nṛpa
kṛṣṇa-rāmāv upāgamya
kṣudh-ārtā idam abravan
Synonyms
tasyāḥ — along the Yamunā; upavane — within a small forest; kāmam — here and there, as they wished; cārayantaḥ — tending; paśūn — the animals; nṛpa — O King; kṛṣṇa-rāmau — Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Rāma; upāgamya — approaching; kṣut-ārtāḥ — disturbed by hunger; idam — this; abruvan — they (the cowherd boys) said.

Translation
Then, O King, the cowherd boys began herding the animals in a leisurely way within a small forest along the Yamunā. But soon they became afflicted by hunger and, approaching Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, spoke as follows.