Text 1
श्रीगोपा ऊचु:
राम राम महाबाहो कृष्ण दुष्टनिबर्हण ।
एषा वै बाधते क्षुन्नस्तच्छान्तिं कर्तुमर्हथ: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-gopa ūcuḥ
rāma rāma mahā-bāho
kṛṣṇa duṣṭa-nibarhaṇa
eṣā vai bādhate kṣun nas
tac-chāntiṁ kartum arhathaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-gopāḥ ūcuḥ — the cowherd boys said; rāma rāma — O Lord Rāma, Lord Rāma; mahā-bāho — O mighty-armed one; kṛṣṇa — O Lord Kṛṣṇa; duṣṭa — of the wicked; nibarhaṇa — O destroyer; eṣā — this; vai — indeed; bādhate — is causing distress; kṣut — hunger; naḥ — to us; tat-śāntim — its counteraction; kartum arhathaḥ — You ought to do.

Translation
The cowherd boys said: O Rāma, Rāma, mighty-armed one! O Kṛṣṇa, chastiser of the wicked! We are being harassed by hunger, and You should do something about it.

Text 2
श्रीशुक उवाच
इति विज्ञापितो गोपैर्भगवान् देवकीसुत: ।
भक्ताया विप्रभार्याया: प्रसीदन्निदमब्रवीत् ॥ २ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
iti vijñāpito gopair
bhagavān devakī-sutaḥ
bhaktāyā vipra-bhāryāyāḥ
prasīdann idam abravīt
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti — thus; vijñāpitaḥ — informed; gopaiḥ — by the cowherd boys; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; devakī-sutaḥ — the son of Devakī; bhaktāyāḥ — His devotees; vipra-bhāryāyāḥ — the wives of the brāhmaṇas; prasīdan — desiring to satisfy; idam — this; abravīt — He spoke.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus entreated by the cowherd boys, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the son of Devakī, replied as follows, desiring to please certain of His devotees who were brāhmaṇas’ wives.

Text 3
प्रयात देवयजनं ब्राह्मणा ब्रह्मवादिन: ।
सत्रमाङ्गिरसं नाम ह्यासते स्वर्गकाम्यया ॥ ३ ॥
prayāta deva-yajanaṁ
brāhmaṇā brahma-vādinaḥ
satram āṅgirasaṁ nāma
hy āsate svarga-kāmyayā
Synonyms
prayāta — please go; deva-yajanam — to the sacrificial arena; brāhmaṇāḥ — brāhmaṇas; brahma-vādinaḥ — followers of the Vedic injunctions; satram — a sacrifice; āṅgirasam nāma — known as Āṅgirasa; hi — indeed; āsate — they are now performing; svarga-kāmyayā — with the motive of promotion to heaven.

Translation
[Lord Kṛṣṇa said:] Please go to the sacrificial arena where a group of brāhmaṇas, learned in the Vedic injunctions, are now performing the Āṅgirasa sacrifice to gain promotion to heaven.

Text 4
तत्र गत्वौदनं गोपा याचतास्मद्विसर्जिता: ।
कीर्तयन्तो भगवत आर्यस्य मम चाभिधाम् ॥ ४ ॥
tatra gatvaudanaṁ gopā
yācatāsmad-visarjitāḥ
kīrtayanto bhagavata
āryasya mama cābhidhām
Synonyms
tatra — there; gatvā — going; odanam — food; gopāḥ — My dear cowherd boys; yācata — just request; asmat — by Us; visarjitāḥ — dispatched; kīrtayantaḥ — announcing; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Lord; āryasya — the elder; mama — My; ca — also; abhidhām — name.

Translation
When you go there, My dear cowherd boys, simply request some food. Declare to them the name of My elder brother, the Supreme Lord Balarāma, and also My name, and explain that you have been sent by Us.

Text 5
इत्यादिष्टा भगवता गत्वायाचन्त ते तथा ।
कृताञ्जलिपुटा विप्रान्दण्डवत्पतिता भुवि ॥ ५ ॥
ity ādiṣṭā bhagavatā
gatvā yācanta te tathā
kṛtāñjali-puṭā viprān
daṇḍa-vat patitā bhuvi
Synonyms
iti — in these words; ādiṣṭaḥ — ordered; bhagavatā — by the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa; gatvā — going; ayācanta — begged; te — they; tathā — in that manner; kṛta-añjali-puṭāḥ — joining their palms in humble supplication; viprān — to the brāhmaṇas; daṇḍa-vat — like sticks; patitāḥ — falling; bhuvi — upon the ground.

Translation
Thus instructed by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the cowherd boys went there and submitted their request. They stood before the brāhmaṇas with palms joined in supplication and then fell flat on the ground to offer respect.

Text 6
हे भूमिदेवा: श‍ृणुत कृष्णस्यादेशकारिण: ।
प्राप्ताञ्जानीत भद्रं वो गोपान्नो रामचोदितान् ॥ ६ ॥
he bhūmi-devāḥ śṛṇuta
kṛṣṇasyādeśa-kāriṇaḥ
prāptāñ jānīta bhadraṁ vo
gopān no rāma-coditān
Synonyms
he bhūmi-devāḥ — O earthly gods; śṛṇuta — please hear us; kṛṣṇasya ādeśa — of the order of Kṛṣṇa; kāriṇaḥ — the executors; prāptān — arrived; jānīta — please recognize; bhadram — all good; vaḥ — unto you; gopān — cowherd boys; naḥ — us; rāma-coditān — sent by Lord Rāma.

Translation
[The cowherd boys said:] O earthly gods, please hear us. We cowherd boys are executing the orders of Kṛṣṇa, and we have been sent here by Balarāma. We wish all good for you. Please acknowledge our arrival.

Text 7
गाश्चारयन्तावविदूर ओदनं
रामाच्युतौ वो लषतो बुभुक्षितौ ।
तयोर्द्विजा ओदनमर्थिनोर्यदि
श्रद्धा च वो यच्छत धर्मवित्तमा: ॥ ७ ॥
gāś cārayantāv avidūra odanaṁ
rāmācyutau vo laṣato bubhukṣitau
tayor dvijā odanam arthinor yadi
śraddhā ca vo yacchata dharma-vittamāḥ
Synonyms
gāḥ — Their cows; cārayantau — grazing; avidūre — not far away; odanam — food; rāma-acyutau — Lord Rāma and Lord Acyuta; vaḥ — from you; laṣataḥ — are desiring; bubhukṣitau — being hungry; tayoḥ — for Them; dvijāḥ — O brāhmaṇas; odanam — food; arthinoḥ — begging; yadi — if; śraddhā — any faith; ca — and; vaḥ — on your part; yacchata — please give; dharma-vit-tamāḥ — O best knowers of the principles of religion.

Translation
Lord Rāma and Lord Acyuta are tending Their cows not far from here. They are hungry and want you to give Them some of your food. Therefore, O brāhmaṇas, O best of the knowers of religion, if you have faith please give some food to Them.

Text 8
दीक्षाया: पशुसंस्थाया: सौत्रामण्याश्च सत्तमा: ।
अन्यत्र दीक्षितस्यापि नान्नमश्नन् हि दुष्यति ॥ ८ ॥
dīkṣāyāḥ paśu-saṁsthāyāḥ
sautrāmaṇyāś ca sattamāḥ
anyatra dīkṣitasyāpi
nānnam aśnan hi duṣyati
Synonyms
dīkṣāyāḥ — beginning with the initiation for a sacrifice; paśu-saṁsthāyāḥ — until sacrificing the animal; sautrāmaṇyāḥ — outside of the sacrifice known as Sautrāmaṇi; ca — and; sat-tamāḥ — O purest ones; anyatra — elsewhere; dīkṣitasya — of one who has been initiated for the sacrifice; api — even; na — not; annam — food; aśnan — eating; hi — indeed; duṣyati — creates offense.

Translation
Except during the interval between the initiation of the performer of a sacrifice and the actual sacrifice of the animal, O most pure brāhmaṇas, it is not contaminating for even the initiated to partake of food, at least in sacrifices other than the Sautrāmaṇi.

Text 9
इति ते भगवद्याच्ञां श‍ृण्वन्तोऽपि न शुश्रुवु: ।
क्षुद्राशा भूरिकर्माणो बालिशा वृद्धमानिन: ॥ ९ ॥
iti te bhagavad-yācñāṁ
śṛṇvanto ’pi na śuśruvuḥ
kṣudrāśā bhūri-karmāṇo
bāliśā vṛddha-māninaḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus; te — they, the brāhmaṇas; bhagavat — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yācñām — the supplication; śṛṇvantaḥ — hearing; api — although; na śuśruvuḥ — they did not hear; kṣudra-āśāḥ — full of petty desire; bhūri-karmāṇaḥ — entangled in elaborate ritualistic activities; bāliśāḥ — childish fools; vṛddha-māninaḥ — presuming themselves to be wise men.

Translation
The brāhmaṇas heard this supplication from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, yet they refused to pay heed. Indeed, they were full of petty desires and entangled in elaborate rituals. Though presuming themselves advanced in Vedic learning, they were actually inexperienced fools.

Texts 10-11
देश: काल: पृथग्द्रव्यं मन्त्रतन्त्रर्त्विजोऽग्नय: ।
देवता यजमानश्च क्रतुर्धर्मश्च यन्मय: ॥ १० ॥
तं ब्रह्म परमं साक्षाद् भगवन्तमधोक्षजम् ।
मनुष्यद‍ृष्ट्या दुष्प्रज्ञा मर्त्यात्मानो न मेनिरे ॥ ११ ॥
deśaḥ kālaḥ pṛthag dravyaṁ
mantra-tantrartvijo ’gnayaḥ
devatā yajamānaś ca
kratur dharmaś ca yan-mayaḥ
taṁ brahma paramaṁ sākṣād
bhagavantam adhokṣajam
manuṣya-dṛṣṭyā duṣprajñā
martyātmāno na menire
Synonyms
deśaḥ — the place; kālaḥ — time; pṛthak dravyam — particular items of paraphernalia; mantra — Vedic hymns; tantra — prescribed rituals; ṛtvijaḥ — priests; agnayaḥ — sacrificial fires; devatāḥ — the presiding demigods; yajamānaḥ — the performer of the sacrifice; ca — and; kratuḥ — the offering; dharmaḥ — the invisible power of fruitive results; ca — and; yat — whom; mayaḥ — constituting; tam — Him; brahma paramam — the Supreme Absolute Truth; sākṣāt — directly manifest; bhagavantam — the Personality of Godhead; adhokṣajam — who is transcendental to material senses; manuṣya-dṛṣṭyā — seeing Him as an ordinary man; duṣprajñāḥ — perverted in their intelligence; martya-ātmānaḥ — falsely identifying themselves with the material body; na menire — they did not properly honor.

Translation
Although the ingredients of sacrificial performance — the place, time, particular paraphernalia, mantras, rituals, priests, fires, demigods, performer, offering and the as yet unseen beneficial results — are all simply aspects of His opulences, the brāhmaṇas saw Lord Kṛṣṇa as an ordinary human because of their perverted intelligence. They failed to recognize that He is the Supreme Absolute Truth, the directly manifest Personality of Godhead, whom the material senses cannot ordinarily perceive. Thus bewildered by their false identification with the mortal body, they did not show Him proper respect.

Text 12
न ते यदोमिति प्रोचुर्न नेति च परन्तप ।
गोपा निराशा: प्रत्येत्य तथोचु: कृष्णरामयो: ॥ १२ ॥
na te yad om iti procur
na neti ca parantapa
gopā nirāśāḥ pratyetya
tathocuḥ kṛṣṇa-rāmayoḥ
Synonyms
na — not; te — they; yat — when; om — “so be it”; iti — thus; procuḥ — did speak; na — not; na — “no”; iti — thus; ca — either; parantapa — O chastiser of the enemies, Parīkṣit Mahārāja; gopāḥ — the cowherd boys; nirāśāḥ — discouraged; pratyetya — returning; tathā — thus; ūcuḥ — described; kṛṣṇa-rāmayoḥ — to Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Rāma.

Translation
When the brāhmaṇas failed to reply even with a simple yes or no, O chastiser of the enemy [Parīkṣit], the cowherd boys returned disappointed to Kṛṣṇa and Rāma and reported this to Them.

Text 13
तदुपाकर्ण्य भगवान् प्रहस्य जगदीश्वर: ।
व्याजहार पुनर्गोपान् दर्शयन्लौकिकीं गतिम् ॥ १३ ॥
tad upākarṇya bhagavān
prahasya jagad-īśvaraḥ
vyājahāra punar gopān
darśayan laukikīṁ gatim
Synonyms
tat — that; upākarṇya — hearing; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; prahasya — laughing; jagat-īśvaraḥ — the controller of the entire universe; vyājahāra — addressed; punaḥ — again; gopān — the cowherd boys; darśayan — showing; laukikīm — of the ordinary world; gatim — the way.

Translation
Hearing what had happened, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord of the universe, simply laughed. Then He again addressed the cowherd boys, showing them the way men act in this world.

Text 14
मां ज्ञापयत पत्नीभ्य: ससङ्कर्षणमागतम् ।
दास्यन्ति काममन्नं व: स्निग्धा मय्युषिता धिया ॥ १४ ॥
māṁ jñāpayata patnībhyaḥ
sa-saṅkarṣaṇam āgatam
dāsyanti kāmam annaṁ vaḥ
snigdhā mayy uṣitā dhiyā
Synonyms
mām — Me; jñāpayata — please announce; patnībhyaḥ — to the wives; sa-saṅkarṣaṇam — together with Lord Balarāma; āgatam — arrived; dāsyanti — they will give; kāmam — as much as you desire; annam — food; vaḥ — to you; snigdhāḥ — affectionate; mayi — in Me; uṣitāḥ — residing; dhiyā — with their intelligence.

Translation
[Lord Kṛṣṇa said:] Tell the wives of the brāhmaṇas that I have come here with Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa. They will certainly give you all the food you want, for they are most affectionate toward Me and, indeed, with their intelligence reside in Me alone.

Text 15
गत्वाथ पत्नीशालायां द‍ृष्ट्वासीना: स्वलङ्कृता: ।
नत्वा द्विजसतीर्गोपा: प्रश्रिता इदमब्रुवन् ॥ १५ ॥
gatvātha patnī-śālāyāṁ
dṛṣṭvāsīnāḥ sv-alaṅkṛtāḥ
natvā dvija-satīr gopāḥ
praśritā idam abruvan
Synonyms
gatvā — going; atha — then; patnī-śālāyām — in the house of the wives of the brāhmaṇas; dṛṣṭvā — seeing them; asīnāḥ — sitting; su-alaṅkṛtāḥ — nicely ornamented; natvā — bowing down to offer obeisances; dvija-satīḥ — to the chaste wives of the brāhmaṇas; gopāḥ — the cowherd boys; praśritāḥ — humbly; idam — this; abruvan — spoke.

Translation
The cowherd boys then went to the house where the brāhmaṇas’ wives were staying. There the boys saw those chaste ladies sitting, nicely decorated with fine ornaments. Bowing down to the brāhmaṇa ladies, the boys addressed them in all humility.

Text 16
नमो वो विप्रपत्नीभ्यो निबोधत वचांसि न: ।
इतोऽविदूरे चरता कृष्णेनेहेषिता वयम् ॥ १६ ॥
namo vo vipra-patnībhyo
nibodhata vacāṁsi naḥ
ito ’vidūre caratā
kṛṣṇeneheṣitā vayam
Synonyms
namaḥ — obeisances; vaḥ — unto you; vipra-patnībhyaḥ — the wives of the brāhmaṇas; nibodhata — please hear; vacāṁsi — words; naḥ — our; itaḥ — from here; avidūre — not distant; caratā — who is going; kṛṣṇena — by Lord Kṛṣṇa; iha — here; iṣitāḥ — sent; vayam — we.

Translation
[The cowherd boys said:] Obeisances unto you, O wives of the learned brāhmaṇas. Kindly hear our words. We have been sent here by Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is passing by not far from here.

Text 17
गाश्चारयन् स गोपालै: सरामो दूरमागत: ।
बुभुक्षितस्य तस्यान्नं सानुगस्य प्रदीयताम् ॥ १७ ॥
gāś cārayan sa gopālaiḥ
sa-rāmo dūram āgataḥ
bubhukṣitasya tasyānnaṁ
sānugasya pradīyatām
Synonyms
gāḥ — the cows; cārayan — tending; saḥ — He; gopālaiḥ — in the company of the cowherd boys; sa-rāmaḥ — together with Lord Balarāma; dūram — from far away; āgataḥ — has come; bubhukṣitasya — who is hungry; tasya — for Him; annam — food; sa-anugasya — together with His companions; pradīyatām — should be given.

Translation
He has come a long way with the cowherd boys and Lord Balarāma, tending the cows. Now He is hungry, so some food should be given for Him and His companions.

Text 18
श्रुत्वाच्युतमुपायातं नित्यं तद्दर्शनोत्सुका: ।
तत्कथाक्षिप्तमनसो बभूवुर्जातसम्भ्रमा: ॥ १८ ॥
śrutvācyutam upāyātaṁ
nityaṁ tad-darśanotsukāḥ
tat-kathākṣipta-manaso
babhūvur jāta-sambhramāḥ
Synonyms
śrutvā — hearing; acyutam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; upāyātam — come nearby; nityam — constantly; tat-darśana — for the sight of Him; utsukāḥ — eager; tat-kathā — by descriptions of Him; ākṣpita — enchanted; manasaḥ — their minds; babhūvuḥ — they became; jāta-sambhramāḥ — excited.

Translation
The wives of the brāhmaṇas were always eager to see Kṛṣṇa, for their minds had been enchanted by descriptions of Him. Thus as soon as they heard that He had come, they became very excited.

Text 19
चतुर्विधं बहुगुणमन्नमादाय भाजनै: ।
अभिसस्रु: प्रियं सर्वा: समुद्रमिव निम्नगा: ॥ १९ ॥
catur-vidhaṁ bahu-guṇam
annam ādāya bhājanaiḥ
abhisasruḥ priyaṁ sarvāḥ
samudram iva nimnagāḥ
Synonyms
catuḥ-vidham — of the four varieties (that which is chewed, that which is drunk, that which is licked and that which is sucked); bahu-guṇam — endowed with many rich tastes and fragrances; annam — food; ādāya — bringing; bhājanaiḥ — in large vessels; abhisasruḥ — they went forward; priyam — to their beloved; sarvāḥ — all of them; samudram — to the ocean; iva — just as; nimna-gāḥ — the rivers.

Translation
Taking along in large vessels the four kinds of foods, full of fine tastes and aromas, all the ladies went forth to meet their beloved, just as rivers flow toward the sea.

Texts 20-21
निषिध्यमाना: पतिभिर्भ्रातृभिर्बन्धुभि: सुतै: ।
भगवत्युत्तमश्लोके दीर्घश्रुतधृताशया: ॥ २० ॥
यमुनोपवनेऽशोकनवपल्लवमण्डिते ।
विचरन्तं वृतं गोपै: साग्रजं दद‍ृशु: स्त्रिय: ॥ २१ ॥
niṣidhyamānāḥ patibhir
bhrātṛbhir bandhubhiḥ sutaiḥ
bhagavaty uttama-śloke
dīrgha-śruta-dhṛtāśayāḥ
yamunopavane ’śoka
nava-pallava-maṇḍite
vicarantaṁ vṛtaṁ gopaiḥ
sāgrajaṁ dadṛśuḥ striyaḥ
Synonyms
niṣidhyamānāḥ — being forbidden; patibhiḥ — by their husbands; bhrātṛbhiḥ — by their brothers; bandhubhiḥ — by other relatives; sutaiḥ — and by their sons; bhagavati — directed toward the Supreme Personality of Godhead; uttama-śloke — who is praised with transcendental hymns; dīrgha — for a long time; śruta — because of hearing; dhṛta — acquired; āśayāḥ — whose expectations; yamunā-upavane — in a garden along the river Yamunā; aśoka-nava-pallava — by the buds of the aśoka trees; maṇḍite — decorated; vicarantam — wandering; vṛtam — surrounded; gopaiḥ — by the cowherd boys; sa-agrajam — together with His elder brother; dadṛśuḥ — they saw; striyaḥ — the ladies.

Translation
Although their husbands, brothers, sons and other relatives tried to forbid them from going, their hope of seeing Kṛṣṇa, cultivated by extensive hearing of His transcendental qualities, won out. Along the river Yamunā, within a garden decorated with buds of aśoka trees, they caught sight of Him strolling along in the company of the cowherd boys and His elder brother, Balarāma.

Text 22
श्यामं हिरण्यपरिधिं वनमाल्यबर्ह-
धातुप्रवालनटवेषमनुव्रतांसे ।
विन्यस्तहस्तमितरेण धुनानमब्जं
कर्णोत्पलालककपोलमुखाब्जहासम् ॥ २२ ॥
śyāmaṁ hiraṇya-paridhiṁ vanamālya-barha-
dhātu-pravāla-naṭa-veṣam anavratāṁse
vinyasta-hastam itareṇa dhunānam abjaṁ
karṇotpalālaka-kapola-mukhābja-hāsam
Synonyms
śyāmam — dark blue in complexion; hiraṇya — golden; paridhim — whose garment; vana-mālya — with a forest garland; barha — peacock feather; dhātu — colored minerals; pravāla — and sprigs of buds; naṭa — like a dancer upon the stage; veṣam — dressed; anuvrata — of a friend; aṁse — upon the shoulder; vinyasta — placed; hastam — His hand; itareṇa — with the other; dhunānam — twirling; abjam — a lotus; karṇa — upon His ears; utpala — lilies; alaka-kapola — with hair extending over His cheeks; mukha-abja — upon His lotuslike face; hāsam — having a smile.

Translation
His complexion was dark blue and His garment golden. Wearing a peacock feather, colored minerals, sprigs of flower buds, and a garland of forest flowers and leaves, He was dressed just like a dramatic dancer. He rested one hand upon the shoulder of a friend and with the other twirled a lotus. Lilies graced His ears, His hair hung down over His cheeks, and His lotuslike face was smiling.

Text 23
प्राय:श्रुतप्रियतमोदयकर्णपूरै-
र्यस्मिन् निमग्नमनसस्तमथाक्षिरन्ध्रै: ।
अन्त: प्रवेश्य सुचिरं परिरभ्य तापं
प्राज्ञं यथाभिमतयो विजहुर्नरेन्द्र ॥ २३ ॥
prāyaḥ-śruta-priyatamodaya-karṇa-pūrair
yasmin nimagna-manasas tam athākṣi-randraiḥ
antaḥ praveśya su-ciraṁ parirabhya tāpaṁ
prājñaṁ yathābhimatayo vijahur narendra
Synonyms
prāyaḥ — repeatedly; śruta — heard; priya-tama — of their dearmost; udaya — the glories; karṇa-pūraiḥ — which were the ornaments of their ears; yasmin — in whom; nimagna — submerged; manasaḥ — their minds; tam — Him; atha — then; akṣi-randhraiḥ — through the apertures of their eyes; antaḥ — within; praveśya — making enter; su-ciram — for a long time; parirabhya — embracing; tāpam — their distress; prājñam — the inner consciousness; yathā — as; abhimatayaḥ — the functions of false ego; vijahuḥ — they gave up; nara-indra — O ruler of men.

Translation
O ruler of men, for a long time those brāhmaṇa ladies had heard about Kṛṣṇa, their beloved, and His glories had become the constant ornaments of their ears. Indeed, their minds were always absorbed in Him. Through the apertures of their eyes they now forced Him to enter within their hearts, and then they embraced Him within for a long time. In this way they finally gave up the pain of separation from Him, just as sages give up the anxiety of false ego by embracing their innermost consciousness.

Text 24
तास्तथा त्यक्तसर्वाशा: प्राप्ता आत्मदिद‍ृक्षया ।
विज्ञायाखिलद‍ृग्द्रष्टा प्राह प्रहसितानन: ॥ २४ ॥
tās tathā tyakta-sarvāśāḥ
prāptā ātma-didṛkṣayā
vijñāyākhila-dṛg-draṣṭā
prāha prahasitānanaḥ
Synonyms
tāḥ — those ladies; tathā — in such a state; tyakta-sarva-āśāḥ — having given up all material desires; prāptāḥ — arrived; ātma-didṛkṣayā — with the desire of seeing Himself; vijñāya — understanding; akhila-dṛk — of the vision of all creatures; draṣṭā — the seer; prāha — He spoke; prahasita-ānanaḥ — with a smile upon His face.

Translation
Lord Kṛṣṇa, who witnesses the thoughts of all creatures, understood how those ladies had abandoned all worldly hopes and come there simply to see Him. Thus He addressed them as follows with a smile upon His face.

Text 25
स्वागतं वो महाभागा आस्यतां करवाम किम् ।
यन्नो दिद‍ृक्षया प्राप्ता उपपन्नमिदं हि व: ॥ २५ ॥
svāgataṁ vo mahā-bhāgā
āsyatāṁ karavāma kim
yan no didṛkṣayā prāptā
upapannam idaṁ hi vaḥ
Synonyms
su-āgatam — auspicious welcome; vaḥ — for you; mahā-bhāgāḥ — O fortunate ladies; āsyatām — please come sit; karavāma — I can do; kim — what; yat — because; naḥ — Us; didṛkṣayā — with the desire of seeing; prāptāḥ — you have come; upapannam — fitting; idam — this; hi — certainly; vaḥ — on your part.

Translation
[Lord Kṛṣṇa said:] Welcome, O most fortunate ladies. Please sit down and make yourselves comfortable. What can I do for you? That you have come here to see Me is most appropriate.

Text 26
नन्वद्धा मयि कुर्वन्ति कुशला: स्वार्थदर्शिन: ।
अहैतुक्यव्यवहितां भक्तिमात्मप्रिये यथा ॥ २६ ॥
nanv addhā mayi kurvanti
kuśalāḥ svārtha-darśinaḥ
ahaituky avyavahitāṁ
bhaktim ātma-priye yathā
Synonyms
nanu — certainly; addhā — directly; mayi — unto Me; kurvanti — they perform; kuśalāḥ — those who are expert; sva-artha — their own true benefit; darśinaḥ — who perceive; ahaitukī — unmotivated; avyavahitām — uninterrupted; bhaktim — devotional service; ātma — to the soul; priye — who am most dear; yathā — properly.

Translation
Certainly expert personalities, who can see their own true interest, render unmotivated and uninterrupted devotional service directly unto Me, for I am most dear to the soul.

Text 27
प्राणबुद्धिमन:स्वात्मदारापत्यधनादय: ।
यत्सम्पर्कात्प्रिया आसंस्तत: को न्वपर: प्रिय: ॥ २७ ॥
prāṇa-buddhi-manaḥ-svātma
dārāpatya-dhanādayaḥ
yat-samparkāt priyā āsaṁs
tataḥ ko nv aparaḥ priyaḥ
Synonyms
prāṇa — one’s vital force; buddhi — intelligence; manaḥ — mind; sva — relatives; ātma — body; dāra — wife; apatya — children; dhana — wealth; ādayaḥ — and so forth; yat — with which (self); samparkāt — because of contact; priyāḥ — dear; āsan — have become; tataḥ — than that; kaḥ — what; nu — indeed; aparaḥ — other; priyaḥ — dear object.

Translation
It is only by contact with the self that one’s vital breath, intelligence, mind, friends, body, wife, children, wealth and so on are dear. Therefore what object can possibly be more dear than one’s own self?

Text 28
तद् यात देवयजनं पतयो वो द्विजातय: ।
स्वसत्रं पारयिष्यन्ति युष्माभिर्गृहमेधिन: ॥ २८ ॥
tad yāta deva-yajanaṁ
patayo vo dvijātayaḥ
sva-satraṁ pārayiṣyanti
yuṣmābhir gṛha-medhinaḥ
Synonyms
tat — therefore; yāta — go; deva-yajanam — to the sacrificial arena; patayaḥ — the husbands; vaḥ — your; dvi-jātayaḥ — the brāhmaṇas; sva-satram — their own sacrifices; pārayiṣyanti — will be able to finish; yuṣmābhiḥ — together with you; gṛha-medhinaḥ — the householders.

Translation
You should thus return to the sacrificial arena, because your husbands, the learned brāhmaṇas, are householders and need your assistance to finish their respective sacrifices.

Text 29
श्रीपत्‍न्य ऊचु:
मैवं विभोऽर्हति भवान् गदितुं नृशंसं
सत्यं कुरुष्व निगमं तव पादमूलम् ।
प्राप्ता वयं तुलसिदाम पदावसृष्टं
केशैर्निवोढुमतिलङ्‌घ्य समस्तबन्धून् ॥ २९ ॥
śrī-patnya ūcuḥ
maivaṁ vibho ’rhati bhavān gadituṁ nr-śaṁsaṁ
satyaṁ kuruṣva nigamaṁ tava pāda-mūlam
prāptā vayaṁ tulasi-dāma padāvasṛṣṭaṁ
keśair nivoḍhum atilaṅghya samasta-bandhūn
Synonyms
śrī-patnyaḥ ūcuḥ — the wives of the brāhmaṇas said; mā — not; evam — like this; vibho — O almighty Lord; arhati — ought; bhavān — You; gaditum — to speak; nṛ-śaṁsam — harshly; satyam — true; kuruṣva — please make; nigamam — the promise given in the revealed scripture; tava — Your; pāda-mūlam — the base of the lotus feet; prāptāḥ — having obtained; vayam — we; tulasi-dāma — the garland of tulasī leaves; padā — from Your feet; avasṛṣṭam — fallen; keśaiḥ — upon our hair; nivoḍhum — in order to carry; atilaṅghya — rejecting; samasta — all; bandhūn — relations.

Translation
The wives of the brāhmaṇas replied: O almighty one, please do not speak such cruel words. Rather, You should fulfill Your promise that You always reciprocate with Your devotees in kind. Now that we have attained Your lotus feet, we simply wish to remain here in the forest so we may carry upon our heads the garlands of tulasī leaves that fall from Your lotus feet. We are ready to give up all material relationships.

Text 30
गृह्णन्ति नो न पतय: पितरौ सुता वा
न भ्रातृबन्धुसुहृद: कुत एव चान्ये ।
तस्माद् भवत्प्रपदयो: पतितात्मनां नो
नान्या भवेद् गतिररिन्दम तद् विधेहि ॥ ३० ॥
gṛhṇanti no na patayaḥ pitarau sutā vā
na bhrātṛ-bandhu-suhṛdaḥ kuta eva cānye
tasmād bhavat-prapadayoḥ patitātmanāṁ no
nānyā bhaved gatir arindama tad vidhehi
Synonyms
gṛhṇanti — they will accept; naḥ — us; na — not; patayaḥ — our husbands; pitarau — fathers; sutāḥ — sons; vā — or; na — not; bhrātṛ — brothers; bandhu — other relatives; suhṛdaḥ — and friends; kutaḥ — how then; eva — indeed; ca — and; anye — other people; tasmāt — therefore; bhavat — Your; prapadayoḥ — at the tips of the lotus feet; patita — fallen; ātmanām — whose bodies; naḥ — for us; na — not; anyā — any other; bhavet — there can be; gatiḥ — destination; arim-dama — O chastiser of enemies; tat — that; vidhehi — kindly bestow upon us.

Translation
Our husbands, fathers, sons, brothers, other relatives and friends will no longer take us back, and how could anyone else be willing to give us shelter? Therefore, since we have thrown ourselves at Your lotus feet and have no other destination, please, O chastiser of enemies, grant our desire.

Text 31
श्रीभगवानुवाच
पतयो नाभ्यसूयेरन् पितृभ्रातृसुतादय: ।
लोकाश्च वो मयोपेता देवा अप्यनुमन्वते ॥ ३१ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
patayo nābhyasūyeran
pitṛ-bhrātṛ-sutādayaḥ
lokāś ca vo mayopetā
devā apy anumanvate
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; patayaḥ — your husbands; na abhyasūyeran — will not feel inimical; pitṛ-bhrātṛ-suta-ādayaḥ — your fathers, brothers, sons and others; lokāḥ — the general populace; ca — also; vaḥ — toward you; mayā — by Me; upetāḥ — advised; devāḥ — the demigods; api — even; anumanvate — regard favorably.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead replied: Rest assured that your husbands will not be inimical toward you, nor will your fathers, brothers, sons, other relatives or the general populace. I will personally advise them of the situation. Indeed, even the demigods will express their approval.

Text 32
न प्रीतयेऽनुरागाय ह्यङ्गसङ्गो नृणामिह ।
तन्मनो मयि युञ्जाना अचिरान्मामवाप्स्यथ ॥ ३२ ॥
na prītaye ’nurāgāya
hy aṅga-saṅgo nṛṇām iha
tan mano mayi yuñjānā
acirān mām avāpsyatha
Synonyms
na — not; prītaye — for satisfaction; anurāgāya — for loving attraction; hi — certainly; aṅga-saṅgaḥ — physical association; nṛṇām — for people; iha — in this world; tat — therefore; manaḥ — your minds; mayi — upon Me; yuñjānāḥ — fixing; acirāt — very quickly; mām — Me; avāpsyatha — you will achieve.

Translation
For you to remain in My bodily association would certainly not please people in this world, nor would it be the best way for you to increase your love for Me. Rather, you should fix your minds on Me, and very soon you will achieve Me.

Text 33
श्रवणाद्दर्शनाद्ध्यानान्मयि भावोऽनुकीर्तनात् ।
न तथा सन्निकर्षेण प्रतियात ततो गृहान् ॥ ३३ ॥
śravaṇād darśanād dhyānān
mayi bhāvo ’nukīrtanāt
na tathā sannikarṣeṇa
pratiyāta tato gṛhān
Synonyms
śravaṇāt — by hearing; darśanāt — by seeing the Deity form; dhyānāt — by meditation; mayi — for Me; bhāvaḥ — love; anukīrtanāt — by chanting My names and qualities; na — not; tathā — in the same way; sannikarṣeṇa — by literal proximity; pratiyāta — return; tataḥ — therefore; gṛhān — to your homes.

Translation
It is by hearing about Me, seeing My Deity form, meditating upon Me and chanting My names and glories that love for Me develops, not by physical proximity. Therefore please go back to your homes.

Text 34
श्रीशुक उवाच
इत्युक्ता द्विजपत्‍न्यस्ता यज्ञवाटं पुनर्गता: ।
ते चानसूयवस्ताभि: स्त्रीभि: सत्रमपारयन् ॥ ३४ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
ity uktā dvija-patnyas tā
yajña-vāṭaṁ punar gatāḥ
te cānasūyavas tābhiḥ
strībhiḥ satram apārayan
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti — with these words; uktāḥ — spoken to; dvija-patnyaḥ — the wives of the brāhmaṇas; tāḥ — they; yajña-vāṭam — to the place of sacrifice; punaḥ — again; gatāḥ — went; te — they, their husbands; ca — and; anasūyavaḥ — not inimical; tābhiḥ — together with them; strībhiḥ — their wives; satram — the sacrificial performance; apārayan — they completed.

Translation
Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus instructed, the wives of the brāhmaṇas returned to the place of sacrifice. The brāhmaṇas did not find any fault with their wives, and together with them they finished the sacrifice.

Text 35
तत्रैका विधृता भर्त्रा भगवन्तं यथाश्रुतम् ।
हृदोपगुह्य विजहौ देहं कर्मानुबन्धनम् ॥ ३५ ॥
tatraikā vidhṛtā bhartrā
bhagavantaṁ yathā-śrutam
hṛḍopaguhya vijahau
dehaṁ karmānubandhanam
Synonyms
tatra — there; ekā — one of them; vidhṛtā — held back by force; bhartrā — by her husband; bhagavantam — the Supreme Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa; yathā-śrutam — as she heard about Him from the others; hṛdā — within her heart; upaguhya — embracing; vijahau — she gave up; deham — her material body; karma-anubandhanam — which is simply the basis of bondage to material activity.

Translation
One of the ladies had been forcibly kept back by her husband. When she heard the others describe the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa, she embraced Him within her heart and gave up her material body, the basis of bondage to material activity.

Text 36
भगवानपि गोविन्दस्तेनैवान्नेन गोपकान् ।
चतुर्विधेनाशयित्वा स्वयं च बुभुजे प्रभु: ॥ ३६ ॥
bhagavān api govindas
tenaivānnena gopakān
catur-vidhenāśayitvā
svayaṁ ca bubhuje prabhuḥ
Synonyms
bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api — moreover; govindaḥ — Lord Govinda; tena — with that; eva — very same; annena — food; gopakān — the cowherd boys; catuḥ-vidhena — of four varieties; aśayitvā — feeding; svayam — Himself; ca — and; bubhuje — partook; prabhuḥ — the Almighty.

Translation
Govinda, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, fed the cowherd boys with that food of four varieties. Then the all-powerful Lord Himself partook of the preparations.

Text 37
एवं लीलानरवपुर्नृलोकमनुशीलयन् ।
रेमे गोगोपगोपीनां रमयन् रूपवाक्कृतै: ॥ ३७ ॥
evaṁ līlā-nara-vapur
nr-lokam anuśīlayan
reme go-gopa-gopīnāṁ
ramayan rūpa-vāk-kṛtaiḥ
Synonyms
evam — in this manner; līlā — for pastimes; nara — appearing as a human being; vapuḥ — whose transcendental body; nṛ-lokam — human society; anuśīlayan — imitating; reme — He took pleasure; go — the cows; gopa — cowherd boys; gopīnām — the cowherd girls; ramayan — pleasing; rūpa — with His beauty; vāk — words; kṛtaiḥ — and actions.

Translation
Thus the Supreme Lord, appearing like a human being to perform His pastimes, imitated the ways of human society. He enjoyed pleasing His cows, cowherd boyfriends and cowherd girlfriends with His beauty, words and actions.

Text 38
अथानुस्मृत्य विप्रास्ते अन्वतप्यन्कृतागस: ।
यद् विश्वेश्वरयोर्याच्ञामहन्म नृविडम्बयो: ॥ ३८ ॥
athānusmṛtya viprās te
anvatapyan kṛtāgasaḥ
yad viśveśvarayor yācñām
ahanma nṛ-viḍambayoḥ
Synonyms
atha — then; anusmṛtya — coming to their senses; viprāḥ — the brāhmaṇas; te — they; anvatapyan — felt great remorse; kṛta-agasaḥ — having committed sinful offenses; yat — because; viśva-īśvarayoḥ — of the two Lords of the universe, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma; yācñām — the humble supplication; ahanma — we transgressed; nr-viḍambayoḥ — of those who were deceptively appearing as human beings.

Translation
The brāhmaṇas then came to their senses and began to feel great remorse. They thought, “We have sinned, for we have denied the request of the two Lords of the universe, who deceptively appeared as ordinary human beings.”

Text 39
द‍ृष्ट्वा स्त्रीणां भगवति कृष्णे भक्तिमलौकिकीम् ।
आत्मानं च तया हीनमनुतप्ता व्यगर्हयन् ॥ ३९ ॥
dṛṣṭvā strīṇāṁ bhagavati
kṛṣṇe bhaktim alaukikīm
ātmānaṁ ca tayā hīnam
anutaptā vyagarhayan
Synonyms
dṛṣṭvā — observing; strīṇām — of their wives; bhagavati — for the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kṛṣṇe — Śrī Kṛṣṇa; bhaktim — the pure devotion; alaukikīm — transcendental to this world; ātmānam — themselves; ca — and; tayā — of that; hīnam — devoid; anutaptāḥ — lamenting; vyagarhayan — they condemned.

Translation
Taking note of their wives’ pure, transcendental devotion for Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and seeing their own lack of devotion, the brāhmaṇas felt most sorrowful and began to condemn themselves.

Text 40
धिग् जन्म नस्त्रिवृद् यत् तद् धिग्‌व्रतं धिग्‌‌बहुज्ञताम् ।
धिक्कुलं धिक् क्रियादाक्ष्यं विमुखा ये त्वधोक्षजे ॥ ४० ॥
dhig janma nas tri-vṛd yat tad
dhig vrataṁ dhig bahu-jñatām
dhik kulaṁ dhik kriyā-dākṣyaṁ
vimukhā ye tv adhokṣaje
Synonyms
dhik — to hell; janma — with the birth; naḥ — our; tri-vṛt — threefold (the first from the physical parents, the second at the time of brahminical initiation, and the third at the time of initiation into the performances of Vedic sacrifice); yat tat — whatever; dhik — to hell; vratam — with our vow (of celibacy); dhik — to hell; bahu-jñatām — with our extensive knowledge; dhik — to hell; kulam — with our aristocratic lineage; dhik — to hell; kriyā-dākṣyam — with our expertise in ritualistic activities; vimukhaḥ — inimical; ye — who; tu — however; adhokṣaje — to the transcendental Personality of Godhead.

Translation
[The brāhmaṇas said:] To hell with our threefold birth, our vow of celibacy and our extensive learning! To hell with our aristocratic background and our expertise in the rituals of sacrifice! These are all condemned because we were inimical to the transcendental Personality of Godhead.

Text 41
नूनं भगवतो माया योगिनामपि मोहिनी ।
यद् वयं गुरवो नृणां स्वार्थे मुह्यामहे द्विजा: ॥ ४१ ॥
nūnaṁ bhagavato māyā
yoginām api mohinī
yad vayaṁ guravo nṛṇāṁ
svārthe muhyāmahe dvijāḥ
Synonyms
nūnam — indeed; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Lord; māyā — the illusory potency; yoginām — for great mystics; api — even; mohinī — is bewildering; yat — since; vayam — we; guravaḥ — the spiritual masters; nṛṇām — of society in general; sva-arthe — about our own real interest; muhyāmahe — have become bewildered; dvijāḥ — brāhmaṇas.

Translation
The illusory potency of the Supreme Lord certainly bewilders even the great mystics, what to speak of us. As brāhmaṇas we are supposed to be the spiritual masters of all classes of men, yet we have been bewildered about our own real interest.

Text 42
अहो पश्यत नारीणामपि कृष्णे जगद्गुरौ ।
दुरन्तभावं योऽविध्यन्मृत्युपाशान् गृहाभिधान् ॥ ४२ ॥
aho paśyata nārīṇām
api kṛṣṇe jagad-gurau
duranta-bhāvaṁ yo ’vidhyan
mṛtyu-pāśān gṛhābhidhān
Synonyms
aho paśyata — just see; nārīṇām — of these women; api — even; kṛṣṇe — for Lord Kṛṣṇa; jagat-gurau — the spiritual master of the entire universe; duranta — unlimited; bhāvam — the devotion; yaḥ — which; avidhyat — has broken; mṛtyu — of death; pāśān — the bonds; gṛha-abhidhān — known as family life.

Translation
Just see the unlimited love these women have developed for Lord Kṛṣṇa, the spiritual master of the entire universe! This love has broken for them the very bonds of death — their attachment to family life.

Texts 43-44
नासां द्विजातिसंस्कारो न निवासो गुरावपि ।
न तपो नात्ममीमांसा न शौचं न क्रिया: शुभा: ॥ ४३ ॥
तथापि ह्युत्तम:श्लोके कृष्णे योगेश्वरेश्वरे ।
भक्तिर्दृढा न चास्माकं संस्कारादिमतामपि ॥ ४४ ॥
nāsāṁ dvijāti-saṁskāro
na nivāso gurāv api
na tapo nātma-mīmāṁsā
na śaucaṁ na kriyāḥ śubhāḥ
tathāpi hy uttamaḥ-śloke
kṛṣṇe yogeśvareśvare
bhaktir dṛḍhā na cāsmākaṁ
saṁskārādimatām api
Synonyms
na — there is not; āsām — on their part; dvijāti-saṁskāraḥ — the purificatory rituals pertaining to the twice-born classes of society; na — nor; nivāsaḥ — residence; gurau — in the āśrama of a spiritual master (that is, training as a brahmacārī); api — even; na — no; tapaḥ — execution of austerities; na — no; ātma-mīmāṁsā — philosophical inquiry into the reality of the self; na — no; śaucam — rituals of cleanliness; na — no; kriyāḥ — ritualistic activities; śubhāḥ — pious; tathā api — nevertheless; hi — indeed; uttamaḥ-śloke — whose glories are chanted by the exalted mantras of the Vedas; kṛṣṇe — for Lord Kṛṣṇa; yoga-īśvara-īśvare — the supreme master of all masters of mystic power; bhaktiḥ — pure devotional service; dṛḍhā — firm; na — not; ca — on the other hand; asmākam — of us; saṁskāra-ādi-matām — who possess such purification and so forth; api — even though.

Translation
These women have never undergone the purificatory rites of the twice-born classes, nor have they lived as brahmacārīs in the āśrama of a spiritual master, nor have they executed austerities, speculated on the nature of the self, followed the formalities of cleanliness or engaged in pious rituals. Nevertheless, they have firm devotion for Lord Kṛṣṇa, whose glories are chanted by the exalted hymns of the Vedas and who is the supreme master of all masters of mystic power. We, on the other hand, have no such devotion for the Lord, although we have executed all these processes.

Text 45
ननु स्वार्थविमूढानां प्रमत्तानां गृहेहया ।
अहो न: स्मारयामास गोपवाक्यै: सतां गति: ॥ ४५ ॥
nanu svārtha-vimūḍhānāṁ
pramattānāṁ gṛhehayā
aho naḥ smārayām āsa
gopa-vākyaiḥ satāṁ gatiḥ
Synonyms
nanu — indeed; sva-artha — about their own true benefit; vimūḍhānām — who were bewildered; pramattānām — who were intoxicated; gṛha-īhayā — with their household endeavors; aho — ah; naḥ — us; smārayām āsa — He reminded about; gopa-vākyaiḥ — by the words of cowherds; satām — of the transcendental souls; gatiḥ — the ultimate destination.

Translation
Indeed, infatuated as we are with our household affairs, we have deviated completely from the real aim of our life. But now just see how the Lord, through the words of these simple cowherd boys, has reminded us of the ultimate destination of all true transcendentalists.

Text 46
अन्यथा पूर्णकामस्य कैवल्याद्यशिषां पते: ।
ईशितव्यै: किमस्माभिरीशस्यैतद् विडम्बनम् ॥ ४६ ॥
anyathā pūrṇa-kāmasya
kaivalyādy-aśiṣāṁ pateḥ
īśitavyaiḥ kim asmābhir
īśasyaitad viḍambanam
Synonyms
anyathā — otherwise; pūrṇa-kāmasya — of Him whose every possible desire is fulfilled; kaivalya — of liberation; ādi — and others; āśiṣām — benedictions; pateḥ — the master; īśitavyaiḥ — with those who are meant to be controlled; kim — what; asmābhiḥ — with us; īśasya — of Him who is the absolute controller; etat — this; viḍambanam — pretense.

Translation
Otherwise, why would the supreme controller — whose every desire is already fulfilled and who is the master of liberation and all other transcendental benedictions — enact this pretense with us, who are always to be controlled by Him?

Text 47
हित्वान्यान् भजते यं श्री: पादस्पर्शाशयासकृत् ।
स्वात्मदोषापवर्गेण तद्याच्ञा जनमोहिनी ॥ ४७ ॥
hitvānyān bhajate yaṁ śrīḥ
pāda-sparśāśayāsakṛt
svātma-doṣāpavargeṇa
tad-yācñā jana-mohinī
Synonyms
hitvā — giving up; anyān — others; bhajate — worships; yam — which Lord; śrīḥ — the goddess of fortune; pāda-sparśa — for the touch of His lotus feet; āśayā — with the desire; asakṛt — constantly; sva-ātma — of herself; doṣa — the faults (of fickleness and pride); apavargeṇa — putting aside; tat — His; yācñā — begging; jana — ordinary humans; mohinī — bewildering.

Translation
Hoping for the touch of His lotus feet, the goddess of fortune perpetually worships Him alone, leaving aside all others and renouncing her pride and fickleness. That He begs is certainly astonishing to everyone.

Texts 48-49
देश: काल: पृथग्द्रव्यं मन्त्रतन्त्रर्त्विजोऽग्नय: ।
देवता यजमानश्च क्रतुर्धर्मश्च यन्मय: ॥ ४८ ॥
स एव भगवान् साक्षाद् विष्णुर्योगेश्वरेश्वर: ।
जातो यदुष्वित्याश‍ृण्म ह्यपि मूढा न विद्महे ॥ ४९ ॥
deśaḥ kālaḥ pṛthag dravyaṁ
mantra-tantrartvijo ’gnayaḥ
devatā yajamānaś ca
kratur dharmaś ca yan-mayaḥ
sa eva bhagavān sākṣād
viṣṇur yogeśvareśvaraḥ
jāto yaduṣv ity āśṛṇma
hy api mūḍhā na vidmahe
Synonyms
deśaḥ — the place; kālaḥ — time; pṛthak dravyam — particular items of paraphernalia; mantra — Vedic hymns; tantra — prescribed rituals; ṛtvijaḥ — priests; agnayaḥ — and the sacrificial fires; devatā — the presiding demigods; yajamānaḥ — the performer; ca — and; kratuḥ — the offering; dharmaḥ — the pious reaction; ca — and; yat — whom; mayaḥ — constituting; saḥ — He; eva — indeed; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sākṣāt — directly; viṣṇuḥ — Lord Viṣṇu; yoga-īśvara-īśvaraḥ — the Lord of all mystic controllers; jātaḥ — taken birth; yaduṣu — among the Yadu dynasty; iti — thus; āśṛṇma — we have heard; hi — certainly; api — nevertheless; mūḍhāḥ — foolish; na vidmahe — we could not understand.

Translation
All the aspects of sacrifice — the auspicious place and time, the various items of paraphernalia, the Vedic hymns, the prescribed rituals, the priests and sacrificial fires, the demigods, the patron of the sacrifice, the sacrificial offering and the pious results obtained — all are simply manifestations of His opulences. Yet even though we had heard that the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, the Lord of all mystic controllers, had taken birth in the Yadu dynasty, we were so foolish that we could not recognize Śrī Kṛṣṇa to be none other than Him.

Text 50
तस्मै नमो भगवते कृष्णायाकुण्ठमेधसे ।
यन्मायामोहितधियो भ्रमाम: कर्मवर्त्मसु ॥ ५० ॥
tasmai namo bhagavate
kṛṣṇāyākuṇṭha-medhase
yan-māyā-mohita-dhiyo
bhramāmaḥ karma-vartmasu
Synonyms
tasmai — unto Him; namaḥ — obeisances; bhagavate — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kṛṣṇāya — Lord Kṛṣṇa; akuṇṭha-medhase — whose intelligence is never restricted; yat-māyā — by whose illusory potency; mohita — bewildered; dhiyaḥ — whose minds; bhramāmaḥ — we are wandering; karma-vartmasu — upon the paths of fruitive activity.

Translation
Let us offer our obeisances unto Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. His intelligence is never bewildered, whereas we, confused by His power of illusion, are simply wandering about on the paths of fruitive work.

Text 51
स वै न आद्य: पुरुष: स्वमायामोहितात्मनाम् ।
अविज्ञतानुभावानां क्षन्तुमर्हत्यतिक्रमम् ॥ ५१ ॥
sa vai na ādyaḥ puruṣaḥ
sva-māyā-mohitātmanām
avijñatānubhāvānāṁ
kṣantum arhaty atikramam
Synonyms
saḥ — He; vai — indeed; naḥ — our; ādyaḥ — the primeval Lord; puruṣaḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sva-mayā-mohita-ātmanām — of those whose minds have been bewildered by His illusory potency; avijñāta — who did not understand; anubhāvānām — His influence; kṣantum — to forgive; arhati — should; atikramam — the offense.

Translation
We were bewildered by Lord Kṛṣṇa’s illusory potency and thus could not understand His influence as the original Personality of Godhead. Now we hope He will kindly forgive our offense.

Text 52
इति स्वाघमनुस्मृत्य कृष्णे ते कृतहेलना: ।
दिदृक्षवो व्रजमथ कंसाद् भीता न चाचलन् ॥ ५२ ॥
iti svāgham anusmṛtya
kṛṣṇe te kṛta-helanāḥ
didṛkṣavo vrajam atha
kaṁsād bhītā na cācalan
Synonyms
iti — thus; sva-agham — their own offense; anusmṛtya — thinking back upon; kṛṣṇe — against Lord Kṛṣṇa; te — they; kṛta-helanāḥ — having shown contempt; didṛkṣavaḥ — wishing to see; vrajam — to the village of Nanda Mahārāja; atha — then; kaṁsāt — of Kaṁsa; bhītāḥ — afraid; na — not; ca — and; acalan — they went.

Translation
Thus reflecting on the sin they had committed by neglecting Lord Kṛṣṇa, they became very eager to see Him. But being afraid of King Kaṁsa, they did not dare go to Vraja.