Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
भगवानपि तत्रैव बलदेवेन संयुत: । अपश्यन्निवसन्गोपानिन्द्रयागकृतोद्यमान् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
bhagavān api tatraiva
baladevena saṁyutaḥ
apaśyan nivasan gopān
indra-yāga-kṛtodyamān
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; api — also; tatra eva — in that same place; baladevena — by Lord Balarāma; saṁyutaḥ — joined; apaśyat — saw; nivasan — staying; gopān — the cowherd men; indra — for Indra, the King of heaven; yāga — for the sake of a sacrifice; kṛta — making; udyamān — great endeavor.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: While staying in that very place with His brother Baladeva, Lord Kṛṣṇa happened to see the cowherd men busily arranging for a sacrifice to Indra.

Text 2
तदभिज्ञोऽपि भगवान् सर्वात्मा सर्वदर्शन: । प्रश्रयावनतोऽपृच्छद् वृद्धान् नन्दपुरोगमान् ॥ २ ॥
tad-abhijño ’pi bhagavān
sarvātmā sarva-darśanaḥ
praśrayāvanato ’pṛcchad
vṛddhān nanda-purogamān
Synonyms
tat-abhijñaḥ — being in full knowledge about it; api — although; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; sarva-ātmā — the Supersoul within everyone’s heart; sarva-darśanaḥ — the omniscient Personality of Godhead; praśraya-avanataḥ — bowing down humbly; apṛcchat — He inquired; vṛddhān — from the elders; nanda-puraḥ-gamān — headed by Mahārāja Nanda.

Translation
Being the omniscient Supersoul, the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa already understood the situation, yet He still humbly inquired from the elders, headed by His father, Nanda Mahārāja.

Text 3
कथ्यतां मे पित: कोऽयं सम्भ्रमो व उपागत: । किं फलं कस्य वोद्देश: केन वा साध्यते मख: ॥ ३ ॥
kathyatāṁ me pitaḥ ko ’yaṁ
sambhramo va upāgataḥ
kiṁ phalaṁ kasya voddeśaḥ
kena vā sādhyate makhaḥ
Synonyms
kathyatām — let it be explained; me — to Me; pitaḥ — My dear father; kaḥ — what; ayam — this; sambhramaḥ — flurry of activity; vaḥ — upon you; upāgataḥ — come; kim — what; phalam — the consequence; kasya — for whose; vā — and; uddeśaḥ — sake; kena — by what means; vā — and; sādhyate — is to be accomplished; makhaḥ — this sacrifice.

Translation
[Lord Kṛṣṇa said:] My dear father, kindly explain to Me what this great endeavor of yours is all about. What is it meant to accomplish? If this is a ritual sacrifice, then for whose satisfaction is it intended and by what means is it going to be executed?

Text 4
एतद् ब्रूहि महान् कामो मह्यं शुश्रूषवे पित: । न हि गोप्यं हि साधूनां कृत्यं सर्वात्मनामिह । अस्त्यस्वपरद‍ृष्टीनाममित्रोदास्तविद्विषाम् ॥ ४ ॥
etad brūhi mahān kāmo
mahyaṁ śuśrūṣave pitaḥ
na hi gopyaṁ hi sadhūnāṁ
kṛtyaṁ sarvātmanām iha
asty asva-para-dṛṣṭīnām
amitrodāsta-vidviṣām
Synonyms
etat — this; brūhi — please speak; mahān — great; kāmaḥ — desire; mahyam — to Me; śuśrūṣave — who am ready to hear faithfully; pitaḥ — O father; na — not; hi — indeed; gopyam — to be kept secret; hi — certainly; sādhūnām — of saintly persons; kṛtyam — the activities; sarva-ātmanām — who see everyone as equal to themselves; iha — in this world; asti — there is; asva-para-dṛṣṭīnām — who do not distinguish between what is their own and what is another’s; amitra-udāsta-vidviṣām — who do not distinguish between friends, neutral parties and enemies.

Translation
Please tell Me about it, O father. I have a great desire to know and am ready to hear in good faith. Certainly, no secrets are to be kept by saintly personalities, who see all others as equal to themselves, who have no conception of “mine” or “another’s” and who do not consider who is a friend, who is an enemy and who is neutral.

Text 5
उदासीनोऽरिवद् वर्ज्य आत्मवत् सुहृदुच्यते ॥ ५ ॥
udāsīno ’ri-vad varjya
ātma-vat suhṛd ucyate
Synonyms
udāsīnaḥ — one who is indifferent; ari-vat — just like an enemy; varjyaḥ — is to be avoided; ātma-vat — like one’s own self; suhṛt — a friend; ucyate — is said to be.

Translation
One who is neutral may be avoided like an enemy, but a friend should be considered like one’s own self.

Text 6
ज्ञात्वाज्ञात्वा च कर्माणि जनोऽयमनुतिष्ठति । विदुष: कर्मसिद्धि: स्याद् यथा नाविदुषो भवेत् ॥ ६ ॥
jñatvājñātvā ca karmāṇi
jano ’yam anutiṣṭhati
viduṣaḥ karma-siddhiḥ syād
yathā nāviduṣo bhavet
Synonyms
jñātvā — understanding; ajñātvā — not understanding; ca — also; karmāṇi — activities; janaḥ — the common people; ayam — these; anutiṣṭhati — perform; viduṣaḥ — for one who is wise; karma-siddhiḥ — achievement of the intended goal of activity; syāt — arises; yathā — as; na — not; aviduṣaḥ — for one who is foolish; bhavet — occurs.

Translation
When people in this world perform activities, sometimes they understand what they are doing and sometimes they don’t. Those who know what they are doing achieve success in their work, whereas ignorant people do not.

Text 7
तत्र तावत् क्रियायोगो भवतां किं विचारित: । अथवा लौकिकस्तन्मे पृच्छत: साधु भण्यताम् ॥ ७ ॥
tatra tāvat kriyā-yogo
bhavatāṁ kiṁ vicāritaḥ
atha vā laukikas tan me
pṛcchataḥ sādhu bhaṇyatām
Synonyms
tatra tāvat — that being the case; kriyā-yogaḥ — this fruitive endeavor; bhavatām — of yours; kim — whether; vicāritaḥ — learned from the scriptures; atha vā — or else; laukikaḥ — of ordinary custom; tat — that; me — to Me; pṛcchataḥ — who am inquiring; sādhu — clearly; bhaṇyatām — it should be explained.

Translation
Such being the case, this ritualistic endeavor of yours should be clearly explained to Me. Is it a ceremony based on scriptural injunction, or simply a custom of ordinary society?

Text 8
श्रीनन्द उवाच
पर्जन्यो भगवानिन्द्रो मेघास्तस्यात्ममूर्तय: । तेऽभिवर्षन्ति भूतानां प्रीणनं जीवनं पय: ॥ ८ ॥
śrī-nanda uvāca
parjanyo bhagavān indro
meghās tasyātma-mūrtayaḥ
te ’bhivarṣanti bhūtānāṁ
prīṇanaṁ jīvanaṁ payaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-nandaḥ uvāca — Śrī Nanda Mahārāja said; parjanyaḥ — the rain; bhagavān — the great lord; indraḥ — Indra; meghāḥ — the clouds; tasya — his; ātma-mūrtayaḥ — personal representatives; te — they; abhivarṣanti — directly give rain; bhūtānām — for all living entities; prīṇanam — the gratification; jīvanam — the life-giving force; payaḥ — (like) milk.

Translation
Nanda Mahārāja replied: The great Lord Indra is the controller of the rain. The clouds are his personal representatives, and they directly provide rainwater, which gives happiness and sustenance to all creatures.

Text 9
तं तात वयमन्ये च वार्मुचां पतिमीश्वरम् । द्रव्यैस्तद्रेतसा सिद्धैर्यजन्ते क्रतुभिर्नरा: ॥ ९ ॥
taṁ tāta vayam anye ca
vārmucāṁ patim īśvaram
dravyais tad-retasā siddhair
yajante kratubhir narāḥ
Synonyms
tam — him; tāta — my dear son; vayam — we; anye — others; ca — also; vāḥ-mucām — of the clouds; patim — the master; īśvaram — the powerful controller; dravyaiḥ — with various items; tat-retasā — by his liquid discharge; siddhaiḥ — produced; yajante — they worship; kratubhiḥ — by fire sacrifices; narāḥ — men.

Translation
Not only we, my dear son, but also many other men worship him, the lord and master of the rain-giving clouds. We offer him grain and other paraphernalia of worship produced through his own discharge in the form of rain.

Text 10
तच्छेषेणोपजीवन्ति त्रिवर्गफलहेतवे । पुंसां पुरुषकाराणां पर्जन्य: फलभावन: ॥ १० ॥
tac-cheṣeṇopajīvanti
tri-varga-phala-hetave
puṁsāṁ puruṣa-kārāṇāṁ
parjanyaḥ phala-bhāvanaḥ
Synonyms
tat — of that sacrifice; śeṣeṇa — by the remnants; upajīvanti — they sustain their lives; tri-varga — consisting of the three aims of human life (religiosity, economic development and sense gratification); phala-hetave — for the sake of fruit; puṁsām — for persons; puruṣa-kārāṇām — engaged in human endeavor; parjanyaḥ — Lord Indra; phala-bhāvanaḥ — the means of effecting the intended goals.

Translation
By accepting the remnants of sacrifices performed to Indra, people sustain their lives and accomplish the threefold aims of religiosity, economic development and sense gratification. Thus Lord Indra is the agent responsible for the fruitive success of industrious people.

Text 11
य एनं विसृजेद् धर्मं परम्पर्यागतं नर: । कामाद् द्वेषाद्भ‍याल्लोभात्स वै नाप्नोति शोभनम् ॥ ११ ॥
ya enaṁ visṛjed dharmaṁ
paramparyāgataṁ naraḥ
kāmād dveṣād bhayāl lobhāt
sa vai nāpnoti śobhanam
Synonyms
yaḥ — anyone who; enam — this; visṛjet — rejects; dharmam — the religious principle; paramparya — from traditional authority; āgatam — received; naraḥ — a person; kāmāt — because of lust; dveṣāt — because of enmity; bhayāt — because of fear; lobhāt — or because of greed; saḥ — he; vai — certainly; na āpnoti — cannot achieve; śobhanam — auspiciousness.

Translation
This religious principle is based on sound tradition. Anyone who rejects it out of lust, enmity, fear or greed will certainly fail to achieve good fortune.

Text 12
श्रीशुक उवाच
वचो निशम्य नन्दस्य तथान्येषां व्रजौकसाम् । इन्द्राय मन्युं जनयन् पितरं प्राह केशव: ॥ १२ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
vaco niśamya nandasya
tathānyeṣāṁ vrajaukasām
indrāya manyuṁ janayan
pitaraṁ prāha keśavaḥ
Synonyms
śrī śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; vacaḥ — the words; niśamya — hearing; nandasya — of Mahārāja Nanda; tathā — and also; anyeṣām — of the others; vraja-okasām — the residents of Vraja; indrāya — in Lord Indra; manyum — anger; janayan — generating; pitaram — to His father; prāha — spoke; keśavaḥ — Lord Keśava.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When Lord Keśava [Kṛṣṇa] heard the statements of His father, Nanda, and other senior residents of Vraja, He addressed His father as follows, to arouse anger in Lord Indra.

Text 13
श्रीभगवानुवाच
कर्मणा जायते जन्तु: कर्मणैव प्रलीयते । सुखं दु:खं भयं क्षेमं कर्मणैवाभिपद्यते ॥ १३ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
karmaṇā jāyate jantuḥ
karmaṇaiva pralīyate
sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ bhayaṁ kṣemaṁ
karmaṇaivābhipadyate
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; karmaṇā — by the force of karma; jāyate — takes birth; jantuḥ — the living entity; karmaṇā — by karma; eva — alone; pralīyate — he meets his destruction; sukham — happiness; duḥkham — unhappiness; bhayam — fear; kṣemam — security; karmaṇā eva — by karma alone; abhipadyate — are obtained.

Translation
Lord Kṛṣṇa said: It is by the force of karma that a living entity takes birth, and it is by karma alone that he meets his destruction. His happiness, distress, fear and sense of security all arise as the effects of karma.

Text 14
अस्ति चेदीश्वर: कश्चित्फलरूप्यन्यकर्मणाम् । कर्तारं भजते सोऽपि न ह्यकर्तु: प्रभुर्हि स: ॥ १४ ॥
asti ced īśvaraḥ kaścit
phala-rūpy anya-karmaṇām
kartāraṁ bhajate so ’pi
na hy akartuḥ prabhur hi saḥ
Synonyms
asti — there is; cet — if hypothetically; īśvaraḥ — a supreme controller; kaścit — someone; phala-rūpī — serving to award fruitive results; anya-karmaṇām — of the activities of other persons; kartāram — the performer of activity; bhajate — depends upon; saḥ — He; api — even; na — not; hi — after all; akartuḥ — of one who performs no activity; prabhuḥ — the master; hi — certainly; saḥ — He.

Translation
Even if there is some supreme controller who awards all others the results of their activities, He must also depend upon a performer’s engaging in activity. After all, there is no question of being the bestower of fruitive results unless fruitive activities have actually been performed.

Text 15
किमिन्द्रेणेह भूतानां स्वस्वकर्मानुवर्तिनाम् । अनीशेनान्यथा कर्तुं स्वभावविहितं नृणाम् ॥ १५ ॥
kim indreṇeha bhūtānāṁ
sva-sva-karmānuvartinām
anīśenānyathā kartuṁ
svabhāva-vihitaṁ nṛṇām
Synonyms
kim — what; indreṇa — with Indra; iha — here; bhūtānām — for living entities; sva-sva — each their own; karma — of fruitive action; anuvartinām — who are experiencing the consequences; anīśena — (Indra) who is incapable; anyathā — otherwise; kartum — to make; svabhāva — by their conditioned natures; vihitam — that which is ordained; nṛṇām — for men.

Translation
Living beings in this world are forced to experience the consequences of their own particular previous work. Since Lord Indra cannot in any way change the destiny of human beings, which is born of their own nature, why should people worship him?

Text 16
स्वभावतन्त्रो हि जन: स्वभावमनुवर्तते । स्वभावस्थमिदं सर्वं सदेवासुरमानुषम् ॥ १६ ॥
svabhāva-tantro hi janaḥ
svabhāvam anuvartate
svabhāva-stham idaṁ sarvaṁ
sa-devāsura-mānuṣam
Synonyms
svabhāva — of his conditioned nature; tantraḥ — under the control; hi — indeed; janaḥ — a person; svabhāvam — his nature; anuvartate — he follows; svabhāva-stham — based on conditioned propensities; idam — this world; sarvam — entire; sa — together with; deva — the demigods; asura — the demons; mānuṣam — and humankind.

Translation
Every individual is under the control of his own conditioned nature, and thus he must follow that nature. This entire universe, with all its demigods, demons and human beings, is based on the conditioned nature of the living entities.

Text 17
देहानुच्चावचाञ्जन्तु: प्राप्योत्सृजति कर्मणा । शत्रुर्मित्रमुदासीन: कर्मैव गुरुरीश्वर: ॥ १७ ॥
dehān uccāvacāñ jantuḥ
prāpyotsṛjati karmaṇā
śatrur mitram udāsīnaḥ
karmaiva gurur īśvaraḥ
Synonyms
dehān — material bodies; ucca-avacān — high- and low-class; jantuḥ — the conditioned living entity; prāpya — obtaining; utsṛjati — gives up; karmaṇā — by the reactions of his material activities; śatruḥ — his enemy; mitram — friend; udāsīnaḥ — and neutral party; karma — material work; eva — alone; guruḥ — his spiritual master; īśvaraḥ — his lord.

Translation
Because it is karma that causes the conditioned living entity to accept and then give up different high- and low-grade material bodies, this karma is his enemy, friend and neutral witness, his spiritual master and controlling lord.

Text 18
तस्मात्सम्पूजयेत्कर्म स्वभावस्थ: स्वकर्मकृत् । अञ्जसा येन वर्तेत तदेवास्य हि दैवतम् ॥ १८ ॥
tasmāt sampūjayet karma
svabhāva-sthaḥ sva-karma-kṛt
anjasā yena varteta
tad evāsya hi daivatam
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; sampūjayet — one should fully worship; karma — his prescribed activity; svabhāva — in the position corresponding to his own conditioned nature; sthaḥ — remaining; sva-karma — his own prescribed duty; kṛt — performing; añjasā — without difficulty; yena — by which; varteta — one lives; tat — that; eva — certainly; asya — his; hi — indeed; daivatam — worshipable deity.

Translation
Therefore one should seriously worship work itself. A person should remain in the position corresponding to his nature and should perform his own duty. Indeed, that by which we may live nicely is really our worshipable deity.

Text 19
आजीव्यैकतरं भावं यस्त्वन्यमुपजीवति । न तस्माद् विन्दते क्षेमं जारान् नार्यसती यथा ॥ १९ ॥
ājīvyaikataraṁ bhāvaṁ
yas tv anyam upajīvati
na tasmād vindate kṣemaṁ
jārān nāry asatī yathā
Synonyms
ājīvya — sustaining his life; ekataram — one; bhāvam — entity; yaḥ — who; tu — but; anyam — another; upajīvati — resorts to; na — not; tasmāt — from that one; vindate — gains; kṣemam — real benefit; jārāt — from a paramour; nārī — a woman; asatī — who is unchaste; yathā — as.

Translation
If one thing is actually sustaining our life but we take shelter of something else, how can we achieve any real benefit? We would be like an unfaithful woman, who can never achieve any actual benefit by consorting with her paramour.

Text 20
वर्तेत ब्रह्मणा विप्रो राजन्यो रक्षया भुव: । वैश्यस्तु वार्तया जीवेच्छूद्रस्तु द्विजसेवया ॥ २० ॥
varteta brahmaṇā vipro
rājanyo rakṣayā bhuvaḥ
vaiśyas tu vārtayā jīvec
chūdras tu dvija-sevayā
Synonyms
varteta — lives; brahmaṇā — by the Vedas; vipraḥ — the brāhmaṇa; rājanyaḥ — the member of the ruling class; rakṣayā — by protection; bhuvaḥ — of the earth; vaiśyaḥ — the vaiśya; tu — on the other hand; vārtayā — by trade; jīvet — lives; śūdraḥ — the śūdra; tu — and; dvija-sevayā — by serving the twice-born brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas and vaiśyas.

Translation
The brāhmaṇa maintains his life by studying and teaching the Vedas, the member of the royal order by protecting the earth, the vaiśya by trade, and the śūdra by serving the higher, twice-born classes.

Text 21
कृषिवाणिज्यगोरक्षा कुसीदं तूर्यमुच्यते । वार्ता चतुर्विधा तत्र वयं गोवृत्तयोऽनिशम् ॥ २१ ॥
kṛṣi-vāṇijya-go-rakṣā
kusīdaṁ tūryam ucyate
vārtā catur-vidhā tatra
vayaṁ go-vṛttayo ’niśam
Synonyms
kṛṣi — farming; vāṇijya — commerce; go-rakṣā — and protecting cows; kusīdam — banking; tūryam — the fourth; ucyate — is said; vārtā — the occupational duty; catuḥ-vidhā — fourfold; tatra — among these; vayam — we; go-vṛttayaḥ — engaged in protecting the cows; aniśam — without cessation.

Translation
The occupational duties of the vaiśya are conceived in four divisions: farming, commerce, cow protection and moneylending. Out of these, we as a community are always engaged in cow protection.

Text 22
सत्त्वं रजस्तम इति स्थित्युत्पत्त्यन्तहेतव: । रजसोत्पद्यते विश्वमन्योन्यं विविधं जगत् ॥ २२ ॥
sattvaṁ rajas tama iti
sthity-utpatty-anta-hetavaḥ
rajasotpadyate viśvam
anyonyaṁ vividhaṁ jagat
Synonyms
sattvam — goodness; rajaḥ — passion; tamaḥ — and ignorance; iti — thus; sthiti — of maintenance; utpatti — creation; anta — and destruction; hetavaḥ — the causes; rajasā — by the mode of passion; utpadyate — is generated; viśvam — this universe; anyonyam — by combination of male and female; vividham — becomes variegated; jagat — the world.

Translation
The causes of creation, maintenance and destruction are the three modes of nature — namely goodness, passion and ignorance. In particular, the mode of passion creates this universe and through sexual combination causes it to become full of variety.

Text 23
रजसा चोदिता मेघा वर्षन्त्यम्बूनि सर्वत: । प्रजास्तैरेव सिध्यन्ति महेन्द्र: किं करिष्यति ॥ २३ ॥
rajasā coditā meghā
varṣanty ambūni sarvataḥ
prajās tair eva sidhyanti
mahendraḥ kiṁ kariṣyati
Synonyms
rajasā — by passion; coditāḥ — impelled; meghāḥ — the clouds; varṣanti — pour down; ambūni — their water; sarvataḥ — everywhere; prajāḥ — the population; taiḥ — by that water; eva — simply; sidhyanti — maintain their existence; mahā-indraḥ — the great Indra; kim — what; kariṣyati — can do.

Translation
Impelled by the material mode of passion, the clouds pour down their rain everywhere, and by this rain all creatures gain their sustenance. What has the great Indra to do with this arrangement?

Text 24
न न: पुरो जनपदा न ग्रामा न गृहा वयम् । वनौकसस्तात नित्यं वनशैलनिवासिन: ॥ २४ ॥
na naḥ purojanapadā
na grāmā na gṛhā vayam
vanaukasas tāta nityaṁ
vana-śaila-nivāsinaḥ
Synonyms
na — not; naḥ — for us; puraḥ — the cities; jana-padāḥ — developed inhabited area; na — not; grāmāḥ — villages; na — not; gṛhāḥ — living in permanent homes; vayam — we; vana-okasaḥ — dwelling in the forests; tāta — My dear father; nityam — always; vana — in the forests; śaila — and on the hills; nivāsinaḥ — living.

Translation
My dear father, our home is not in the cities or towns or villages. Being forest dwellers, we always live in the forest and on the hills.

Text 25
तस्माद् गवां ब्राह्मणानामद्रेश्चारभ्यतां मख: । य इन्द्रयागसम्भारास्तैरयं साध्यतां मख: ॥ २५ ॥
tasmād gavāṁ brāhmaṇānām
adreś cārabhyatāṁ makhaḥ
ya indra-yāga-sambhārās
tair ayaṁ sādhyatāṁ makhaḥ
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; gavām — of the cows; brāhmaṇānām — of the brāhmaṇas; adreḥ — and of the hill (Govardhana); ca — also; ārabhyatām — let it begin; makhaḥ — the sacrifice; ye — which; indra-yāga — for the sacrifice to Indra; sambhārāḥ — the ingredients; taiḥ — by them; ayam — this; sādhyatām — may it be carried out; makhaḥ — the sacrifice.

Translation
Therefore may a sacrifice for the pleasure of the cows, the brāhmaṇas and Govardhana Hill begin! With all the paraphernalia collected for worshiping Indra, let this sacrifice be performed instead.

Text 26
पच्यन्तां विविधा: पाका: सूपान्ता: पायसादय: । संयावापूपशष्कुल्य: सर्वदोहश्च गृह्यताम् ॥ २६ ॥
pacyantāṁ vividhāḥ pākāḥ
sūpāntāḥ pāyasādayaḥ
saṁyāvāpūpa-śaṣkulyaḥ
sarva-dohaś ca gṛhyatām
Synonyms
pacyantām — let the people cook; vividhāḥ — many varieties; pākāḥ — of cooked foods; sūpa-antāḥ — ending with liquid vegetable preparations; pāyasa-ādayaḥ — beginning with sweet rice; saṁyāva-āpūpa — fried and baked cakes; śaṣkulyaḥ — large, round cakes made from rice flour; sarva — all; dohaḥ — what is obtained by milking the cows; ca — and; gṛhyatām — let it be taken.

Translation
Let many different kinds of food be cooked, from sweet rice to vegetable soups! Many kinds of fancy cakes, both baked and fried, should be prepared. And all the available milk products should be taken for this sacrifice.

Text 27
हूयन्तामग्नय: सम्यग्ब्राह्मणैर्ब्रह्मवादिभि: । अन्नं बहुगुणं तेभ्यो देयं वो धेनुदक्षिणा: ॥ २७ ॥
hūyantām agnayaḥ samyag
brāhmaṇair brahma-vādibhiḥ
annaṁ bahu-guṇaṁ tebhyo
deyaṁ vo dhenu-dakṣiṇāḥ
Synonyms
hūyantām — should be invoked; agnayaḥ — the sacrificial fires; samyak — in the proper manner; brāhmaṇaiḥ — by the brāhmaṇas; brahma-vādibhiḥ — who are learned in the Vedas; annam — food; bahu-guṇam — well prepared; tebhyaḥ — to them; deyam — should be given; vaḥ — by you; dhenu-dakṣiṇāḥ — cows and other gifts as remuneration.

Translation
The brāhmaṇas who are learned in the Vedic mantras must properly invoke the sacrificial fires. Then you should feed the priests with nicely prepared food and reward them with cows and other gifts.

Text 28
अन्येभ्यश्चाश्वचाण्डालपतितेभ्यो यथार्हत: । यवसं च गवां दत्त्वा गिरये दीयतां बलि: ॥ २८ ॥
anyebhyaś cāśva-cāṇḍāla-
patitebhyo yathārhataḥ
yavasaṁ ca gavāṁ dattvā
giraye dīyatāṁ baliḥ
Synonyms
anyebhyaḥ — to the others; ca — also; ā-śva-cāṇḍāla — even down to the dogs and the dog-eaters; patitebhyaḥ — to such fallen persons; yathā — as; arhataḥ — is proper in each case; yavasam — grass; ca — and; gavām — to the cows; dattvā — having given; giraye — to the mountain called Govardhana; dīyatām — should be presented; baliḥ — respectful offerings.

Translation
After giving the appropriate food to everyone else, including such fallen souls as dogs and dog-eaters, you should give grass to the cows and then present your respectful offerings to Govardhana Hill.

Text 29
स्वलङ्कृता भुक्तवन्त: स्वनुलिप्ता: सुवासस: । प्रदक्षिणां च कुरुत गोविप्रानलपर्वतान् ॥ २९ ॥
sv-alaṅkṛtā bhuktavantaḥ
sv-anuliptāḥ su-vāsasaḥ
pradakṣiṇāṁ ca kuruta
go-viprānala-parvatān
Synonyms
su-alaṅkṛtāḥ — handsomely adorned; bhuktavantaḥ — having eaten to your satisfaction; su-anuliptāḥ — anointed with auspicious sandalwood pulp; su-vāsasaḥ — wearing fine garments; pradakṣiṇām — circumambulation; ca — and; kuruta — you should perform; go — of the cows; vipra — the brāhmaṇas; anala — the sacrificial fires; parvatān — and the hill, Govardhana.

Translation
After everyone has eaten to his satisfaction, you should all dress and decorate yourselves handsomely, smear your bodies with sandalwood paste and then circumambulate the cows, the brāhmaṇas, the sacrificial fires and Govardhana Hill.

Text 30
एतन्मम मतं तात क्रियतां यदि रोचते । अयं गोब्राह्मणाद्रीणां मह्यं च दयितो मख: ॥ ३० ॥
etan mama mataṁ tāta
kriyatāṁ yadi rocate
ayaṁ go-brāhmaṇādrīṇāṁ
mahyaṁ ca dayito makhaḥ
Synonyms
etat — this; mama — My; matam — idea; tāta — O father; kriyatām — may it be carried out; yadi — if; rocate — it is pleasing; ayam — this; go-brāhmaṇa-adrīṇām — for the cows, brāhmaṇas and Govardhana Hill; mahyam — for Me; ca — also; dayitaḥ — cherished; makhaḥ — sacrifice.

Translation
This is My idea, O father, and you may carry it out if it appeals to you. Such a sacrifice will be very dear to the cows, the brāhmaṇas and Govardhana Hill, and also to Me.

Text 31
श्रीशुक उवाच
कालात्मना भगवता शक्रदर्प जिघांसया । प्रोक्तं निशम्य नन्दाद्या: साध्वगृह्णन्त तद्वच: ॥ ३१ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
kālātmanā bhagavatā
śakra-darpa-jighāṁsayā
proktaṁ niśamya nandādyāḥ
sādhv agṛhṇanta tad-vacaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; kāla-ātmanā — manifesting as the force of time; bhagavatā — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śakra — of Indra; darpa — the pride; jighāṁsayā — with a desire to destroy; proktam — what was spoken; niśamya — hearing; nanda-ādyāḥ — Nanda and the other elder cowherd men; sādhu — as excellent; agṛhṇanta — they accepted; tat-vacaḥ — His words.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is Himself powerful time, desired to destroy the false pride of Lord Indra. When Nanda and the other senior men of Vṛndāvana heard Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s statement, they accepted His words as proper.

Texts 32-33
तथा च व्यदधु: सर्वं यथाह मधुसूदन: । वाचयित्वा स्वस्त्ययनं तद्‌‌द्रव्येण गिरिद्विजान् ॥ ३२ ॥ उपहृत्य बलीन् सम्यगाद‍ृता यवसं गवाम् । गोधनानि पुरस्कृत्य गिरिं चक्रु: प्रदक्षिणम् ॥ ३३ ॥
tathā ca vyadadhuḥ sarvaṁ
yathāha madhusūdanaḥ
vācayitvā svasty-ayanaṁ
tad-dravyeṇa giri-dvijān
upahṛtya balīn samyag
ādṛtā yavasaṁ gavām
go-dhanāni puraskṛtya
giriṁ cakruḥ pradakṣiṇam
Synonyms
tathā — thus; ca — and; vyadadhuḥ — they executed; sarvam — everything; yathā — as; āha — He spoke; madhusūdanaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; vācayitvā — making (the brāhmaṇas) recite; svasti-ayanam — the auspicious chants; tat-dravyeṇa — with the paraphernalia intended for Indra’s sacrifice; giri — to the hill; dvijān — and the brāhmaṇas; upahṛtya — offering; balīn — the presentations of tribute; samyak — all together; ādṛtāḥ — respectfully; yavasam — grass; gavām — to the cows; go-dhanāni — the bulls, cows and calves; puraskṛtya — placing in front; girim — of the hill; cakruḥ — they performed; pradakṣiṇam — circumambulation.

Translation
The cowherd community then did all that Madhusūdana had suggested. They arranged for the brāhmaṇas to recite the auspicious Vedic mantras, and using the paraphernalia that had been intended for Indra’s sacrifice, they presented offerings to Govardhana Hill and the brāhmaṇas with reverential respect. They also gave grass to the cows. Then, placing the cows, bulls and calves in front of them, they circumambulated Govardhana.

Text 34
अनांस्यनडुद्युक्तानि ते चारुह्य स्वलङ्कृता: । गोप्यश्च कृष्णवीर्याणि गायन्त्य: सद्विजाशिष: ॥ ३४ ॥
anāṁsy anaḍud-yuktāni
te cāruhya sv-alaṅkṛtāḥ
gopyaś ca kṛṣṇa-vīryāṇi
gāyantyaḥ sa-dvijāśiṣaḥ
Synonyms
anāṁsi — wagons; anaḍut-yuktāni — yoked with oxen; te — they; ca — and; āruhya — riding; su-alaṅkṛtāḥ — nicely ornamented; gopyaḥ — the cowherd women; ca — and; kṛṣṇa-vīryāṇi — the glories of Lord Kṛṣṇa; gāyantyaḥ — singing; sa — together with; dvija — of the brāhmaṇas; āśiṣaḥ — the benedictions.

Translation
As the beautifully ornamented cowherd ladies followed along, riding on wagons drawn by oxen, they sang the glories of Lord Kṛṣṇa, and their songs mingled with the brāhmaṇas’ chanting of benedictions.

Text 35
कृष्णस्त्वन्यतमं रूपं गोपविश्रम्भणं गत: । शैलोऽस्मीति ब्रुवन् भूरि बलिमादद् बृहद्वपु: ॥ ३५ ॥
kṛṣṇas tv anyatamaṁ rūpaṁ
gopa-viśrambhaṇaṁ gataḥ
śailo ’smīti bruvan bhūri
balim ādad bṛhad-vapuḥ
Synonyms
kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; tu — and then; anyatamam — another; rūpam — transcendental form; gopa-viśrambhaṇam — for generating the faith of the cowherds; gataḥ — assumed; śailaḥ — the mountain; asmi — I am; iti — these words; bruvan — saying; bhūri — abundant; balim — the offerings; ādat — He devoured; bṛhat-vapuḥ — in His huge form.

Translation
Kṛṣṇa then assumed an unprecedented, huge form to instill faith in the cowherd men. Declaring “I am Govardhana Mountain!” He ate the abundant offerings.

Text 36
तस्मै नमो व्रजजनै: सह चक्र आत्मनात्मने । अहो पश्यत शैलोऽसौ रूपी नोऽनुग्रहं व्यधात् ॥ ३६ ॥
tasmai namo vraja-janaiḥ
saha cakra ātmanātmane
aho paśyata śailo ’sau
rūpī no ’nugrahaṁ vyadhāt
Synonyms
tasmai — to Him; namaḥ — obeisances; vraja-janaiḥ — with the people of Vraja; saha — together; cakre — He made; ātmanā — by Himself; ātmane — to Himself; aho — ah; paśyata — just see; śailaḥ — hill; asau — this; rūpī — manifest in person; naḥ — upon us; anugraham — mercy; vyadhāt — has bestowed.

Translation
Together with the people of Vraja, the Lord bowed down to this form of Govardhana Hill, thus in effect offering obeisances to Himself. Then He said, “Just see how this hill has appeared in person and bestowed mercy upon us!

Text 37
एषोऽवजानतो मर्त्यान् कामरूपी वनौकस: । हन्ति ह्यस्मै नमस्याम: शर्मणे आत्मनो गवाम् ॥ ३७ ॥
eṣo ’vajānato martyān
kāma-rūpī vanaukasaḥ
hanti hy asmai namasyāmaḥ
śarmaṇe ātmano gavām
Synonyms
eṣaḥ — this one; avajānataḥ — those who are neglectful; martyān — mortals; kāma-rūpī — assuming any form at will (such as that of the snakes who live upon the hill); vana-okasaḥ — residents of the forest; hanti — will kill; hi — certainly; asmai — to him; namasyāmaḥ — let us pay our obeisances; śarmaṇe — for the protection; ātmanaḥ — of ourselves; gavām — and of the cows.

Translation
“This Govardhana Hill, assuming any form he wishes, will kill any residents of the forest who neglect him. Therefore let us pay our obeisances to him for the safety of ourselves and our cows.”

Text 38
इत्यद्रिगोद्विजमखं वासुदेवप्रचोदिता: । यथा विधाय ते गोपा सहकृष्णा व्रजं ययु: ॥ ३८ ॥
ity adri-go-dvija-makhaṁ
vāsudeva-pracoditāḥ
yathā vidhāya te gopā
saha-kṛṣṇā vrajaṁ yayuḥ
Synonyms
iti — in this manner; adri — to Govardhana Hill; go — the cows; dvija — and the brāhmaṇas; makham — the great sacrifice; vāsudeva — by Lord Kṛṣṇa; pracoditāḥ — urged; yathā — properly; vidhāya — executing; te — they; gopāḥ — the cowherds; saha-kṛṣṇāḥ — together with Lord Kṛṣṇa; vrajam — to Vraja; yayuḥ — they went.

Translation
The members of the cowherd community, having thus been inspired by Lord Vāsudeva to properly execute the sacrifice to Govardhana Hill, the cows and the brāhmaṇas, returned with Lord Kṛṣṇa to their village, Vraja.