Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवंविधानि कर्माणि गोपा: कृष्णस्य वीक्ष्य ते । अतद्वीर्यविद: प्रोचु: समभ्येत्य सुविस्मिता: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ-vidhāni karmāṇi
gopāḥ kṛṣṇasya vīkṣya te
atad-vīrya-vidaḥ procuḥ
samabhyetya su-vismitāḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam-vidhāni — like this; karmāṇi — activities; gopāḥ — the cowherd men; kṛṣṇasya — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; vīkṣya — seeing; te — they; atat-vīrya-vidaḥ — unable to understand His power; procuḥ — they spoke; samabhyetya — approaching (Nanda Mahārāja); su-vismitāḥ — very astonished.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: The cowherd men were astonished when they saw Kṛṣṇa’s activities, such as lifting Govardhana Hill. Unable to understand His transcendental potency, they approached Nanda Mahārāja and spoke as follows.

Text 2
बालकस्य यदेतानि कर्माण्यत्यद्भ‍ुतानि वै । कथमर्हत्यसौ जन्म ग्राम्येष्वात्मजुगुप्सितम् ॥ २ ॥
bālakasya yad etāni
karmāṇy aty-adbhutāni vai
katham arhaty asau janma
grāmyeṣv ātma-jugupsitam
Synonyms
bālakasya — of the boy; yat — because; etāni — these; karmāṇi — activities; ati-adbhutāni — most amazing; vai — certainly; katham — how; arhati — should deserve; asau — He; janma — birth; grāmyeṣu — among worldly men; ātma — for Himself; jugupsitam — contemptible.

Translation
[The cowherd men said:] Since this boy performs such extraordinary activities, how could He warrant a birth among worldly men like us — a birth that for Him would seem contemptible?

Text 3
य: सप्तहायनो बाल: करेणैकेन लीलया । कथं
बिभ्रद् गिरिवरं पुष्करं गजराडिव ॥ ३ ॥
yaḥ sapta-hāyano bālaḥ
kareṇaikena līlayā
kathaṁ bibhrad giri-varaṁ
puṣkaraṁ gaja-rāḍ iva
Synonyms
yaḥ — who; sapta-hāyanaḥ — seven years of age; bālaḥ — a boy; kareṇa — with a hand; ekena — one; līlayā — playfully; katham — how; bibhrat — He held up; giri-varam — the best of mountains, Govardhana; puṣkaram — a lotus flower; gaja-rāṭ — a mighty elephant; iva — as.

Translation
How could this seven-year-old boy playfully hold up the great hill Govardhana with one hand, just as a mighty elephant holds up a lotus flower?

Text 4
तोकेनामीलिताक्षेण पूतनाया महौजस:
। पीत: स्तन: सह प्राणै: कालेनेव वयस्तनो: ॥ ४ ॥
tokenāmīlitākṣeṇa
pūtanāyā mahaujasaḥ
pītaḥ stanaḥ saha prāṇaiḥ
kāleneva vayas tanoḥ
Synonyms
tokena — by the young child; ā-mīlita — almost closed; akṣeṇa — whose eyes; pūtanāyāḥ — of the witch Pūtanā; mahā-ojasaḥ — whose power was very great; pītaḥ — drunk; stanaḥ — the breast; saha — along with; prāṇaiḥ — her life air; kālena — by the force of time; iva — as; vayaḥ — the life span; tanoḥ — of a material body.

Translation
As a mere infant who had hardly yet opened His eyes, He drank the breast milk of the powerful demoness Pūtanā and then sucked out her very life air as well, just as the force of time sucks out the youth of one’s body.

Text 5
हिन्वतोऽध: शयानस्य मास्यस्य चरणावुदक् । अनोऽपतद् विपर्यस्तं रुदत: प्रपदाहतम् ॥ ५ ॥
hinvato ’dhaḥ śayānasya
māsyasya caraṇāv udak
ano ’patad viparyastaṁ
rudataḥ prapadāhatam
Synonyms
hinvataḥ — moving; adhaḥ — beneath; śayānasya — of Him who was lying; māsyasya — the child only a few months old; caraṇau — His two feet; udak — upwards; anaḥ — the cart; apatat — fell; viparyastam — turned upside-down; rudataḥ — of Him who was crying; prapada — by the tip of the foot; āhatam — struck.

Translation
Once, when only three months old, little Kṛṣṇa was crying and kicking up His feet as He lay beneath a huge cart. Then the cart fell and turned upside-down simply because it was struck by the tip of His toe.

Text 6
एकहायन आसीनो ह्रियमाणो विहायसा । दैत्येन यस्तृणावर्तमहन् कण्ठग्रहातुरम् ॥ ६ ॥
eka-hāyana āsīno
hriyamāṇo vihāyasā
daityena yas tṛṇāvartam
ahan kaṇṭha-grahāturam
Synonyms
eka-hāyanaḥ — one year old; āsīnaḥ — sitting; hriyamāṇaḥ — being taken away; vihāyasā — in the sky; daityena — by the demon; yaḥ — who; tṛṇāvartam — named Tṛṇāvarta; ahan — killed; kaṇṭha — his neck; graha — by being seized; āturam — tormented.

Translation
At the age of one, while sitting peacefully He was taken up into the sky by the demon Tṛṇāvarta. But baby Kṛṣṇa grabbed the demon’s neck, causing him great pain, and thus killed him.

Text 7
क्‍वचिद्धैयङ्गवस्तैन्ये मात्रा बद्ध उदूखले । गच्छन्नर्जुनयोर्मध्ये बाहुभ्यां तावपातयत् ॥ ७ ॥
kvacid dhaiyaṅgava-stainye
mātrā baddha udūkhale
gacchann arjunayor madhye
bāhubhyāṁ tāv apātayat
Synonyms
kvacit — once; haiyaṅgava — butter; stainye — engaged in stealing; mātrā — by His mother; baddhaḥ — bound up; udūkhale — to a large mortar; gacchan — moving; arjunayoḥ — the twin arjuna trees; madhye — between; bāhubhyām — by His hands; tau apātayat — He made them fall.

Translation
Once, His mother tied Him with ropes to a mortar because she had caught Him stealing butter. Then, crawling on His hands, He dragged the mortar between a pair of arjuna trees and pulled them down.

Text 8
वने सञ्चारयन् वत्सान् सरामो बालकैर्वृत: । हन्तुकामं बकं दोर्भ्यां मुखतोऽरिमपाटयत् ॥ ८ ॥
vane sañcārayan vatsān
sa-rāmo bālakair vṛtaḥ
hantu-kāmaṁ bakaṁ dorbhyāṁ
mukhato ’rim apāṭayat
Synonyms
vane — in the forest; sañcārayan — grazing; vatsān — the calves; sarāmaḥ — together with Lord Balarāma; bālakaiḥ — by the cowherd boys; vṛtaḥ — surrounded; hantu-kāmam — desiring to kill; bakam — the demon Baka; dorbhyām — with His arms; mukhataḥ — from the mouth; arim — the enemy; apāṭayat — tore apart.

Translation
Another time, when Kṛṣṇa was tending the calves in the forest together with Balarāma and the cowherd boys, the demon Bakāsura came with the intention of killing Kṛṣṇa. But Kṛṣṇa seized this inimical demon by the mouth and tore him apart.

Text 9
वत्सेषु वत्सरूपेण प्रविशन्तं जिघांसया । हत्वा न्यपातयत्तेन कपित्थानि च लीलया ॥ ९ ॥
vatseṣu vatsa-rūpeṇa
praviśantaṁ jighāṁsayā
hatvā nyapātayat tena
kapitthāni ca līlayā
Synonyms
vatseṣu — among the calves; vatsa-rūpeṇa — appearing as if another calf; praviśantam — who had entered; jighāṁsayā — wanting to kill; hatvā — killing him; nyapātayat — He made to fall; tena — by him; kapitthāni — the kapittha fruits; ca — and; līlayā — as a sport.

Translation
Desiring to kill Kṛṣṇa, the demon Vatsa disguised himself as a calf and entered among Kṛṣṇa’s calves. But Kṛṣṇa killed the demon and, using his body, enjoyed the sport of knocking kapittha fruits down from the trees.

Text 10
हत्वा रासभदैतेयं तद्ब‍न्धूंश्च बलान्वित: । चक्रे तालवनं क्षेमं परिपक्‍वफलान्वितम् ॥ १० ॥
hatvā rāsabha-daiteyaṁ
tad-bandhūṁś ca balānvitaḥ
cakre tāla-vanaṁ kṣemaṁ
paripakva-phalānvitam
Synonyms
hatvā — killing; rāsabha — who appeared as a jackass; daiteyam — the descendant of Diti; tat-bandhūn — the demon’s companions; ca — and; bala-anvitaḥ — accompanied by Balarāma; cakre — He made; tāla-vanam — the Tālavana forest; kṣemam — auspicious; paripakva — fully ripened; phala — with fruits; anvitam — filled.

Translation
Together with Lord Balarāma, Kṛṣṇa killed the jackass demon and all his friends, thereby securing the safety of the Tālavana forest, which abounded with fully ripened palm fruits.

Text 11
प्रलम्बं घातयित्वोग्रं बलेन बलशालिना । अमोचयद् व्रजपशून्गोपांश्चारण्यवह्नित: ॥ ११ ॥
pralambaṁ ghātayitvograṁ
balena bala-śālinā
amocayad vraja-paśūn
gopāṁś cāraṇya-vahnitaḥ
Synonyms
pralambam — the demon named Pralamba; ghāyayitvā — arranging to be killed; ugram — terrible; balena — by Lord Balarāma; bala-śālinā — who is very powerful; amocayat — He liberated; vraja-paśūn — the animals of Vraja; gopān — the cowherd boys; ca — and; āraṇya — of the forest; vahnitaḥ — from the fire.

Translation
After arranging for the mighty Lord Balarāma to kill the terrible demon Pralamba, Kṛṣṇa saved Vraja’s cowherd boys and their animals from a forest fire.

Text 12
आशीविषतमाहीन्द्रं दमित्वा विमदं ह्रदात् । प्रसह्योद्वास्य यमुनां चक्रेऽसौ निर्विषोदकाम् ॥ १२ ॥
āśī-viṣatamāhīndraṁ
damitvā vimadaṁ hradāt
prasahyodvāsya yamunāṁ
cakre ’sau nirviṣodakām
Synonyms
āśī — of his fangs; viṣa-tama — having the most powerful poison; ahi — of the snakes; indram — the chief; damitvā — subduing; vimadam — whose pride was removed; hradāt — from the lake; prasahya — by force; udvāsya — sending him away; yamunām — the river Yamunā; cakre — made; asau — He; nirviṣa — free from poison; udakām — its water.

Translation
Kṛṣṇa chastised the most poisonous serpent, Kāliya, and after humbling him He drove him forcibly from the lake of the Yamunā. In this way the Lord made the water of that river free of the snake’s powerful poison.

Text 13
दुस्त्यजश्चानुरागोऽस्मिन् सर्वेषां नो व्रजौकसाम् । नन्दते तनयेऽस्मासु तस्याप्यौत्पत्तिक: कथम् ॥ १३ ॥
dustyajaś cānurāgo ’smin
sarveṣāṁ no vrajaukasām
nanda te tanaye ’smāsu
tasyāpy autpattikaḥ katham
Synonyms
dustyajaḥ — impossible to give up; ca — and; anurāgaḥ — loving affection; asmin — for Him; sarveṣām — on the part of all; naḥ — us; vraja-okasām — the residents of Vraja; nanda — dear Nanda Mahārāja; te — your; tanaye — for the son; asmāsu — toward us; tasya — on His part; api — also; autpattikaḥ — natural; katham — how.

Translation
Dear Nanda, how is it that we and all the other residents of Vraja cannot give up our constant affection for your son? And how is it that He is so spontaneously attracted to us?

Text 14
क्‍व सप्तहायनो बाल: क्‍व महाद्रिविधारणम् । ततो नो जायते शङ्का व्रजनाथ तवात्मजे ॥ १४ ॥
kva sapta-hāyano bālaḥ
kva mahādri-vidhāraṇam
tato no jāyate śaṅkā
vraja-nātha tavātmaje
Synonyms
kva — where, in comparison; sapta-hāyanaḥ — seven years old; bālaḥ — this boy; kva — where; mahā-adri — of the great mountain; vidhāraṇam — the lifting; tataḥ — thus; naḥ — for us; jāyate — arises; śaṅkā — doubt; vraja-nātha — O master of Vraja; tava — your; ātmaje — concerning the son.

Translation
On the one hand this boy is only seven years old, and on the other we see that He has lifted the great hill Govardhana. Therefore, O King of Vraja, a doubt about your son arises within us.

Text 15
श्रीनन्द उवाच
श्रूयतां मे वचो गोपा व्येतु शङ्का च वोऽर्भके । एनं कुमारमुद्दिश्य गर्गो मे यदुवाच ह ॥ १५ ॥
śrī-nanda uvāca
śrūyatāṁ me vaco gopā
vyetu śaṅkā ca vo ’rbhake
enam kumāram uddiśya
gargo me yad uvāca ha
Synonyms
śrī-nandaḥ uvāca — Śrī Nanda Mahārāja said; śrūyatām — please hear; me — my; vacaḥ — words; gopāḥ — my dear cowherd men; vyetu — let it go away; śaṅkā — the doubt; ca — and; vaḥ — your; arbhake — concerning the boy; enam — this; kumāram — to the child; uddiśya — referring; gargaḥ — the sage Garga; me — to me; yat — which; uvāca — spoke; ha — in the past.

Translation
Nanda Mahārāja replied: O cowherd men, just hear my words and let all your doubts concerning my son be gone. Some time ago Garga Muni spoke to me as follows about this boy.

Text 16
वर्णास्त्रय: किलास्यासन् गृह्णतोऽनुयुगं तनू: । शुक्लो रक्तस्तथा पीत इदानीं कृष्णतां गत: ॥ १६ ॥
varṇās trayaḥ kilāsyāsan
gṛhṇato ’nu-yugaṁ tanūḥ
śuklo raktas tathā pīta
idānīṁ kṛṣṇatāṁ gataḥ
Synonyms
varṇāḥ trayaḥ — three colors; kila — indeed; asya — by your son Kṛṣṇa; āsan — were assumed; gṛhṇataḥ — accepting; anu-yugam tanūḥ — transcendental bodies according to the different yugas; śuklaḥ — sometimes white; raktaḥ — sometimes red; tathā — as well as; pītaḥ — sometimes yellow; idānīm kṛṣṇatām gataḥ — at the present moment He has assumed a blackish color.

Translation
[Garga Muni had said:] Your son Kṛṣṇa appears as an incarnation in every millennium. In the past He assumed three different colors — white, red and yellow — and now He has appeared in a blackish color.

Text 17
प्रागयं वसुदेवस्य क्‍वचिज्जातस्तवात्मज: । वासुदेव इति श्रीमानभिज्ञा: सम्प्रचक्षते ॥ १७ ॥
prāgayaṁ vasudevasya
kvacij jātas tavātmajaḥ
vāsudeva iti śrīmān
abhijñāḥ sampracakṣate
Synonyms
prāk — before; ayam — this child; vasudevasya — of Vasudeva; kvacit — sometimes; jātaḥ — was born; tava — your; ātmajaḥ — Kṛṣṇa, who has taken birth as your child; vāsudevaḥ — therefore He may be given the name Vāsudeva; iti — thus; śrīmān — very beautiful; abhijñāḥ — those who are learned; sampracakṣate — also say that Kṛṣṇa is Vāsudeva.

Translation
For many reasons, this beautiful son of yours sometimes appeared previously as the son of Vasudeva. Therefore, those who are learned sometimes call this child Vāsudeva.

Text 18
बहूनि सन्ति नामानि रूपाणि च सुतस्य ते । गुणकर्मानुरूपाणि तान्यहं वेद नो जना: ॥ १८ ॥
bahūni santi nāmāni
rūpāṇi ca sutasya te
guṇa-karmānurūpāṇi
tāny ahaṁ veda no janāḥ
Synonyms
bahūni — various; santi — there are; nāmāni — names; rūpāṇi — forms; ca — also; sutasya — of the son; te — your; guṇa-karma-anurūpāṇi — according to His attributes and activities; tāni — them; aham — I; veda — know; na u janāḥ — not ordinary persons.

Translation
For this son of yours there are many forms and names according to His transcendental qualities and activities. These are known to me, but people in general do not understand them.

Text 19
एष व: श्रेय आधास्यद् गोपगोकुलनन्दन: । अनेन सर्वदुर्गाणि यूयमञ्जस्तरिष्यथ ॥ १९ ॥
eṣa vaḥ śreya ādhāsyad
gopa-gokula-nandanaḥ
anena sarva-durgāṇi
yūyam añjas tariṣyatha
Synonyms
eṣaḥ — this child; vaḥ — for all of you people; śreyaḥ ādhāsyat — will act all-auspiciously; gopa-gokula-nandanaḥ — just like a cowherd boy born in a family of cowherd men as the son of the estate of Gokula; anena — by Him; sarva-durgāṇi — all kinds of miserable conditions; yūyam — all of you; añjaḥ — easily; tariṣyatha — will overcome.

Translation
To increase the transcendental bliss of the cowherd men of Gokula, this child will always act auspiciously for you. And by His grace only, you will surpass all difficulties.

Text 20
पुरानेन व्रजपते साधवो दस्युपीडिता: । अराजके रक्ष्यमाणा जिग्युर्दस्यून्समेधिता: ॥ २० ॥
purānena vraja-pate
sādhavo dasyu-pīḍitāḥ
arājake rakṣyamāṇā
jigyur dasyūn samedhitāḥ
Synonyms
purā — formerly; anena — by Kṛṣṇa; vraja-pate — O King of Vraja; sādhavaḥ — those who were honest; dasyu-pīḍitāḥ — being disturbed by rogues and thieves; arājake — when there was an irregular government; rakṣyamāṇāḥ — were protected; jigyuḥ — conquered; dasyūn — the rogues and thieves; samedhitāḥ — flourished.

Translation
O Nanda Mahārāja, as recorded in history, when there was an irregular, incapable government, Indra having been dethroned, and when honest people were being harassed and disturbed by thieves, this child appeared in order to curb the rogues and to protect the people and enable them to flourish.

Text 21
य एतस्मिन् महाभागे प्रीतिं कुर्वन्ति मानवा:
। नारयोऽभिभवन्त्येतान् विष्णुपक्षानिवासुरा: ॥ २१ ॥
ya etasmin mahā-bhāge
prītiṁ kurvanti mānavāḥ
nārayo ’bhibhavanty etān
viṣṇu-pakṣān ivāsurāḥ
Synonyms
ye — those persons who; etasmin — unto this child; mahā-bhāge — most auspicious; prītim — affection; kurvanti — execute; mānavāḥ — such persons; na — not; arayaḥ — their enemies; abhibhavanti — do overcome; etān — those who are attached to Kṛṣṇa; viṣṇu-pakṣān — the demigods, who always have Lord Viṣṇu on their side; iva — like; asurāḥ — the demons.

Translation
Demons cannot harm the demigods, who always have Lord Viṣṇu on their side. Similarly, any person or group attached to all-auspicious Kṛṣṇa cannot be defeated by enemies.

Text 22
तस्मान्नन्द कुमारोऽयं नारायणसमो गुणै:
। श्रिया कीर्त्यानुभावेन तत्कर्मसु न विस्मय: ॥ २२ ॥
tasmān nanda kumāro ’yaṁ
nārāyaṇa-samo guṇaiḥ
śriyā kīrtyānubhāvena
tat-karmasu na vismayaḥ
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; nanda — O Nanda Mahārāja; kumāraḥ — child; ayam — this; nārāyaṇa-samaḥ — is as good as Nārāyaṇa; guṇaiḥ — by His qualities; śriyā — by His opulence; kīrtyā — especially by His name and fame; anubhāvena — and by His influence; tat — His; karmasu — concerning the activities; na — there is no; vismayaḥ — surprise.

Translation

Therefore, O Nanda Mahārāja, this child of yours is as good as Nārāyaṇa. In His transcendental qualities, opulence, name, fame and influence, He is exactly like Nārāyaṇa. Thus you should not be astonished by His activities.

Text 23
इत्यद्धा मां समादिश्य गर्गे च स्वगृहं गते । मन्ये नारायणस्यांशं कृष्णमक्लिष्टकारिणम् ॥ २३ ॥
ity addhā māṁ samādiśya
garge ca sva-gṛhaṁ gate
manye nārāyaṇasyāṁśaṁ
kṛṣṇam akliṣṭa-kāriṇam
Synonyms
iti — thus speaking; addhā — directly; mām — me; samādiśya — advising; garge — Gargācārya; ca — and; sva-gṛham — to his home; gate — going; manye — I consider; nārāyaṇasya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa; aṁśam — an empowered expansion; kṛṣṇam — Kṛṣṇa; akliṣṭa-kāriṇam — who keeps us free from misery.

Translation
[Nanda Mahārāja continued:] After Garga Ṛṣi spoke these words to me and returned home, I began to consider that Kṛṣṇa, who keeps us free from trouble, is actually an expansion of Lord Nārāyaṇa.

Text 24
इति नन्दवच: श्रुत्वा गर्गगीतं व्रजौकस: । मुदिता नन्दमानर्चु: कृष्णं च गतविस्मया: ॥ २४ ॥
iti nanda-vacaḥ śrutvā
garga-gītaṁ taṁ vrajaukasaḥ
muditā nandam ānarcuḥ
kṛṣṇaṁ ca gata-vismayāḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus; nanda-vacaḥ — the words of Nanda Mahārāja; śrutvā — hearing; garga-gītam — the statements of Garga Ṛṣi; vraja-okasaḥ — the residents of Vraja; muditāḥ — enlivened; nandam — Nanda Mahārāja; ānarcuḥ — they honored; kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; ca — and; gata — gone; vismayāḥ — their perplexity.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Having heard Nanda Mahārāja relate the statements of Garga Muni, the residents of Vṛndāvana became enlivened. Their perplexity was gone, and they worshiped Nanda and Lord Kṛṣṇa with great respect.

Text 25
देवे वर्षति यज्ञविप्लवरुषा वज्राश्मवर्षानिलै:सीदत्पालपशुस्त्रियात्मशरणं द‍ृष्ट्वानुकम्प्युत्स्मयन् । उत्पाट्यैककरेण शैलमबलो लीलोच्छिलीन्ध्रं यथाबिभ्रद् गोष्ठमपान्महेन्द्रमदभित् प्रीयान्न इन्द्रो गवाम् ॥ २५ ॥
deve varṣati yajña-viplava-ruṣā vajrāsma-varṣānilaiḥ
sīdat-pāla-paśu-striy ātma-śaraṇaṁ dṛṣṭvānukampy utsmayan
utpāṭyaika-kareṇa śailam abalo līlocchilīndhraṁ yathā
bibhrad goṣṭham apān mahendra-mada-bhit prīyān na indro gavām
Synonyms
deve — when the demigod Indra; varṣati — caused rain; yajña — of his sacrifice; viplava — due to the disturbances; ruṣā — out of anger; vajra — with lightning bolts; aśma-varṣa — hail; anilaiḥ — and winds; sīdat — suffering; pāla — the cowherds; paśu — animals; stri — and women; ātma — Himself; śaraṇam — being their only shelter; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; anukampī — very compassionate by nature; utsmayan — smiling broadly; utpāṭya — picking up; eka-kareṇa — in one hand; śailam — the hill, Govardhana; abalaḥ — a small child; līlā — in play; ucchilīndhram — a mushroom; yathā — just as; bibhrat — He held; goṣṭham — the cowherd community; apāt — He protected; mahā-indra — of King Indra; mada — of the false pride; bhit — the destroyer; prīyāt — may He be satisfied; naḥ — with us; indraḥ — the Lord; gavām — of the cows.

Translation
Indra became angry when his sacrifice was disrupted, and thus he caused rain and hail to fall on Gokula, accompanied by lightning and powerful winds, all of which brought great suffering to the cowherds, animals and women there. When Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is by nature always compassionate, saw the condition of those who had only Him as their shelter, He smiled broadly and lifted Govardhana Hill with one hand, just as a small child picks up a mushroom to play with it. Holding up the hill, He protected the cowherd community. May He, Govinda, the Lord of the cows and the destroyer of Indra’s false pride, be pleased with us.