Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
गोवर्धने धृते शैले आसाराद् रक्षिते व्रजे । गोलोकादाव्रजत्कृष्णं सुरभि: शक्र एव च ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
govardhane dhṛte śaile
āsārād rakṣite vraje
go-lokād āvrajat kṛṣṇaṁ
surabhiḥ śakra eva ca
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; govardhane — Govardhana; dhṛte — having been held; śaile — the hill; āsārāt — from the rainfall; rakṣite — having been protected; vraje — Vraja; go-lokāt — from the planet of the cows; āvrajat — came; kṛṣṇam — to Kṛṣṇa; surabhiḥ — mother Surabhi; śakraḥ — Indra; eva — also; ca — and.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: After Kṛṣṇa had lifted Govardhana Hill and thus protected the inhabitants of Vraja from the terrible rainfall, Surabhi, the mother of the cows, came from her planet to see Kṛṣṇa. She was accompanied by Indra.

Text 2
विविक्त उपसङ्गम्य व्रीडीत: कृतहेलन: । पस्पर्श पादयोरेनं किरीटेनार्कवर्चसा ॥ २ ॥
vivikta upasaṅgamya
vrīḍītaḥ kṛta-helanaḥ
pasparśa pādayor enaṁ
kirīṭenārka-varcasā
Synonyms
vivikte — in a solitary place; upasaṅgamya — approaching; vrīḍitaḥ — ashamed; kṛta-helanaḥ — having committed offense; pasparśa — he touched; pādayoḥ — upon His feet; enam — Him; kirīṭena — with his helmet; arka — like the sun; varcasā — the effulgence of which.

Translation
Indra was very ashamed of having offended the Lord. Approaching Him in a solitary place, Indra fell down and lay his helmet, whose effulgence was as brilliant as the sun, upon the Lord’s lotus feet.

Text 3
द‍ृष्टश्रुतानुभावोऽस्य कृष्णस्यामिततेजस: । नष्टत्रिलोकेशमद इदमाह कृताञ्जलि: ॥ ३ ॥
dṛṣṭa-śrutānubhāvo ’sya
kṛṣṇasyāmita-tejasaḥ
naṣṭa-tri-lokeśa-mada
idam āha kṛtāñjaliḥ
Synonyms
dṛṣṭa — seen; śruta — heard; anubhāvaḥ — the power; asya — of this; kṛṣṇasya — Lord Kṛṣṇa; amita — immeasurable; tejasaḥ — whose potencies; naṣṭa — destroyed; tri-loka — of the three worlds; īśa — of being the lord; madaḥ — his intoxication; idam — these words; āha — spoke; kṛta-añjaliḥ — joining his palms in supplication.

Translation
Indra had now heard of and seen the transcendental power of omnipotent Kṛṣṇa, and his false pride in being the lord of the three worlds was thus defeated. Holding his hands together in supplication, he addressed the Lord as follows.

Text 4
इन्द्र उवाच
विशुद्धसत्त्वं तव धाम शान्तंतपोमयं ध्वस्तरजस्तमस्कम् । मायामयोऽयं गुणसम्प्रवाहोन विद्यते तेऽग्रहणानुबन्ध: ॥ ४ ॥
indra uvāca
viśuddha-sattvaṁ tava dhāma śāntaṁ
tapo-mayaṁ dhvasta-rajas-tamaskam
māyā-mayo ’yaṁ guṇa-sampravāho
na vidyate te grahaṇānubandhaḥ
Synonyms
indraḥ uvāca — Indra said; viśuddha-sattvam — manifesting transcendental goodness; tava — Your; dhāma — form; śāntam — changeless; tapaḥ-mayam — full of knowledge; dhvasta — destroyed; rajaḥ — the mode of passion; tamaskam — and the mode of ignorance; māyā-mayaḥ — based on illusion; ayam — this; guṇa — of the modes of material nature; sampravāhaḥ — the great flux; na vidyate — is not present; te — within You; agrahaṇa — ignorance; anubandhaḥ — which is due to.

Translation
King Indra said: Your transcendental form, a manifestation of pure goodness, is undisturbed by change, shining with knowledge and devoid of passion and ignorance. In You does not exist the mighty flow of the modes of material nature, which is based on illusion and ignorance.

Text 5
कुतो नु तद्धेतव ईश तत्कृतालोभादयो येऽबुधलिङ्गभावा: । तथापि दण्डं भगवान् बिभर्तिधर्मस्य गुप्‍त्यै लनिग्रहाय ॥ ५ ॥
kuto nu tad-dhetava īśa tat-kṛtā
lobhādayo ye ’budha-linga-bhāvāḥ
tathāpi daṇḍaṁ bhagavān bibharti
dharmasya guptyai khala-nigrahāya
Synonyms
kutaḥ — how; nu — certainly; tat — of that (existence of the material body); hetavaḥ — the causes; īśa — O Lord; tat-kṛtāḥ — produced by one’s connection with the material body; lobha-ādayaḥ — greed and so forth; ye — which; abudha — of an ignorant person; linga-bhāvāḥ — symptoms; tathā api — nevertheless; daṇḍam — punishment; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bibharti — wields; dharmasya — of the principles of religion; guptyai — for the protection; khala — of wicked persons; nigrahāya — for the chastisement.

Translation
How, then, could there exist in You the symptoms of an ignorant person — such as greed, lust, anger and envy — which are produced by one’s previous involvement in material existence and which cause one to become further entangled in material existence? And yet as the Supreme Lord You impose punishment to protect religious principles and curb down the wicked.

Text 6
पिता गुरुस्त्वं जगतामधीशोदुरत्यय: काल उपात्तदण्ड: । हिताय चेच्छातनुभि: समीहसेमानं विधुन्वन् जगदीशमानिनाम् ॥ ६ ॥
pitā gurus tvaṁ jagatām adhīśo
duratyayaḥ kāla upātta-daṇḍaḥ
hitāya cecchā-tanubhiḥ samīhase
mānaṁ vidhunvan jagad-īśa-māninām
Synonyms
pitā — the father; guruḥ — the spiritual master; tvam — You; jagatām — of the entire universe; adhīśaḥ — the supreme controller; duratyayaḥ — insurmountable; kālaḥ — time; upātta — wielding; daṇḍaḥ — punishment; hitāya — for the benefit; ca — and; icchā — assumed by Your own free will; tanubhiḥ — by Your transcendental forms; samīhase — You endeavor; mānam — the false pride; vidhunvan — eradicating; jagat-īśa — lords of the universe; māninām — of those who presume themselves to be.

Translation
You are the father and spiritual master of this entire universe, and also its supreme controller. You are insurmountable time, imposing punishment upon the sinful for their own benefit. Indeed, in Your various incarnations, selected by Your own free will, You act decisively to remove the false pride of those who presume themselves masters of this world.

Text 7
ये मद्विधाज्ञा जगदीशमानिन-स्त्वां वीक्ष्य कालेऽभयमाशु तन्मदम् । हित्वार्यमार्गं प्रभजन्त्यपस्मयाईहा खलानामपि तेऽनुशासनम् ॥ ७ ॥
ye mad-vidhājñā jagad-īśa-māninas
tvāṁ vīkṣya kāle ’bhayam āśu tan-madam
hitvārya-mārgaṁ prabhajanty apasmayā
īhā khalānām api te ’nuśāsanam
Synonyms
ye — those who; mat-vidha — like me; ajñāḥ — foolish persons; jagat-īśa — as lords of the universe; māninaḥ — falsely identifying themselves; tvām — You; vīkṣya — seeing; kāle — at time (of fear); abhayam — fearless; āśu — quickly; tat — their; madam — false pride; hitvā — abandoning; ārya — of devotees progressing in spiritual life; mārgam — the path; prabhajanti — they take to fully; apa-smayāḥ — free of pride; īhā — the activity; khalānām — of the wicked; api — indeed; te — by You; anuśāsanam — the instruction.

Translation
Even fools like me, who proudly think themselves universal lords, quickly give up their conceit and directly take to the path of the spiritually progressive when they see You are fearless even in the face of time. Thus You punish the mischievous only to instruct them.

Text 8
स त्वं ममैश्वर्यमदप्लुतस्यकृतागसस्तेऽविदुष: प्रभावम् । क्षन्तुं प्रभोऽथार्हसि मूढचेतसोमैवं पुनर्भून्मतिरीश मेऽसती ॥ ८ ॥
sa tvaṁ mamaiśvarya-mada-plutasya
kṛtāgasas te ’viduṣaḥ prabhāvam
kṣantuṁ prabho ’thārhasi mūḍha-cetaso
maivaṁ punar bhūn matir īśa me ’satī
Synonyms
saḥ — He; tvam — Yourself; mama — of me; aiśvarya — of rulership; mada — in the intoxication; plutasya — who is submerged; kṛta — having committed; āgasaḥ — sinful offense; te — Your; aviduṣaḥ — not knowing; prabhāvam — the transcendental influence; kṣantum — to forgive; prabho — O master; atha — therefore; arhasi — You should; mūḍha — foolish; cetasaḥ — whose intelligence; mā — never; evam — thus; punaḥ — again; bhūt — may it be; matiḥ — consciousness; īśa — O Lord; me — my; asatī — impure.

Translation
Engrossed in pride over my ruling power, ignorant of Your majesty, I offended You. O Lord, may You forgive me. My intelligence was bewildered, but let my consciousness never again be so impure.

Text 9
तवावतारोऽयमधोक्षजेहभुवो भराणामुरुभारजन्मनाम् । चमूपतीनामभवाय देवभवाय युष्मच्चरणानुवर्तिनाम् ॥ ९ ॥
tavāvatāro ’yam adhokṣajeha
bhuvo bharāṇām uru-bhāra-janmanām
camū-patīnām abhavāya deva
bhavāya yuṣmac-caraṇānuvartinām
Synonyms
tava — Your; avatāraḥ — descent; ayam — this; adhokṣaja — O transcendental Lord; iha — into this world; bhuvaḥ — of the earth; bharāṇām — who constitute a great burden; uru-bhāra — to many disturbances; janmanām — who have given rise; camū-patīnām — of military leaders; abhavāya — for the destruction; deva — O Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhavāya — for the auspicious benefit; yuṣmat — Your; caraṇa — lotus feet; anuvartinām — of those who serve.

Translation
You descend into this world, O transcendent Lord, to destroy the warlords who burden the earth and create many terrible disturbances. O Lord, you simultaneously act for the welfare of those who faithfully serve Your lotus feet.

Text 10
नमस्तुभ्यं भगवते पुरुषाय महात्मने । वासुदेवाय कृष्णाय सात्वतां पतये नम: ॥ १० ॥
namas tubhyaṁ bhagavate
puruṣāya mahātmane
vāsudevāya kṛṣṇāya
sātvatāṁ pataye namaḥ
Synonyms
namaḥ — obeisances; tubhyam — unto You; bhagavate — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puruṣāya — the Lord dwelling within the hearts of all; mahā-ātmane — the great Soul; vāsudevāya — to Him who dwells everywhere; kṛṣṇāya — Śrī Kṛṣṇa; sātvatām — of the Yadu dynasty; pataye — to the master; namaḥ — obeisances.

Translation
Obeisances unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the great Soul, who are all-pervading and who reside in the hearts of all. My obeisances unto You, Kṛṣṇa, the chief of the Yadu dynasty.

Text 11
स्वच्छन्दोपात्तदेहाय विशुद्धज्ञानमूर्तये । सर्वस्मै सर्वबीजाय सर्वभूतात्मने नम: ॥ ११ ॥
svacchandopātta-dehāya
viśuddha-jñāna-mūrtaye
sarvasmai sarva-bījāya
sarva-bhūtātmane namaḥ
Synonyms
sva — of His own (devotees); chanda — according to the desire; upātta — who assumes; dehāya — His transcendental bodies; viśuddha — perfectly pure; jñāna — knowledge; mūrtaye — whose form; sarvasmai — to Him who is everything; sarva-bījāya — who is the seed of all; sarva-bhūta — of all created beings; ātmane — who is the indwelling Soul; namaḥ — obeisances.

Translation
Unto Him who assumes transcendental bodies according to the desires of His devotees, unto Him whose form is itself pure consciousness, unto Him who is everything, who is the seed of everything and who is the Soul of all creatures, I offer my obeisances.

Text 12
मयेदं भगवन् गोष्ठनाशायासारवायुभि: । चेष्टितं विहते यज्ञे मानिना तीव्रमन्युना ॥ १२ ॥
mayedaṁ bhagavan goṣṭha-
nāśāyāsāra-vāyubhiḥ
ceṣṭitaṁ vihate yajñe
māninā tīvra-manyunā
Synonyms
mayā — by me; idam — this; bhagavan — O Lord; goṣṭha — of Your cowherd community; nāśāya — for the destruction; āsāra — by hard rain; vāyubhiḥ — and wind; ceṣṭitam — enacted; vihate — when it was disrupted; yajñe — my sacrifice; māninā — (by me) who was falsely proud; tīvra — fierce; manyunā — whose anger.

Translation
My dear Lord, when my sacrifice was disrupted I became fiercely angry because of false pride. Thus I tried to destroy Your cowherd community with severe rain and wind.

Text 13
त्वयेशानुगृहीतोऽस्मि ध्वस्तस्तम्भो वृथोद्यम: । ईश्वरं गुरुमात्मानं त्वामहं शरणं गत: ॥ १३ ॥
tvayeśānugṛhīto ’smi
dhvasta-stambho vṛthodyamaḥ
īśvaraṁ gurum ātmānaṁ
tvām ahaṁ śaraṇaṁ gataḥ
Synonyms
tvayā — by You; īśa — O Lord; anugṛhītaḥ — shown mercy; asmi — I am; dhvasta — shattered; stambhaḥ — my false pride; vṛthā — fruitless; udyamaḥ — my attempt; īśvaram — the Supreme Lord; gurum — the spiritual master; ātmānam — the true Self; tvām — to You; aham — I; śaraṇam — for shelter; gataḥ — have come.

Translation
O Lord, You have shown mercy to me by shattering my false pride and defeating my attempt [to punish Vṛndāvana]. To You, the Supreme Lord, spiritual master and Supreme Soul, I have now come for shelter.

Text 14
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं सङ्कीर्तित: कृष्णो मघोना भगवानमुम् । मेघगम्भीरया वाचा प्रहसन्निदमब्रवीत् ॥ १४ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ saṅkīrtitaḥ kṛṣṇo
maghonā bhagavān amum
megha-gambhīrayā vācā
prahasann idam abravīt
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — in this manner; saṅkīrtitaḥ — glorified; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; maghonā — by Indra; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; amum — to him; megha — like the clouds; gambhīrayā — grave; vācā — with words; prahasan — smiling; idam — the following; abravīt — spoke.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus glorified by Indra, Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, smiled and then spoke to him as follows in a voice resonant like the clouds.

Text 15
श्रीभगवानुवाच
मया तेऽकारि मघवन् मखभङ्गोऽनुगृह्णता । मदनुस्मृतये नित्यं मत्तस्येन्द्र श्रिया भृशम् ॥ १५ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
mayā te ’kāri maghavan
makha-bhaṅgo ’nugṛhṇatā
mad-anusmṛtaye nityaṁ
mattasyendra-śriyā bhṛśam
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; mayā — by Me; te — unto you; akāri — has been done; maghavan — My dear Indra; makha — of your sacrifice; bhaṅgaḥ — the stopping; anugṛhṇatā — acting to show mercy to you; mat-anusmṛtaye — for the sake of remembrance of Me; nityam — constant; mattasya — of one intoxicated; indra-śriyā — with the opulence of Indra; bhṛśam — greatly.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Indra, it was out of mercy that I stopped the sacrifice meant for you. You were greatly intoxicated by your opulence as King of heaven, and I wanted you to always remember Me.

Text 16
मामैश्वर्यश्रीमदान्धो दण्डपाणिं न पश्यति । तं भ्रंशयामि सम्पद्‌भ्यो यस्य चेच्छाम्यनुग्रहम् ॥ १६ ॥
mām aiśvarya-śrī-madāndho
daṇḍa pāṇiṁ na paśyati
taṁ bhraṁśayāmi sampadbhyo
yasya cecchāmy anugraham
Synonyms
mām — Me; aiśvarya — of his power; śrī — and opulence; mada — by the intoxication; andhaḥ — rendered blind; daṇḍa — with the rod of punishment; pāṇim — in My hand; na paśyati — one does not see; tam — him; bhraṁśayāmi — I make fall; sampadbhyaḥ — from his material assets; yasya — for whom; ca — and; icchāmi — I desire; anugraham — benefit.

Translation
A man blinded by intoxication with his power and opulence cannot see Me nearby with the rod of punishment in My hand. If I desire his real welfare, I drag him down from his materially fortunate position.

Text 17
गम्यतां शक्र भद्रं व: क्रियतां मेऽनुशासनम् । स्थीयतां स्वाधिकारेषु युक्तैर्व: स्तम्भवर्जितै: ॥ १७ ॥
gamyatāṁ śakra bhadraṁ vaḥ
kriyatāṁ me ’nuśāsanam
sthīyatāṁ svādhikāreṣu
yuktair vaḥ stambha-varjitaiḥ
Synonyms
gamyatām — you may go; śakra — O Indra; bhadram — good fortune; vaḥ — unto you; kriyatām — you should execute; me — My; anuśāsanam — order; sthīyatām — you may remain; sva — in your own; adhikāreṣu — responsibilities; yuktaiḥ — soberly engaged; vaḥ — you; stambha — false pride; varjitaiḥ — devoid of.

Translation
Indra, you may now go. Execute My order and remain in your appointed position as King of heaven. But be sober, without false pride.

Text 18
अथाह सुरभि: कृष्णमभिवन्द्यमनस्विनी । स्वसन्तानैरुपामन्‍त्र्य गोपरूपिणमीश्वरम् ॥ १८ ॥
athāha surabhiḥ kṛṣṇam
abhivandya manasvinī
sva-santānair upāmantrya
gopa-rūpiṇam īśvaram
Synonyms
atha — then; āha — spoke; surabhiḥ — the mother of the cows, Surabhi; kṛṣṇam — to Kṛṣṇa; abhivandya — offering respects; manasvinī — peaceful in mind; sva-santānaiḥ — together with her progeny, the cows; upāmantrya — begging for His attention; gopa-rūpiṇam — appearing as a cowherd boy; īśvaram — the Supreme Lord.

Translation
Mother Surabhi, along with her progeny, the cows, then offered her obeisances to Lord Kṛṣṇa. Respectfully requesting His attention, the gentle lady addressed the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who was present before her as a cowherd boy.

Text 19
सुरभिरुवाच
कृष्ण कृष्ण महायोगिन् विश्वात्मन् विश्वसम्भव । भवता लोकनाथेन सनाथा वयमच्युत ॥ १९ ॥
surabhir uvāca
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa mahā-yogin
viśvātman viśva-sambhava
bhavatā loka-nāthena
sa-nāthā vayam acyuta
Synonyms
surabhiḥ uvāca — Surabhi said; kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa — O Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa; mahā yogin — O greatest of mystics; viśva-ātman — O Soul of the universe; viśva-sambhava — O origin of the universe; bhavatā — by You; loka nāthena — the master of the world; sa-nāthāḥ — having a master; vayam — we; acyuta — O infallible one.

Translation
Mother Surabhi said: O Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, greatest of mystics! O Soul and origin of the universe! You are the master of the world, and by Your grace, O infallible Lord, we have You as our master.

Text 20
त्वं न: परमकं दैवं त्वं न इन्द्रो जगत्पते । भवाय भव गोविप्रदेवानां ये च साधव: ॥ २० ॥
tvaṁ naḥ paramakaṁ daivaṁ
tvaṁ na indro jagat-pate
bhavāya bhava go-vipra
devānāṁ ye ca sādhavaḥ
Synonyms
tvam — You; naḥ — our; paramakam — supreme; daivam — worshipable Deity; tvam — You; naḥ — our; indraḥ — Lord Indra; jagat-pate — O master of the universe; bhavāya — for the welfare; bhava — please be; go — of the cows; vipra — the brāhmaṇas; devānām — and the demigods; ye — who; ca — and; sādhavaḥ — saintly persons.

Translation
You are our worshipable Deity. Therefore, O Lord of the universe, for the benefit of the cows, the brāhmaṇas, the demigods and all other saintly persons, please become our Indra.

Text 21
इन्द्रं नस्त्वाभिषेक्ष्यामो ब्रह्मणा चोदिता वयम् । अवतीर्णोऽसि विश्वात्मन् भूमेर्भारापनुत्तये ॥ २१ ॥
indraṁ nas tvābhiṣekṣyāmo
brahmaṇā coditā vayam
avatīrṇo ’si viśvātman
bhūmer bhārāpanuttaye
Synonyms
indram — as Indra; naḥ — our; tvā — to You; abhiṣekṣyāmaḥ — we shall perform the bathing ceremony of coronation; brahmaṇā — by Lord Brahmā; coditāḥ — ordered; vayam — we; avatīrṇaḥ asi — You have descended; viśva-ātman — O Soul of the universe; bhūmeḥ — of the earth; bhāra — the burden; apanuttaye — in order to alleviate.

Translation
As ordered by Lord Brahmā, we shall perform Your bathing ceremony to coronate You as Indra. O Soul of the universe, You descend to this world to relieve the burden of the earth.

Texts 22-23
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं कृष्णमुपामन्‍त्र्य सुरभि: पयसात्मन: । जलैराकाशगङ्गाया ऐरावतकरोद्‌धृतै: ॥ २२ ॥ इन्द्र: सुरर्षिभि: साकं चोदितो देवमातृभि: । अभ्यसिञ्चत दाशार्हं गोविन्द इति चाभ्यधात् ॥ २३ ॥
śṛī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ kṛṣṇam upāmantrya
surabhiḥ payasātmanaḥ
jalair ākāśa-gaṅgāyā
airāvata-karoddhṛtaiḥ
indraḥ surarṣibhiḥ sākaṁ
codito deva-mātṛbhiḥ
abhyasiñcata dāśārhaṁ
govinda iti cābhyadhāt
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — thus; kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; upāmantrya — requesting; surabhiḥ — mother Surabhi; payasā — with milk; ātmanaḥ — her own; jalaiḥ — with the water; ākāśa-gaṅgāyāḥ — of the Ganges flowing through the heavenly region (known as the Mandākinī); airāvata — of Indra’s carrier, the elephant Airāvata; kara — by the trunk; uddhṛtaiḥ — carried; indraḥ — Lord Indra; sura — by the demigods; ṛṣibhiḥ — and the great sages; sākam — accompanied; coditaḥ — inspired; deva — of the demigods; mātṛbhiḥ — by the mothers (headed by Aditi); abhyasiñcata — he bathed; dāśārham — Lord Kṛṣṇa, the descendant of King Daśārha; govindaḥ iti — as Govinda; ca — and; abhyadhāt — he named the Lord.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Having thus appealed to Lord Kṛṣṇa, mother Surabhi performed His bathing ceremony with her own milk, and Indra, ordered by Aditi and other mothers of the demigods, anointed the Lord with heavenly Gaṅgā water from the trunk of Indra’s elephant carrier, Airāvata. Thus, in the company of the demigods and great sages, Indra coronated Lord Kṛṣṇa, the descendant of Daśārha, and gave Him the name Govinda.

Text 24
तत्रागतास्तुम्बुरुनारदादयोगन्धर्वविद्याधरसिद्धचारणा: । जगुर्यशो लोकमलापहं हरे:सुराङ्गना: सन्ननृतुर्मुदान्विता: ॥ २४ ॥
tatrāgatās tumburu-nāradādayo
gandharva-vidyādhara-siddha-cāraṇāḥ
jagur yaśo loka-malāpahaṁ hareḥ
surāṅganāḥ sannanṛtur mudānvitāḥ
Synonyms
tatra — to that place; āgatāḥ — coming; tumburu — the Gandharva named Tumburu; nārada — Nārada Muni; ādayaḥ — and other demigods; gandharva-vidyādhara-siddha-cāraṇāḥ — the Gandharvas, Vidyādharas, Siddhas and Cāraṇas; jaguḥ — sang; yaśaḥ — the glories; loka — of the entire world; mala — the contamination; apaham — which eradicate; hareḥ — of Lord Hari; sura — of the demigods; aṅganāḥ — the wives; sannanṛtuḥ — danced together; mudā anvitāḥ — filled with joy.

Translation
Tumburu, Nārada and other Gandharvas, along with the Vidyādharas, Siddhas and Cāraṇas, came there to sing the glories of Lord Hari, which purify the entire world. And the wives of the demigods, filled with joy, danced together in the Lord’s honor.

Text 25
तं तुष्टुवुर्देवनिकायकेतवोह्यवाकिरंश्चाद्भुतपुष्पवृष्टिभि: । लोका: परां निर्वृतिमाप्नुवंस्त्रयोगावस्तदा गामनयन् पयोद्रुताम् ॥ २५ ॥
taṁ tuṣṭuvur deva-nikāya-ketavo
hy avākiraṁś cādbhuta-puṣpa-vṛṣṭibhiḥ
lokāḥ parāṁ nirvṛtim āpnuvaṁs trayo
gāvas tadā gām anayan payo-drutām
Synonyms
tam — Him; tuṣṭuvuḥ — praised; deva-nikāya — of all the demigods; ketavaḥ — the most eminent; hi — indeed; avākiran — they covered Him; ca — and; adbhuta — amazing; puṣpa — of flowers; vṛṣṭibhiḥ — with showers; lokāḥ — the worlds; parām — supreme; nirvṛtim — satisfaction; āpnuvan — experienced; trayaḥ — three; gāvaḥ — the cows; tadā — then; gām — the earth; anayan — brought; payaḥ — with their milk; drutām — to saturation.

Translation
The most eminent demigods chanted the praises of the Lord and scattered wonderful showers of flowers all around Him. All three worlds felt supreme satisfaction, and the cows drenched the surface of the earth with their milk.

Text 26
नानारसौघा: सरितो वृक्षा आसन् मधुस्रवा: । अकृष्टपच्यौषधयो गिरयोऽबिभ्रनुन्मणीन् ॥ २६ ॥
nānā-rasaughāḥ sarito
vṛkṣā āsan madhu-sravāḥ
akṛṣṭa-pacyauṣadhayo
girayo ’bibhran un maṇīn
Synonyms
nānā — various; rasa — liquids; oghāḥ — flooding; saritaḥ — the rivers; vṛkṣāḥ — the trees; āsan — became; madhu — with sweet sap; sravāḥ — flowing; akṛṣṭa — even without cultivation; pacya — ripened; oṣadhayaḥ — the plants; girayaḥ — the mountains; abibhran — carried; ut — above the ground; maṇīn — jewels.

Translation
Rivers flowed with various kinds of tasty liquids, trees exuded honey, edible plants came to maturity without cultivation, and hills gave forth jewels formerly hidden in their interiors.

Text 27
कृष्णेऽभिषिक्त एतानि सर्वाणि कुरुनन्दन । निर्वैराण्यभवंस्तात क्रूराण्यपि निसर्गत: ॥ २७ ॥
kṛṣṇe ’bhiṣikta etāni
sarvāṇi kuru-nandana
nirvairāṇy abhavaṁs tāta
krūrāṇy api nisargataḥ
Synonyms
kṛṣṇe — Lord Kṛṣṇa; abhiṣikte — having been bathed; etāni — these; sarvāṇi — all; kuru-nandana — O beloved of the Kuru dynasty; nirvairāṇi — free from enmity; abhavan — became; tāta — my dear Parīkṣit; krūrāṇi — vicious; api — although; nisargataḥ — by nature.

Translation
O Parīkṣit, beloved of the Kuru dynasty, upon the ceremonial bathing of Lord Kṛṣṇa, all living creatures, even those cruel by nature, became entirely free of enmity.

Text 28
इति गोगोकुलपतिं गोविन्दमभिषिच्य स: । अनुज्ञातो ययौ शक्रो वृतो देवादिभिर्दिवम् ॥ २८ ॥
iti go-gokula-patiṁ
govindam abhiṣicya saḥ
anujñāto yayau śakro
vṛto devādibhir divam
Synonyms
iti — thus; go — of the cows; go-kula — and of the community of cowherds; patim — the master; govindam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; abhiṣicya — bathing; saḥ — he, Indra; anujñātaḥ — given permission; yayau — went; śakraḥ — King Indra; vṛtaḥ — surrounded; deva-ādibhiḥ — by the demigods and others; divam — to heaven.

Translation
After he had ceremonially bathed Lord Govinda, who is the master of the cows and the cowherd community, King Indra took the Lord’s permission and, surrounded by the demigods and other higher beings, returned to his heavenly abode.