Text 1
श्रीबादरायणिरुवाच
एकादश्यां निराहार: समभ्यर्च्य जनार्दनम् । स्‍नातुं नन्दस्तु कालिन्द्यां द्वादश्यां जलमाविशत् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca
ekādaśyāṁ nirāhāraḥ
samabhyarcya janārdanam
snātuṁ nandas tu kālindyāṁ
dvādaśyāṁ jalam āviśat
Synonyms
śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca — Śrī Bādarāyaṇi (Śukadeva Gosvāmī) said; ekādaśyām — on Ekādaśī (the eleventh day of the lunar month); nirāhāraḥ — fasting; samabhyarcya — having worshiped; janārdanam — Lord Janārdana, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; snātum — in order to bathe (before breaking the fast at its prescribed completion); nandaḥ — Nanda Mahārāja; tu — but; kālindyām — in the river Yamunā; dvādaśyām — on the twelfth day; jalam — the water; āviśat — entered.

Translation
Śrī Bādarāyaṇi said: Having worshiped Lord Janārdana and fasted on the Ekādaśī day, Nanda Mahārāja entered the water of the Kālindī on the Dvādaśī to take his bath.

Text 2
तं गृहीत्वानयद् भृत्यो वरुणस्यासुरोऽन्तिकम् । अवज्ञायासुरीं वेलां प्रविष्टमुदकं निशि ॥ २ ॥
taṁ gṛhītvānayad bhṛtyo
varuṇasyāsuro ’ntikam
avajñāyāsurīṁ velāṁ
praviṣṭam udakaṁ niśi
Synonyms
tam — him; gṛhītvā — seizing; anayat — brought; bhṛtyaḥ — a servant; varuṇasya — of Varuṇa, the lord of the sea; asuraḥ — demon; antikam — to the presence (of his master); avajñāya — who had disregarded; āsurīm — the inauspicious; velām — time; praviṣṭam — having entered; udakam — the water; niśi — during the night.

Translation
Because Nanda Mahārāja entered the water in the dark of night, disregarding that the time was inauspicious, a demoniac servant of Varuṇa seized him and brought him to his master.

Text 3
चुक्रुशुस्तमपश्यन्त: कृष्ण रामेति गोपका: । भगवांस्तदुपश्रुत्य पितरं वरुणाहृतम् । तदन्तिकं गतो राजन्स्वानामभयदो विभु: ॥ ३ ॥
cukruśus tam apaśyantaḥ
kṛṣṇa rāmeti gopakāḥ
bhagavāṁs tad upaśrutya
pitaraṁ varuṇāhṛtam
tad-antikaṁ gato rājan
svānām abhaya-do vibhuḥ
Synonyms
cukruśuḥ — they called out loudly; tam — him, Nanda; apaśyantaḥ — not seeing; kṛṣṇa — O Kṛṣṇa; rāma — O Rāma; iti — thus; gopakāḥ — the cowherd men; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord, Kṛṣṇa; tat — that; upaśrutya — hearing; pitaram — His father; varuṇa — by Varuṇa; āhṛtam — taken away; tat — of Varuṇa; antikam — to the presence; gataḥ — went; rājan — my dear King Parīkṣit; svānām — of His own devotees; abhaya — of fearlessness; daḥ — the giver; vibhuḥ — the almighty Lord.

Translation
O King, not seeing Nanda Mahārāja, the cowherd men loudly cried out, “O Kṛṣṇa! O Rāma!” Lord Kṛṣṇa heard their cries and understood that His father had been captured by Varuṇa. Therefore the almighty Lord, who makes His devotees fearless, went to the court of Varuṇadeva.

Text 4
प्राप्तं वीक्ष्य हृषीकेशं लोकपाल: सपर्यया । महत्या पूजयित्वाह तद्दर्शनमहोत्सव: ॥ ४ ॥
prāptaṁ vīkṣya hṛṣīkeśaṁ
loka-pālaḥ saparyayā
mahatyā pūjayitvāha
tad-darśana-mahotsavaḥ
Synonyms
prāptam — arrived; vīkṣya — seeing; hṛṣīkeśam — Lord Kṛṣṇa, the controller of the senses; loka — of that planet (the watery regions); pālaḥ — the presiding deity (Varuṇa); saparyayā — with respectful offerings; mahatyā — elaborate; pūjayitvā — worshiping; āha — spoke; tat — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; darśana — from the sight; mahā — great; utsavaḥ — jubilant pleasure.

Translation
Seeing that the Lord, Hṛṣīkeśa, had arrived, the demigod Varuṇa worshiped Him with elaborate offerings. Varuṇa was in a state of great jubilation upon seeing the Lord, and he spoke as follows.

Text 5
श्रीवरुण उवाच
अद्य मे निभृतो देहोऽद्यैवार्थोऽधिगत: प्रभो । त्वत्पादभाजो भगवन्नवापु: पारमध्वन: ॥ ५ ॥
śrī-varuṇa uvāca
adya me nibhṛto deho
’dyaivārtho ’dhigataḥ prabho
tvat-pāda-bhājo bhagavann
avāpuḥ pāram adhvanaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-varuṇaḥ uvāca — Śrī Varuṇa said; adya — today; me — by me; nibhṛtaḥ — is carried successfully; dehaḥ — my material body; adya — today; eva — indeed; arthaḥ — the goal of life; adhigataḥ — is experienced; prabho — O Lord; tvat — Your; pāda — the lotus feet; bhājaḥ — those who serve; bhagavan — O Supreme Personality; avāpuḥ — have achieved; pāram — the state of transcendence; adhvanaḥ — of the path (of material existence).

Translation
Śrī Varuṇa said: Now my body has fulfilled its function. Indeed, now the goal of my life is achieved, O Lord. Those who accept Your lotus feet, O Personality of Godhead, can transcend the path of material existence.

Text 6
नमस्तुभ्यं भगवते ब्रह्मणे परमात्मने । न यत्र श्रूयते माया लोकसृष्टिविकल्पना ॥ ६ ॥
namas tubhyaṁ bhagavate
brahmaṇe paramātmane
na yatra śrūyate māyā
loka-sṛṣṭi-vikalpanā
Synonyms
namaḥ — obeisances; tubhyam — unto You; bhagavate — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; brahmaṇe — the Absolute Truth; parama-ātmane — the Supreme Soul; na — not; yatra — in whom; śrūyate — is heard of; māyā — the illusory, material energy; loka — of this world; sṛṣṭi — the creation; vikalpanā — which arranges.

Translation
My obeisances unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, the Supreme Soul, within whom there is no trace of the illusory energy, which orchestrates the creation of this world.

Text 7
अजानता मामकेन मूढेनाकार्यवेदिना । आनीतोऽयं तव पिता तद्भ‍वान् क्षन्तुमर्हति ॥ ७ ॥
ajānatā māmakena
mūḍhenākārya-vedinā
ānīto ’yaṁ tava pitā
tad bhavān kṣantum arhati
Synonyms
ajānatā — by one who was ignorant; māmakena — by my servant; mūḍhena — foolish; akārya-vedinā — not knowing his proper duty; ānītaḥ — was brought; ayam — this person; tava — Your; pitā — father; tat — that; bhavān — Your good self; kṣantum arhati — should please forgive.

Translation
Your father, who is sitting here, was brought to me by a foolish, ignorant servant of mine who did not understand his proper duty. Therefore, please forgive us.

Text 8
ममाप्यनुग्रहं कृष्ण कर्तुमर्हस्यशेषद‍ृक् । गोविन्द नीयतामेष पिता ते पितृवत्सल ॥ ८ ॥
mamāpy anugrahaṁ kṛṣṇa
kartum arhasy aśeṣa-dṛk
govinda nīyatām eṣa
pitā te pitṛ-vatsala
Synonyms
mama — to me; api — even; anugraham — mercy; kṛṣṇa — O Lord Kṛṣṇa; kartum arhasi — please do; aśeṣa — of everything; dṛk — O You who see; govinda — O Govinda; nīyatām — may he be taken; eṣaḥ — this; pitā — father; te — Your; pitṛ-vatsala — O You who are most affectionate to Your parents.

Translation
O Kṛṣṇa, O seer of everything, please give Your mercy even to me. O Govinda, You are most affectionate to Your father. Please take him home.

Text 9
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं प्रसादित: कृष्णो भगवानीश्वरेश्वर: । आदायागत्स्वपितरं बन्धूनां चावहन्मुदम् ॥ ९ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ prasāditaḥ kṛṣṇo
bhagavān īśvareśvaraḥ
ādāyāgāt sva-pitaraṁ
bandhūnāṁ cāvahan mudam
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — thus; prasāditaḥ — satisfied; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; īśvara — of all controllers; īśvaraḥ — the supreme controller; ādāya — taking; agāt — went; sva-pitaram — His father; bandhūnām — to His relatives; ca — and; āvahan — bringing; mudam — pleasure.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus satisfied by Lord Varuṇa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord of lords, took His father and returned home, where their relatives were overjoyed to see them.

Text 10
नन्दस्त्वतीन्द्रियं द‍ृष्ट्वा लोकपालमहोदयम् । कृष्णे च सन्नतिं तेषां ज्ञातिभ्यो विस्मितोऽब्रवीत् ॥ १० ॥
nandas tv atīndriyaṁ dṛṣṭvā
loka-pāla-mahodayam
kṛṣṇe ca sannatiṁ teṣāṁ
jñātibhyo vismito ’bravīt
Synonyms
nandaḥ — Nanda Mahārāja; tu — and; atīndriyam — not seen before; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; loka-pāla — of the controlling deity of the (ocean) planet, Varuṇa; mahā-udayam — the great opulence; kṛṣṇe — unto Kṛṣṇa; ca — and; sannatim — the offering of obeisances; teṣām — by them (Varuṇa and his followers); jñātibhyaḥ — to his friends and relatives; vismitaḥ — amazed; abravīt — spoke.

Translation
Nanda Mahārāja had been astonished to see for the first time the great opulence of Varuṇa, the ruler of the ocean planet, and also to see how Varuṇa and his servants had offered such humble respect to Kṛṣṇa. Nanda described all this to his fellow cowherd men.

Text 11
ते चौत्सुक्यधियो राजन् मत्वा गोपास्तमीश्वरम् । अपि न: स्वगतिं सूक्ष्मामुपाधास्यदधीश्वर: ॥ ११ ॥
te cautsukya-dhiyo rājan
matvā gopās tam īśvaram
api naḥ sva-gatiṁ sūkṣmām
upādhāsyad adhīśvaraḥ
Synonyms
te — they; ca — and; autsukya — full of eagerness; dhiyaḥ — their minds; rājan — O King Parīkṣit; matvā — thinking; gopāḥ — the cowherd men; tam — Him; īśvaram — the Supreme Lord; api — perhaps; naḥ — to us; sva-gatim — His own abode; sūkṣmām — transcendental; upādhāsyat — is going to bestow; adhīśvaraḥ — the supreme controller.

Translation
[Hearing about Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes with Varuṇa,] the cowherd men considered that Kṛṣṇa must be the Supreme Lord, and their minds, O King, were filled with eagerness. They thought, “Will the Supreme Lord bestow upon us His transcendental abode?”

Text 12
इति स्वानां स भगवान् विज्ञायाखिलद‍ृक्स्वयम् । सङ्कल्पसिद्धये तेषां कृपयैतदचिन्तयत् ॥ १२ ॥
iti svānāṁ sa bhagavān
vijñāyākhila-dṛk svayam
saṅkalpa-siddhaye teṣāṁ
kṛpayaitad acintayat
Synonyms
iti — such; svānām — of His personal devotees; saḥ — He; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vijñāya — understanding; akhila-dṛk — the seer of everything; svayam — Himself; saṅkalpa — of the imagined desire; siddhaye — for the realization; teṣām — their; kṛpayā — compassionately; etat — this (as follows in the next verse); acintayat — thought.

Translation
Because He sees everything, Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, automatically understood what the cowherd men were conjecturing. Wanting to show His compassion to them by fulfilling their desires, the Lord thought as follows.

Text 13
जनो वै लोक एतस्मिन्नविद्याकामकर्मभि: । उच्चावचासु गतिषु न वेद स्वां गतिं भ्रमन् ॥ १३ ॥
jano vai loka etasminn
avidyā-kāma-karmabhiḥ
uccāvacāsu gatiṣu
na veda svāṁ gatiṁ bhraman
Synonyms
janaḥ — people; vai — certainly; loke — in the world; etasmin — this; avidyā — without knowledge; kāma — because of desires; karmabhiḥ — by activities; ucca — among superior; avacāsu — and inferior; gatiṣu — destinations; na veda — does not recognize; svām — his own; gatim — destination; bhraman — wandering.

Translation
[Lord Kṛṣṇa thought:] Certainly people in this world are wandering among higher and lower destinations, which they achieve through activities performed according to their desires and without full knowledge. Thus people do not know their real destination.

Text 14
इति सञ्चिन्त्य भगवान् महाकारुणिको हरि: । दर्शयामास लोकं स्वं गोपानां तमस: परम् ॥ १४ ॥
iti sañcintya bhagavān
mahā-kāruṇiko hariḥ
darśayām āsa lokaṁ svaṁ
gopānāṁ tamasaḥ param
Synonyms
iti — in these words; sañcintya — considering to Himself; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mahā-kāruṇikaḥ — the most merciful; hariḥ — Lord Hari; darśayām āsa — showed; lokam — the planet, Vaikuṇṭha; svam — His own; gopānām — to the cowherd men; tamasaḥ — material darkness; param — beyond.

Translation
Thus deeply considering the situation, the all-merciful Supreme Personality of Godhead Hari revealed to the cowherd men His abode, which is beyond material darkness.

Text 15
सत्यं ज्ञानमनन्तं यद् ब्रह्मज्योति: सनातनम् । यद्धि पश्यन्ति मुनयो गुणापाये समाहिता: ॥ १५ ॥
satyaṁ jñānam anantaṁ yad
brahma-jyotiḥ sanātanam
yad dhi paśyanti munayo
guṇāpāye samāhitāḥ
Synonyms
satyam — indestructible; jñānam — knowledge; anantam — unlimited; yat — which; brahma — the absolute; jyotiḥ — effulgence; sanātanam — eternal; yat — which; hi — indeed; paśyanti — see; munayaḥ — sages; guṇa — the modes of material nature; apāye — when they subside; samāhitāḥ — absorbed in trance.

Translation
Lord Kṛṣṇa revealed the indestructible spiritual effulgence, which is unlimited, conscious and eternal. Sages see that spiritual existence in trance, when their consciousness is free of the modes of material nature.

Text 16
ते तु ब्रह्मह्रदं नीता मग्ना: कृष्णेन चोद्‌धृता: । दद‍ृशुर्ब्रह्मणो लोकं यत्राक्रूरोऽध्यगात् पुरा ॥ १६ ॥
te tu brahma-hradam nītā
magnāḥ kṛṣṇena coddhṛtāḥ
dadṛśur brahmaṇo lokaṁ
yatrākrūro ’dhyagāt purā
Synonyms
te — they; tu — and; brahma-hradam — to the lake known as Brahma-hrada; nītāḥ — brought; magnāḥ — submerged; kṛṣṇena — by Kṛṣṇa; ca — and; uddhṛtāḥ — lifted out; dadṛśuḥ — they saw; brahmaṇaḥ — of the Absolute Truth; lokam — the transcendental planet; yatra — where; akrūraḥ — Akrūra; adhyagāt — saw; purā — previously.

Translation
The cowherd men were brought by Lord Kṛṣṇa to the Brahma-hrada, made to submerge in the water, and then lifted up. From the same vantage point that Akrūra saw the spiritual world, the cowherd men saw the planet of the Absolute Truth.

Text 17
नन्दादयस्तु तं द‍ृष्ट्वा परमानन्दनिवृता: । कृष्णं च तत्रच्छन्दोभि: स्तूयमानं सुविस्मिता: ॥ १७ ॥
nandādayas tu taṁ dṛṣṭvā
paramānanda-nivṛtāḥ
kṛṣṇaṁ ca tatra cchandobhiḥ
stūyamānaṁ su-vismitāḥ
Synonyms
nanda-ādayaḥ — the cowherd men headed by Nanda Mahārāja; tu — and; tam — that; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; parama — supreme; ānanda — by ecstasy; nivṛtāḥ — overwhelmed with joy; kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; ca — and; tatra — there; chandobhiḥ — by the Vedic hymns; stūyamānam — being praised; su — very much; vismitāḥ — surprised.

Translation
Nanda Mahārāja and the other cowherd men felt the greatest happiness when they saw that transcendental abode. They were especially amazed to see Kṛṣṇa Himself there, surrounded by the personified Vedas, who were offering Him prayers.