Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
अन्तर्हिते भगवति सहसैव व्रजाङ्गना: ।
अतप्यंस्तमचक्षाणा: करिण्य इव यूथपम् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
antarhite bhagavati
sahasaiva vrajāṅganāḥ
atapyaṁs tam acakṣāṇāḥ
kariṇya iva yūthapam
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; antarhite — when He disappeared; bhagavati — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sahasā eva — quite suddenly; vraja-aṅganāḥ — the young ladies of Vraja; atapyan — felt great remorse; tam — Him; acakṣāṇāḥ — not seeing; kariṇyaḥ — female elephants; iva — just as; yūthapam — their male leader.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When Lord Kṛṣṇa disappeared so suddenly, the gopīs felt great sorrow at losing sight of Him, like a group of female elephants who have lost their mate.

Text 2
गत्यानुरागस्मितविभ्रमेक्षितै-
र्मनोरमालापविहारविभ्रमै: ।
आक्षिप्तचित्ता: प्रमदा रमापते-
स्तास्ता विचेष्टा जगृहुस्तदात्मिका: ॥ २ ॥
gatyānurāga-smita-vibhramekṣitair
mano-ramālāpa-vihāra-vibhramaiḥ
ākṣipta-cittāḥ pramadā ramā-pates
tās tā viceṣṭā jagṛhus tad-ātmikāḥ
Synonyms
gatyā — by His movements; anurāga — affectionate; smita — smiles; vibhrama — playful; īkṣitaiḥ — and glances; manaḥ-rama — charming; āIāpa — by His talking; vihāra — playing; vibhramaiḥ — and other allurements; ākṣipta — overwhelmed; cittāḥ — whose hearts; pramadāḥ — the girls; ramā-pateḥ — of the husband of Ramā, the goddess of fortune, or of the master of beauty and opulence; tāḥ tāḥ — each of those; viceṣṭāḥ — wonderful activities; jagṛhuḥ — they enacted; tat-ātmikāḥ — absorbed in Him.

Translation
As the cowherd women remembered Lord Kṛṣṇa, their hearts were overwhelmed by His movements and loving smiles, His playful glances and enchanting talks, and by the many other pastimes He would enjoy with them. Thus absorbed in thoughts of Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of Ramā, the gopīs began acting out His various transcendental pastimes.

Text 3
गतिस्मितप्रेक्षणभाषणादिषु
प्रिया: प्रियस्य प्रतिरूढमूर्तय: ।
असावहं त्वित्यबलास्तदात्मिका
न्यवेदिषु: कृष्णविहारविभ्रमा: ॥ ३ ॥
gati-smita-prekṣaṇa-bhāṣaṇādiṣu
priyāḥ priyasya pratirūḍha-mūrtayaḥ
asāv ahaṁ tv ity abalās tad-ātmikā
nyavediṣuḥ kṛṣṇa-vihāra-vibhramāḥ
Synonyms
gati — in His movements; smita — smiling; prekṣaṇa — beholding; bhāṣaṇā — talking; ādiṣu — and so on; priyāḥ — the dear gopīs; priyasya — of their beloved; pratirūḍha — fully absorbed; mūrtayaḥ — their bodies; asau — He; aham — I; tu — actually; iti — speaking thus; abalāḥ — the women; tat-ātmikāḥ — identifying with Him; nyavediṣuḥ — they announced; kṛṣṇa-vihāra — caused by the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa; vibhramāḥ — whose intoxication.

Translation
Because the beloved gopīs were absorbed in thoughts of their beloved Kṛṣṇa, their bodies imitated His way of moving and smiling, His way of beholding them, His speech and His other distinctive features. Deeply immersed in thinking of Him and maddened by remembering His pastimes, they declared to one another, “I am Kṛṣṇa!”

Text 4
गायन्त्य उच्चैरमुमेव संहता
विचिक्युरुन्मत्तकवद् वनाद् वनम् ।
पप्रच्छुराकाशवदन्तरं बहि-
र्भूतेषु सन्तं पुरुषं वनस्पतीन् ॥ ४ ॥
gāyantya uccair amum eva saṁhatā
vicikyur unmattaka-vad vanād vanam
papracchur ākāśa-vad antaraṁ bahir
bhūteṣu santaṁ puruṣaṁ vanaspatīn
Synonyms
gāyantyaḥ — singing; uccaiḥ — loudly; amum — about Him; eva — indeed; saṁhatāḥ — together in a group; vicikyuḥ — they searched; unmattaka-vat — like madwomen; vanāt vanam — from one area of the forest to another; papracchuḥ — they inquired; ākāśa-vat — like the sky; antaram — internally; bahiḥ — and externally; bhūteṣu — in all created beings; santam — present; puruṣam — the Supreme Person; vanaspatīn — from the trees.

Translation
Singing loudly of Kṛṣṇa, they searched for Him throughout the Vṛndāvana forest like a band of madwomen. They even asked the trees about Him, who as the Supersoul is present inside and outside of all created things, just like the sky.

Text 5
द‍ृष्टो व: कच्चिदश्वत्थ प्लक्ष न्यग्रोध नो मन: ।
नन्दसूनुर्गतो हृत्वा प्रेमहासावलोकनै: ॥ ५ ॥
dṛṣṭo vaḥ kaccid aśvattha
plakṣa nyagrodha no manaḥ
nanda-sūnur gato hṛtvā
prema-hāsāvalokanaiḥ
Synonyms
dṛṣṭaḥ — has been seen; vaḥ — by you; kaccit — whether; aśvattha — O aśvattha (holy fig tree); plakṣa — O plakṣa (waved-leaf fig tree); nyagrodha — O nyagrodha (banyan tree); naḥ — our; manaḥ — minds; nanda — of Mahārāja Nanda; sūnuḥ — the son; gataḥ — has gone away; hṛtvā — after stealing; prema — loving; hāsa — with His smiles; avalokanaiḥ — and glances.

Translation
[The gopīs said:] O aśvattha tree, O plakṣa, O nyagrodha, have you seen Kṛṣṇa? That son of Nanda Mahārāja has gone away after stealing our minds with His loving smiles and glances.

Text 6
कच्चित् कुरबकाशोकनागपुन्नागचम्पका: ।
रामानुजो मानिनीनामितो दर्पहरस्मित: ॥ ६ ॥
kaccit kurabakāśoka-
nāga-punnāga-campakāḥ
rāmānujo māninīnām
ito darpa-hara-smitaḥ
Synonyms
kaccit — whether; kurabaka-aśoka-nāga-punnāga-campakāḥ — O kurabaka (red amaranth), aśoka, nāga, punnāga and campaka trees; rāma — of Balarāma; anujaḥ — the younger brother; māninīnām — of women, who are proud by nature; itaḥ — passing by here; darpa — the pride; hara — removing; smitaḥ — whose smile.

Translation
O kurabaka tree, O aśoka, O nāga, punnāga and campaka, has Balarāma’s younger brother, whose smile removes the audacity of all proud women, passed this way?

Text 7
कच्चित्तुलसि कल्याणि गोविन्दचरणप्रिये ।
सह त्वालिकुलैर्बिभ्रद् दृष्टस्तेऽतिप्रियोऽच्युत: ॥ ७ ॥
kaccit tulasi kalyāṇi
govinda-caraṇa-priye
saha tvāli-kulair bibhrad
dṛṣṭas te ’ti-priyo ’cyutaḥ
Synonyms
kaccit — whether; tulasi — O tulasī plant; kalyāṇi — O kind one; govinda — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; caraṇa — the feet; priye — you to whom are dear; saha — together with; tvā — you; ali — of bees; kulaiḥ — swarms; bibhrat — carrying; dṛṣṭaḥ — seen; te — by you; ati-priyaḥ — very dear; acyutaḥ — Lord Acyuta.

Translation
O most kind tulasī, to whom the feet of Govinda are so dear, have you seen that infallible one walk by, wearing you and encircled by swarms of bees?

Text 8
मालत्यदर्शि व: कच्चिन्मल्लिके जाति यूथिके ।
प्रीतिं वो जनयन् यात: करस्पर्शेन माधव: ॥ ८ ॥
mālaty adarśi vaḥ kaccin
mallike jāti-yūthike
prītiṁ vo janayan yātaḥ
kara-sparśena mādhavaḥ
Synonyms
mālati — O mālatī plant (a kind of white jasmine); adarśi — has been seen; vaḥ — by you; kaccit — whether; mallike — O mallikā (a different kind of jasmine); jāti — O jāti (another kind of white jasmine); yūthike — O yūthikā (yet another jasmine); prītim — pleasure; vaḥ — for you; janayan — generating; yātaḥ — has gone by; kara — of His hand; sparśena — by the touch; mādhavaḥ — Kṛṣṇa, the embodiment of the spring season.

Translation
O mālati, O mallikā, O jāti and yūthikā, has Mādhava gone by here, giving you pleasure with the touch of His hand?

Text 9
चूतप्रियालपनसासनकोविदार-
जम्ब्वर्कबिल्वबकुलाम्रकदम्बनीपा: ।
येऽन्ये परार्थभवका यमुनोपकूला:
शंसन्तु कृष्णपदवीं रहितात्मनां न: ॥ ९ ॥
cūta-priyāla-panasāsana-kovidāra
jambv-arka-bilva-bakulāmra-kadamba-nīpāḥ
ye ’nye parārtha-bhavakā yamunopakūlāḥ
śaṁsantu kṛṣṇa-padavīṁ rahitātmanāṁ naḥ
Synonyms
cūta — O mango creeper; priyāla — O priyāla tree (a kind of śāla tree); panasa — O jackfruit tree; āsana — O āsana tree (a yellow śāla); kovidāra — O kovidāra tree; jambu — O rose-apple tree; arka — O arka plant; bilva — O bel–fruit tree; bakula — O mimosa tree; āmra — O mango tree; kadamba — O kadamba tree; nīpāḥ — O nīpa (a smaller kind of kadamba); ye — who; anye — others; para — of others; artha — for the sake; bhavakāḥ — whose existence; yamunā-upakūlāḥ — living near the bank of the river Yamunā; śaṁsantu — kindly tell; kṛṣṇa-padavīm — the path Kṛṣṇa has taken; rahita — who have been deprived; ātmanām — of our minds; naḥ — to us.

Translation
O cūta, O priyāla, O panasa, āsana and kovidāra, O jambu, O arka, O bilva, bakula and āmra, O kadamba and nīpa and all you other plants and trees living by the banks of the Yamunā who have dedicated your very existence to the welfare of others, we gopīs have lost our minds, so please tell us where Kṛṣṇa has gone.

Text 10
किं ते कृतं क्षिति तपो बत केशवाङ्‍‍‍‍‍घ्रि-
स्पर्शोत्सवोत्पुलकिताङ्गरुहैर्विभासि ।
अप्यङ्‍‍‍‍‍घ्रिसम्भव उरुक्रमविक्रमाद् वा
आहो वराहवपुष: परिरम्भणेन ॥ १० ॥
kiṁ te kṛtaṁ kṣiti tapo bata keśavāṅghri-
sparśotsavotpulakitāṅga-nahair vibhāsi
apy aṅghri-sambhava urukrama-vikramād vā
āho varāha-vapuṣaḥ parirambhaṇena
Synonyms
kim — what; te — by you; kṛtam — performed; kṣiti — O earth; tapaḥ — austerity; bata — indeed; keśava — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; aṅghri — by the feet; sparśa — on account of being touched; utsava — due to the joyful experience; utpulakita — standing on end in jubilation; aṅga-ruhaiḥ — with your bodily hairs (the grass and growing plants on your surface); vibhāsi — you appear beautiful; api — perhaps; aṅghri — by the feet (of Kṛṣṇa present now on your surface); sambhavaḥ — generated; urukrama — of Lord Vāmanadeva, Lord Kṛṣṇa’s dwarf incarnation, who covered the entire universe in three mighty steps; vikramāt — because of the stepping; vā — or; āha u — or else perhaps; varāha — of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s incarnation as a boar; vapuṣaḥ — by the body; parirambhaṇena — because of the embrace.

Translation
O mother earth, what austerity did you perform to attain the touch of Lord Keśava’s lotus feet, which has brought you such great joy that your bodily hairs are standing on end? You appear very beautiful in this condition. Was it during the Lord’s current appearance that you acquired this ecstatic symptom, or was it perhaps much earlier, when He stepped upon you in His form of the dwarf Vāmanadeva, or even earlier, when He embraced you in His form of the boar Varāhadeva?

Text 11
अप्येणपत्‍न्युपगत: प्रिययेह गात्रै-
स्तन्वन् द‍ृशां सखि सुनिर्वृतिमच्युतो व: ।
कान्ताङ्गसङ्गकुचकुङ्कुमरञ्जिताया:
कुन्दस्रज: कुलपतेरिह वाति गन्ध: ॥ ११ ॥
apy eṇa-patny upagataḥ priyayeha gātrais
tanvan dṛśāṁ sakhi su-nirvṛtim acyuto vaḥ
kāntāṅga-saṅga-kuca-kuṅkuma-rañjitāyāḥ
kunda-srajaḥ kula-pater iha vāti gandhaḥ
Synonyms
api — whether; eṇa — of the deer; patni — O wife; upagataḥ — has been encountered; priyayā — together with His beloved; iha — here; gātraiḥ — by His bodily limbs; tanvan — producing; dṛśām — of the eyes; sakhi — O friend; su-nirvṛtim — great pleasure; acyutaḥ — the infallible Lord Kṛṣṇa; vaḥ — your; kāntā — of His girlfriend; aṅga-saṅga — because of the physical contact; kuca — on the breast; kuṅkuma — by the vermilion powder; rañjitāyāḥ — colored; kunda — of jasmine flowers; srajaḥ — of the garland; kula — of the group (of gopīs); pateḥ — of the master; iha — around here; vāti — is blowing; gandhaḥ — the fragrance.

Translation
O friend, wife of the deer, has Lord Acyuta been here with His beloved, bringing great joy to your eyes? Indeed, blowing this way is the fragrance of His garland of kunda flowers, which was smeared with the kuṅkuma from the breasts of His girlfriend when He embraced Her.

Text 12
बाहुं प्रियांस उपधाय गृहीतपद्मो
रामानुजस्तुलसिकालिकुलैर्मदान्धै: ।
अन्वीयमान इह वस्तरव: प्रणामं
किं वाभिनन्दति चरन् प्रणयावलोकै: ॥ १२ ॥
bāhuṁ priyāṁsa upadhāya gṛhīta-padmo
rāmānujas tulasikāli-kulair madāndhaiḥ
anvīyamāna iha vas taravaḥ praṇāmaṁ
kiṁ vābhinandati caran praṇayāvalokaiḥ
Synonyms
bāhum — His arm; priyā — of His beloved; aṁse — on the shoulder; upadhāya — placing; gṛhīta — holding; padmaḥ — a lotus; rāma-anujaḥ — Kṛṣṇa, the younger brother of Balarāma; tulasikā — swarming around the tulasī mañjarīs (which are ornamenting His garland); ali-kulaiḥ — by the many bees; mada — with intoxication; andhaiḥ — who are blind; anvīyamānaḥ — being followed; iha — here; vaḥ — your; taravaḥ — O trees; praṇāmam — the bowing down; kim vā — whether; abhinandati — has acknowledged; caran — while walking by; praṇaya — imbued with love; avalokaiḥ — with His glances.

Translation
O trees, we see that you are bowing down. When the younger brother of Rāma walked by here, followed by intoxicated bees swarming around the tulasī mañjarīs decorating His garland, did He acknowledge your obeisances with His affectionate glances? He must have been resting His arm on the shoulder of His beloved and carrying a lotus flower in His free hand.

Text 13
पृच्छतेमा लता बाहूनप्याश्लिष्टा वनस्पते: ।
नूनं तत्करजस्पृष्टा बिभ्रत्युत्पुलकान्यहो ॥ १३ ॥
pṛcchatemā latā bāhūn
apy āśliṣṭā vanaspateḥ
nūnaṁ tat-karaja-spṛṣṭā
bibhraty utpulakāny aho
Synonyms
pṛcchata — just ask; imāḥ — from these; latāḥ — creepers; bāhūn — the arms (branches); api — even though; āśliṣṭāḥ — embracing; vanaspateḥ — of the tree; nūnam — certainly; tat — of Him, Kṛṣṇa; kara-ja — by the fingernails; spṛṣṭāḥ — touched; bibhrati — they are bearing; utpulakāni — joyful eruptions on the skin; aho — just see.

Translation
Let us ask these creepers about Kṛṣṇa. Even though they are embracing the arms of their husband, this tree, they certainly must have been touched by Kṛṣṇa’s fingernails, since out of joy they are manifesting eruptions on their skin.

Text 14
इत्युन्मत्तवचोगोप्य: कृष्णान्वेषणकातरा: ।
लीला भगवतस्तास्ता ह्यनुचक्रुस्तदात्मिका: ॥ १४ ॥
ity unmatta-vaco gopyaḥ
kṛṣṇānveṣaṇa-kātarāḥ
līlā bhagavatas tās tā
hy anucakrus tad-ātmikāḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus; unmatta — maddened; vacaḥ — speaking words; gopyaḥ — the gopīs; kṛṣṇa-anveṣaṇa — by searching for Kṛṣṇa; kātarāḥ — distraught; līlāḥ — the transcendental pastimes; bhagavataḥ — of Him, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tāḥ tāḥ — each of them; hi — indeed; anucakruḥ — they acted out; tat-ātmikāḥ — becoming absorbed in thought of Him.

Translation
Having spoken these words, the gopīs, distraught from searching for Kṛṣṇa, began to act out His various pastimes, fully absorbed in thoughts of Him.

Text 15
कस्याचित् पूतनायन्त्या: कृष्णायन्त्यपिबत् स्तनम् ।
तोकयित्वा रुदत्यन्या पदाहन् शकटायतीम् ॥ १५ ॥
kasyācit pūtanāyantyāḥ
kṛṣṇāyanty apibat stanam
tokayitvā rudaty anyā
padāhan śakaṭāyatīm
Synonyms
kasyācit — of one of the gopīs; pūtanāyantyāḥ — who was acting like the witch Pūtanā; kṛṣṇāyantī — another, who was acting like Kṛṣṇa; apibat — drank; stanam — from the breast; tokayitvā — acting like an infant; rudatī — crying; anyā — another; padā — with her foot; ahan — struck; śakaṭā-yatīm — another, who was imitating a cart.

Translation
One gopī imitated Pūtanā, while another acted like infant Kṛṣṇa and pretended to suck her breast. Another gopī, crying in imitation of infant Kṛṣṇa, kicked a gopī who was taking the role of the cart demon, Śakaṭāsura.

Text 16
दैत्यायित्वा जहारान्यामेको कृष्णार्भभावनाम् ।
रिङ्गयामास काप्यङ्‌‌‌घ्री कर्षन्ती घोषनि:स्वनै: ॥ १६ ॥
daityāyitvā jahārānyām
eko kṛṣṇārbha-bhāvanām
riṅgayām āsa kāpy aṅghrī
karṣantī ghoṣa-niḥsvanaiḥ
Synonyms
daityāyitvā — imitating a demon (namely Tṛṇāvarta); jahāra — carried away; anyām — another gopī; ekā — one gopī; kṛṣṇa-arbha — of the infant Kṛṣṇa; bhāvanām — who was assuming the mood; riṅgayām āsa — crawled about; kā api — one of them; aṅghrī — her two feet; karṣantī — dragging; ghoṣa — of tinkling bells; niḥsvanaiḥ — with the sounding.

Translation
One gopī took the role of Tṛṇāvarta and carried away another, who was acting like infant Kṛṣṇa, while yet another gopī crawled about, her ankle bells tinkling as she pulled her feet.

Text 17
कृष्णरामायिते द्वे तु गोपायन्त्यश्च काश्चन ।
वत्सायतीं हन्ति चान्या तत्रैका तु बकायतीम् ॥ १७ ॥
kṛṣṇa-rāmāyite dve tu
gopāyantyaś ca kāścana
vatsāyatīṁ hanti cānyā
tatraikā tu bakāyatīm
Synonyms
kṛṣṇa-rāmāyite — acting like Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Balarāma; dve — two gopīs; tu — and; gopāyantyaḥ — acting like Their cowherd boyfriends; ca — and; kāścana — some; vatsāyatīm — who was imitating the calf demon, Vatsāsura; hanti — killed; ca — and; anyā — another; tatra — there; ekā — one; tu — moreover; bakāyatīm — another, who was imitating the crane demon, Bakāsura.

Translation
Two gopīs acted like Rāma and Kṛṣṇa in the midst of several others, who took the role of cowherd boys. One gopī enacted Kṛṣṇa’s killing of the demon Vatsāsura, represented by another gopī, and a pair of gopīs acted out the killing of Bakāsura.

Text 18
आहूय दूरगा यद्वत् कृष्णस्तमनुवर्ततीम् ।
वेणुं क्‍वणन्तीं क्रीडन्तीमन्या: शंसन्ति साध्विति ॥ १८ ॥
āhūya dūra-gā yadvat
kṛṣṇas tam anuvartatīm
veṇuṁ kvaṇantīṁ krīḍantīm
anyāḥ śaṁsanti sādhv iti
Synonyms
āhūya — calling; dūra — who were far away; gāḥ — the cows; yadvat — just as; kṛṣṇaḥ — Kṛṣṇa; tam — him; anuvartatīm — one gopī who was imitating; veṇum — the flute; kvaṇantīm — vibrating; krīḍantīm — playing games; anyāḥ — the other gopīs; śaṁsanti — praised; sādhu iti — “excellent!”

Translation
When one gopī perfectly imitated how Kṛṣṇa would call the cows who had wandered far away, how He would play His flute and how He would engage in various sports, the others congratulated her with exclamations of “Well done! Well done!”

Text 19
कस्याञ्चित् स्वभुजं न्यस्य
चलन्त्याहापरा ननु ।
कृष्णोऽहं पश्यत गतिं
ललितामिति तन्मना: ॥ १९ ॥
kasyāñcit sva-bhujaṁ nyasya
calanty āhāparā nanu
kṛṣṇo ’haṁ paśyata gatiṁ
lalitām iti tan-manāḥ
Synonyms
kasyāñcit — of one of them; sva-bhujam — her arm; nyasya — placing (on the shoulder); calantī — walking about; āha — stated; aparā — another; nanu — indeed; kṛṣṇaḥ — Kṛṣṇa; aham — I am; paśyata — just see; gatim — my movements; lalitām — graceful; iti — with these words; tat — in Him; manāḥ — with her mind fully absorbed.

Translation
Another gopī, her mind fixed on Kṛṣṇa, walked about with her arm resting on the shoulder of a friend and declared, “I am Kṛṣṇa! Just see how gracefully I move!”

Text 20
मा भैष्ट वातवर्षाभ्यां तत्‍त्राणं विहितं मया ।
इत्युक्त्वैकेन हस्तेन यतन्त्युन्निदधेऽम्बरम् ॥ २० ॥
mā bhaiṣṭa vāta-varṣābhyāṁ
tat-trāṇaṁ vihitaṁ maya
ity uktvaikena hastena
yatanty unnidadhe ’mbaram
Synonyms
mā bhaiṣṭa — don’t any of you fear; vāta — the wind; varṣābhyām — and rain; tat — from that; trāṇam — your deliverance; vihitam — has been arranged; mayā — by me; iti — thus; uktvā — speaking; ekena — with one; hastena — hand; yatantī — endeavoring; unnidadhe — she lifted; ambaram — her upper garment.

Translation
“Don’t be afraid of the wind and rain,” said one gopī. “I will save you.” And with that she lifted her shawl above her head.

Text 21
आरुह्यैका पदाक्रम्य शिरस्याहापरां नृप ।
दुष्टाहे गच्छ जातोऽहं खलानां ननु दण्डकृत् ॥ २१ ॥
āruhyaikā padākramya
śirasy āhāparāṁ nṛpa
duṣṭāhe gaccha jāto ’haṁ
khalānām nanu daṇḍa-kṛt
Synonyms
āruhya — rising up; ekā — one of the gopīs; padā — with her foot; ākramya — climbing above; śirasi — the head; āha — said; aparām — to another; nṛpa — O King (Parīkṣit); duṣṭa — wicked; ahe — O snake; gaccha — go away; jātaḥ — have taken birth; aham — I; khalānām — on those who are envious; nanu — indeed; daṇḍa — of punishment; kṛt — as the imposer.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] O King, one gopī climbed on another’s shoulders and, putting her foot on the other’s head, said, “Go away from here, O wicked snake! You should know that I have taken birth in this world just to punish the envious.”

Text 22
तत्रैकोवाच हे गोपा दावाग्निं पश्यतोल्बणम् ।
चक्षूंष्याश्वपिदध्वं वो विधास्ये क्षेममञ्जसा ॥ २२ ॥
tatraikovāca he gopā
dāvāgniṁ paśyatolbaṇam
cakṣūṁṣy āśv apidadhvaṁ vo
vidhāsye kṣemam añjasā
Synonyms
tatra — there; ekā — one of them; uvāca — said; he gopāḥ — O cowherd boys; dāva-agnim — the forest fire; paśyata — see; ulbaṇam — fierce; cakṣūṁṣi — your eyes; āśu — quickly; apidadhvam — just close; vaḥ — your; vidhāsye — I will arrange; kṣemam — protection; añjasā — with ease.

Translation
Then another gopī spoke up: My dear cowherd boys, look at this raging forest fire! Quickly close your eyes and I will easily protect you.

Text 23
बद्धान्यया स्रजा काचित्तन्वी तत्र उलूखले ।
बध्नामि भाण्डभेत्तारं हैयङ्गवमुषं त्विति ।
भीता सुद‍ृक् पिधायास्यं भेजे भीतिविडम्बनम् ॥ २३ ॥
baddhānyayā srajā kācit
tanvī tatra ulūkhale
badhnāmi bhāṇḍa-bhettāraṁ
haiyaṅgava-muṣaṁ tv iti
bhītā su-dṛk pidhāyāsyaṁ
bheje bhīti-viḍambanam
Synonyms
baddhā — tied up; anyayā — by another gopī; srajā — with a flower garland; kācit — one gopī; tanvī — slender; tatra — there; ulūkhale — to the grinding mortar; badhnāmi — I am binding; bhāṇḍa — of the storage pots; bhettāram — the breaker; haiyam-gava — of the butter saved from the previous day’s milk; muṣam — the stealer; tu — indeed; iti — thus speaking; bhītā — afraid; su-dṛk — with beautiful eyes; pidhāya — covering; āsyam — her face; bheje — assumed; bhīti — of fear; viḍambanam — the pretense.

Translation
One gopī tied up her slender companion with a flower garland and said, “Now I will bind this boy who has broken the butter pots and stolen the butter.” The second gopī then covered her face and beautiful eyes, pretending to be afraid.

Text 24
एवं कृष्णं पृच्छमाना गण्दावनलतास्तरून् ।
व्यचक्षत वनोद्देशे पदानि परमात्मन: ॥ २४ ॥
evaṁ kṛṣṇaṁ pṛcchamānā
vrṇdāvana-latās tarūn
vyacakṣata vanoddeśe
padāni paramātmanaḥ
Synonyms
evam — in this manner; kṛṣṇam — about Kṛṣṇa; pṛcchamānāḥ — inquiring; vṛndāvana — of the Vṛndāvana forest; latāḥ — from the creepers; tarūn — and the trees; vyacakṣata — they saw; vana — of the forest; uddeśe — in one spot; padāni — the footprints; parama-ātmanaḥ — of the Supersoul.

Translation
While the gopīs were thus imitating Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes and asking Vṛndāvana’s creepers and trees where Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Soul, might be, they happened to see His footprints in a corner of the forest.

Text 25
पदानि व्यक्तमेतानि नन्दसूनोर्महात्मन: ।
लक्ष्यन्ते हि ध्वजाम्भोजवज्राङ्कुशयवादिभि: ॥ २५ ॥
padāni vyaktam etāni
nanda-sūnor mahātmanaḥ
lakṣyante hi dhvajāmbhoja-
vajrāṅkuśa-yavādibhiḥ
Synonyms
padāni — the footprints; vyaktam — clearly; etāni — these; nanda-sūnoḥ — of the son of Nanda Mahārāja; mahā-ātmanaḥ — the great soul; lakṣyante — are ascertained; hi — indeed; dhvaja — by the flag; ambhoja — lotus; vajra — thunderbolt; aṅkuśa — elephant goad; yava-ādibhiḥ — barleycorn, etc.

Translation
[The gopīs said:] The marks of a flag, lotus, thunderbolt, elephant goad, barleycorn and so forth on these footprints clearly distinguish them as belonging to that great soul, the son of Nanda Mahārāja.

Text 26
तैस्तै: पदैस्तत्पदवीमन्विच्छन्त्योऽग्रतोऽबला: ।
वध्वा: पदै: सुपृक्तानि विलोक्यार्ता: समब्रुवन् ॥ २६ ॥
tais taiḥ padais tat-padavīm
anvicchantyo ’grato ’balāḥ
vadhvāḥ padaiḥ su-pṛktāni
vilokyārtāḥ samabruvan
Synonyms
taiḥ taiḥ — by those various; padaiḥ — footprints; tat — His; padavīm — path; anvicchantyaḥ — tracing out; agrataḥ — forward; abalāḥ — the girls; vadhvāḥ — of His special consort; padaiḥ — with the footprints; supṛktāni — thoroughly intermingled; vilokya — noticing; ārtāḥ — distressed; samabruvan — they spoke.

Translation
The gopīs began following Kṛṣṇa’s path, as shown by His many footprints, but when they saw that these prints were thoroughly intermixed with those of His dearmost consort, they became perturbed and spoke as follows.

Text 27
कस्या: पदानि चैतानि याताया नन्दसूनुना ।
अंसन्यस्तप्रकोष्ठाया: करेणो: करिणा यथा ॥ २७ ॥
kasyāḥ padāni caitāni
yātāyā nanda-sūnunā
aṁsa-nyasta-prakoṣṭhāyāḥ
kareṇoḥ kariṇā yathā
Synonyms
kasyāḥ — of one certain gopī; padāni — the footprints; ca — also; etāni — these; yātāyāḥ — who was going; nanda-sūnunā — together with the son of Nanda Mahārāja; aṁsa — upon whose shoulder; nyasta — placed; prakoṣṭhāyāḥ — His forearm; kareṇoḥ — of a she-elephant; kariṇā — by the he-elephant; yathā — as.

Translation
[The gopīs said:] Here we see the footprints of some gopī who must have been walking along with the son of Nanda Mahārāja. He must have put His arm on Her shoulder, just as an elephant rests His trunk on the shoulder of an accompanying she-elephant.

Text 28
अनयाराधितो नूनं भगवान् हरिरीश्वर: ।
यन्नो विहाय गोविन्द: प्रीतो यामनयद् रह: ॥ २८ ॥
anayārādhito nūnaṁ
bhagavān harir īśvaraḥ
yan no vihāya govindaḥ
prīto yām anayad rahaḥ
Synonyms
anayā — by Her; ārādhitaḥ — perfectly worshiped; nūnam — certainly; bhagavan — the Personality of Godhead; hariḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; īśvaraḥ — the supreme controller; yat — inasmuch as; naḥ — us; vihāya — rejecting; govindaḥ — Lord Govinda; prītaḥ — pleased; yām — whom; anayat — led; rahaḥ — to a secluded place.

Translation
Certainly this particular gopī has perfectly worshiped the all-powerful Personality of Godhead, Govinda, since He was so pleased with Her that He abandoned the rest of us and brought Her to a secluded place.

Text 29
धन्या अहो अमी आल्यो गोविन्दाङ्‌घ्य्रब्जरेणव: ।
यान् ब्रह्मेशौ रमा देवी दधुर्मूध्‍‌‌र्न्यघनुत्तये ॥ २९ ॥
dhanyā aho amī ālyo
govindāṅghry-abja-reṇavaḥ
yān brahmeśau ramā devī
dadhur mūrdhny agha-nuttaye
Synonyms
dhanyāḥ — sanctified; aho — ah; amī — these; ālyaḥ — O gopīs; govinda — of Govinda; aṅghri-abja — of the lotuslike feet; reṇavaḥ — the particles of dust; yān — which; brahmā — Lord Brahmā; īśau — and Lord Śiva; ramā devī — Ramādevī, the wife of Lord Viṣṇu; dadhuḥ — take; mūrdhni — on their heads; agha — of their sinful reactions; nuttaye — for the dispelling.

Translation
O girls! The dust of Govinda’s lotus feet is so sacred that even Brahmā, Śiva and the goddess Ramā take that dust upon their heads to dispel sinful reactions.

Text 30
तस्या अमूनि न: क्षोभं कुर्वन्त्युच्चै: पदानि यत्
यैकापहृत्य गोपीनां रहो भुङ्क्तेऽच्युताधरम् ।
न लक्ष्यन्ते पदान्यत्र तस्या नूनं तृणाङ्कुरै:
खिद्यत्सुजाताङ्‍‍‍‍‍घ्रितलामुन्निन्ये प्रेयसीं प्रिय: ॥ ३० ॥
tasyā amūni naḥ kṣobhaṁ
kurvanty uccaiḥ padāni yat
yaikāpahṛtya gopīnām
raho bhunkte ’cyutādharam
na lakṣyante padāny atra
tasyā nūnaṁ tṛṇāṅkuraiḥ
khidyat-sujātāṅghri-talām
unninye preyasīṁ priyaḥ
Synonyms
tasyāḥ — of Her; amūni — these; naḥ — for us; kṣobham — agitation; kurvanti — create; uccaiḥ — exceedingly; padāni — the footprints; yat — because; yā — who; ekā — alone; apahṛtya — being taken aside; gopīnām — of all the gopīs; rahaḥ — in seclusion; bhuṅkte — She enjoys; acyuta — of Kṛṣṇa; adharam — the lips; na lakṣyante — are not seen; padāni — the feet; atra — here; tasyāḥ — Her; nūnam — certainly; tṛṇa — by the blades of grass; aṅkuraiḥ — and the growing sprouts; khidyat — being caused pain; sujāta — tender; aṅghri — of whose feet; talām — the soles; unninye — He has lifted up; preyasīm — His beloved; priyaḥ — Her dear Kṛṣṇa.

Translation
These footprints of that special gopī greatly disturb us. Of all the gopīs, She alone was taken away to a secluded place, where She is enjoying the lips of Kṛṣṇa. Look, we can’t see Her footprints over here! It’s obvious that the grass and sprouts were hurting the tender soles of Her feet, and so the lover lifted up His beloved.

Text 31
इमान्यधिकमग्नानि पदानि वहतो वधूम् ।
गोप्य: पश्यत कृष्णस्य भाराक्रान्तस्य कामिन: ।
अत्रावरोपिता कान्ता पुष्पहेतोर्महात्मना ॥ ३१ ॥
imāny adhika-magnāni
padāni vahato vadhūm
gopyaḥ paśyata kṛṣṇasya
bhārākrāntasya kāminaḥ
atrāvaropitā kāntā
puṣpa-hetor mahātmanā
Synonyms
imāni — these; adhika — very much; magnāni — merged; padāni — footprints; vahataḥ — of Him who was carrying; vadhūm — His consort; gopyaḥ — O gopīs; paśyata — just see; kṛṣṇasya — of Kṛṣṇa; bhāra — by the weight; ākrāntasya — oppressed; kāminaḥ — lusty; atra — in this place; avaropitā — placed down; kāntā — the girlfriend; puṣpa — of (gathering) flowers; hetoḥ — for the purpose; mahā-ātmanā — by the very intelligent.

Translation
Please observe, my dear gopīs, how in this place lusty Kṛṣṇa’s footprints are pressed more deeply into the ground. Carrying the weight of His beloved must have been difficult for Him. And over here that intelligent boy must have put Her down to gather some flowers.

Text 32
अत्र प्रसूनावचय: प्रियार्थे प्रेयसा कृत: ।
प्रपदाक्रमण एते पश्यतासकले पदे ॥ ३२ ॥
atra prasūnāvacayaḥ
priyārthe preyasā kṛtaḥ
prapadākramaṇa ete
paśyatāsakale pade
Synonyms
atra — here; prasūna — of flowers; avacayaḥ — the gathering; priyā-arthe — for the sake of His beloved; preyasā — by the beloved Kṛṣṇa; kṛtaḥ — done; prapada — front of His feet; ākramaṇe — with the pressing down; ete — these; paśyata — just see; asakale — incomplete; pade — the pair of footprints.

Translation
Just see how in this place dear Kṛṣṇa collected flowers for His beloved. Here He has left the impression of only the front part of His feet because He was standing on His toes to reach the flowers.

Text 33
केशप्रसाधनं त्वत्र कामिन्या: कामिना कृतम् ।
तानि चूडयता कान्तामुपविष्टमिह ध्रुवम् ॥ ३३ ॥
keśa-prasādhanaṁ tv atra
kāminyāḥ kāminā kṛtam
tāni cūḍayatā kāntām
upaviṣṭam iha dhruvam
Synonyms
keśa — of Her hair; prasādhanam — the decorative arrangement; tu — furthermore; atra — here; kāminyāḥ — of the lusty girl; kāminā — by the lusty boy; kṛtam — done; tāni — with those (flowers); cūḍayatā — by Him who was making a crown; kāntām — His consort; upaviṣṭam — seated; iha — here; dhruvam — certainly.

Translation
Certainly Kṛṣṇa sat down here with His girlfriend to arrange Her hair. The lusty boy must have made a crown for that lusty girl out of the flowers He had collected.

Text 34
रेमे तया चात्मरत आत्मारामोऽप्यखण्डित: ।
कामिनां दर्शयन् दैन्यं स्त्रीणां चैव दुरात्मताम् ॥ ३४ ॥
reme tayā cātma-rata
ātmārāmo ’py akhaṇḍitaḥ
kāmināṁ darśayan dainyaṁ
strīṇāṁ caiva durātmatām
Synonyms
reme — He enjoyed; tayā — with Her; ca — and; ātma-rataḥ — He who takes pleasure only within Himself; ātma-ārāmaḥ — completely self-satisfied; api — although; akhaṇḍitaḥ — never incomplete; kāminām — of ordinary lusty men; darśayan — showing; dainyam — the degraded condition; strīṇām — of ordinary women; ca eva — also; durātmatām — the hardheartedness.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Lord Kṛṣṇa enjoyed with that gopī, although He enjoys only within, being self-satisfied and complete in Himself. Thus by contrast He showed the wretchedness of ordinary lusty men and hardhearted women.

Texts 35-36
इत्येवं दर्शयन्त्यस्ताश्चेरुर्गोप्यो विचेतस: ।
यां गोपीमनयत्कृष्णो विहायान्या: स्त्रियो वने ॥ ३५ ॥
सा च मेने तदात्मानं वरिष्ठं सर्वयोषिताम् ।
हित्वा गोपी: कामयाना मामसौ भजते प्रिय: ॥ ३६ ॥
ity evaṁ darśayantyas tāś
cerur gopyo vicetasaḥ
yāṁ gopīm anayat kṛṣṇo
vihāyānyāḥ striyo vane
sā ca mene tadātmānaṁ
variṣṭhaṁ sarva-yoṣitām
hitvā gopīḥ kāma-yānā
mām asau bhajate priyaḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus; evam — in this manner; darśayantyaḥ — showing; tāḥ — they; ceruḥ — wandered; gopyaḥ — the gopīs; vicetasaḥ — completely bewildered; yām — which; gopīm — gopī; anayat — He took; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; vihāya — abandoning; anyāḥ — the other; striyaḥ — women; vane — in the forest; sā — She; ca — also; mene — thought; tadā — then; ātmānam — Herself; variṣṭham — the best; sarva — of all; yoṣitām — women; hitvā — rejecting; gopīḥ — the gopīs; kāma-yānāḥ — who are impelled by lusty desire; mām — Me; asau — He; bhajate — is accepting; priyaḥ — the beloved.

Translation
As the gopīs wandered about, their minds completely bewildered, they pointed out various signs of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. The particular gopī whom Kṛṣṇa had led into a secluded forest when He had abandoned all the other young girls began to think Herself the best of women. “My beloved has rejected all the other gopīs,” She thought, “even though they are driven by Cupid himself. He has chosen to reciprocate with Me alone.”

Text 37
ततो गत्वा वनोद्देशं द‍ृप्ता केशवमब्रवीत् ।
न पारयेऽहं चलितुं नय मां यत्र ते मन: ॥ ३७ ॥
tato gatvā vanoddeśaṁ
dṛptā keśavam abravīt
na pāraye ’haṁ calituṁ
naya māṁ yatra te manaḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; gatvā — going; vana — of the forest; uddeśam — to one region; dṛptā — becoming proud; keśavam — to Kṛṣṇa; abravīt — She said; na pāraye — am not able; aham — I; calitum — to move; naya — bring; mām — Me; yatra — where; te — Your; manaḥ — mind.

Translation
As the two lovers passed through one part of the Vṛndāvana forest, the special gopī began feeling proud of Herself. She told Lord Keśava, “I cannot walk any further. Please carry Me wherever You want to go.”

Text 38
एवमुक्त: प्रियामाह स्कन्ध आरुह्यतामिति ।
ततश्चान्तर्दधे कृष्ण: सा वधूरन्वतप्यत ॥ ३८ ॥
evam uktaḥ priyām āha
skandha āruhyatām iti
tataś cāntardadhe kṛṣṇaḥ
sā vadhūr anvatapyata
Synonyms
evam — thus; uktaḥ — addressed; priyām — to His beloved; āha — He said; skandhe — on My shoulder; āruhyatām — please climb; iti — these words; tataḥ — then; ca — and; antardadhe — He disappeared; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; sā — She; vadhūḥ — His consort; anvatapyata — felt remorse.

Translation
Thus addressed, Lord Kṛṣṇa replied, “Just climb on My shoulder.” But as soon as He said this, He disappeared. His beloved consort then immediately felt great remorse.

Text 39
हा नाथ रमण प्रेष्ठ क्‍वासि क्‍वासि महाभुज ।
दास्यास्ते कृपणाया मे सखे दर्शय सन्निधिम् ॥ ३९ ॥
hā nātha ramaṇa preṣṭha
kvāsi kvāsi mahā-bhuja
dāsyās te kṛpaṇāyā me
sakhe darśaya sannidhim
Synonyms
hā — O; nātha — master; ramaṇa — lover; preṣṭha — dearmost; kva asi kva asi — where are You, where are You; mahā-bhuja — O mighty-armed one; dāsyāḥ — to the maidservant; te — Your; kṛpaṇāyāḥ — wretched; me — Me; sakhe — O friend; darśaya — please show; sannidhim — Your presence.

Translation
She cried out: O master! My lover! O dearmost, where are You? Where are You? Please, O mighty-armed one, O friend, show Yourself to Me, Your poor servant!

Text 40
श्रीशुक उवाच
अन्विच्छन्त्यो भगवतो मार्गं गोप्योऽविदूरित: ।
दद‍ृशु: प्रियविश्लेषान्मोहितां दु:खितां सखीम् ॥ ४० ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
anvicchantyo bhagavato
mārgaṁ gopyo ’vidūritaḥ
dadṛśuḥ priya-viśleṣān
mohitāṁ duḥkhitāṁ sakhīm
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; anvicchantyaḥ — searching out; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mārgam — the path; gopyaḥ — the gopīs; avidūritaḥ — not far away; dadṛśuḥ — saw; priya — from Her beloved; viśleṣāt — because of the separation; mohitām — bewildered; duḥkhitām — unhappy; sakhīm — their friend.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: While continuing to search out Kṛṣṇa’s path, the gopīs discovered their unhappy friend close by. She was bewildered by separation from Her lover.

Text 41
तया कथितमाकर्ण्य मानप्राप्तिं च माधवात् ।
अवमानं च दौरात्म्याद् विस्मयं परमं ययु: ॥ ४१ ॥
tayā kathitam ākarṇya
māna-prāptiṁ ca mādhavāt
avamānaṁ ca daurātmyād
vismayaṁ paramaṁ yayuḥ
Synonyms
tayā — by Her; kathitam — what was related; ākarṇya — hearing; māna — of respect; prāptim — the receiving; ca — and; mādhavāt — from Lord Kṛṣṇa; avamānam — the dishonor; ca — also; daurātmyāt — because of Her impropriety; vismayam — amazement; paramam — supreme; yayuḥ — they experienced.

Translation
She told them how Mādhava had given Her much respect, but how She then suffered dishonor because of Her misbehavior. The gopīs were extremely amazed to hear this.

Text 42
ततोऽविशन्वनं चन्द्रज्योत्स्‍ना यावद् विभाव्यते ।
तम: प्रविष्टमालक्ष्य ततो निववृतु: स्त्रिय: ॥ ४२ ॥
tato ’viśan vanaṁ candra
jyotsnā yāvad vibhāvyate
tamaḥ praviṣṭam ālakṣya
tato nivavṛtuḥ striyaḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; aviśan — they entered; vanam — the forest; candra — of the moon; jyotsnā — the light; yāvat — as far; vibhāvyate — as was visible; tamaḥ — darkness; praviṣṭam — entered; ālakṣya — noticing; tataḥ — thereupon; nivavṛtuḥ — they desisted; striyaḥ — the women.

Translation
In search of Kṛṣṇa, the gopīs then entered the depths of the forest as far as the light of the moon shone. But when they found themselves engulfed in darkness, they decided to turn back.

Text 43
तन्मनस्कास्तदालापास्तद्विचेष्टास्तदात्मिका: ।
तद्गुणानेव गायन्त्यो नात्मगाराणि सस्मरु: ॥ ४३ ॥
tan-manaskās tad-alāpās
tad-viceṣṭās tad-ātmikāḥ
tad-guṇān eva gāyantyo
nātmagārāṇi sasmaruḥ
Synonyms
tat-manaskāḥ — their minds filled with thoughts of Him; tat-ālāpāḥ — conversing about Him; tat-viceṣṭāḥ — imitating His activities; tat-ātmikāḥ — filled with His presence; tat-guṇān — about His qualities; eva — simply; gāyantyaḥ — singing; na — not; ātma — their own; āgārāṇi — homes; sasmaruḥ — remembered.

Translation
Their minds absorbed in thoughts of Him, they conversed about Him, acted out His pastimes and felt themselves filled with His presence. They completely forgot about their homes as they loudly sang the glories of Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental qualities.

Text 44
पुन: पुलिनमागत्य कालिन्द्या: कृष्णभावना: ।
समवेता जगु: कृष्णं तदागमनकाङ्‌‌क्षिता: ॥ ४४ ॥
punaḥ pulinam āgatya
kālindyāḥ kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāḥ
samavetā jaguḥ kṛṣṇaṁ
tad-āgamana-kāṅkṣitāḥ
Synonyms
punaḥ — again; pulinam — to the bank; āgatya — coming; kālindyāḥ — of the river Yamunā; kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāḥ — meditating on Kṛṣṇa; samavetāḥ — joined together; jaguḥ — they sang; kṛṣṇam — about Kṛṣṇa; tat-āgamana — His arrival; kāṅkṣitāḥ — eagerly desired.

Translation
The gopīs again came to the bank of the Kālindī. Meditating on Kṛṣṇa and eagerly hoping He would come, they sat down together to sing of Him.