Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
इत्थं भगवतो गोप्य: श्रुत्वा वाच: सुपेशला: ।
जहुर्विरहजं तापं तदङ्गोपचिताशिष: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
itthaṁ bhagavato gopyaḥ
śrutvā vācaḥ su-peśalāḥ
jahur viraha-jaṁ tāpaṁ
tad-aṅgopacitāśiṣaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ittham — thus; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; gopyaḥ — the cowherd girls; śrutvā — hearing; vācaḥ — the words; su-peśalāḥ — most charming; jahuḥ — they gave up; viraha-jam — born out of their feelings of separation; tāpam — the distress; tat — His; aṅga — from (touching) the limbs; upacita — fulfilled; āśiṣaḥ — whose desires.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When the cowherd girls heard the Supreme Personality of Godhead speak these most charming words, they forgot their distress caused by separation from Him. Touching His transcendental limbs, they felt all their desires fulfilled.

Text 2
तत्रारभत गोविन्दो रासक्रीडामनुव्रतै: ।
स्त्रीरत्नैरन्वित: प्रीतैरन्योन्याबद्धबाहुभि: ॥ २ ॥
tatrārabhata govindo
rāsa-krīḍām anuvrataiḥ
strī-ratnair anvitaḥ prītair
anyonyābaddha-bāhubhiḥ
Synonyms
tatra — there; ārabhata — began; govindaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; rāsa-krīḍam — the pastime of the rāsa dance; anuvrataiḥ — by the faithful (gopīs); strī — of women; ratnaiḥ — the jewels; anvitaḥ — joined; prītaiḥ — who were satisfied; anyonya — among one another; ābaddha — entwining; bāhubhiḥ — their arms.

Translation
There on the Yamunā’s banks Lord Govinda then began the pastime of the rāsa dance in the company of those jewels among women, the faithful gopīs, who joyfully linked their arms together.

Text 3
रासोत्सव: सम्प्रवृत्तो गोपीमण्डलमण्डित: ।
योगेश्वरेण कृष्णेन तासां मध्ये द्वयोर्द्वयो: ।
प्रविष्टेन गृहीतानां कण्ठे स्वनिकटं स्त्रिय: ।
यं मन्येरन् नभस्तावद् विमानशतसङ्कुलम् ।
दिवौकसां सदाराणामौत्सुक्यापहृतात्मनाम् ॥ ३ ॥
rāsotsavaḥ sampravṛtto
gopī-maṇḍala-maṇḍitaḥ
yogeśvareṇa kṛṣṇena
tāsāṁ madhye dvayor dvayoḥ
praviṣṭena gṛhītānāṁ
kaṇṭhe sva-nikaṭaṁ striyaḥ
yaṁ manyeran nabhas tāvad
vimāna-śata-saṅkulam
divaukasāṁ sa-dārāṇām
autsukyāpahṛtātmanām
Synonyms
rāsa — of the rāsa dance; utsavaḥ — the festivity; sampravṛttaḥ — commenced; gopī-maṇḍala — by the circle of gopīs; maṇḍitaḥ — decorated; yoga — of mystic power; īśvareṇa — by the supreme controller; kṛṣṇena — Lord Kṛṣṇa; tāsām — of them; madhye — within the midst; dvayoḥ dvayoḥ — between each pair; praviṣṭena — present; gṛhīṭānām — who were held; kaṇṭhe — by the necks; sva-nikaṭam — next to themselves; striyaḥ — the women; yam — whom; manyeran — considered; nabhaḥ — the sky; tāvat — at that time; vimāna — of airplanes; śata — with hundreds; saṅkulam — crowded; diva — of the heavenly planets; okasām — belonging to the inhabitants; sa — accompanied; dārāṇām — by their wives; autsukya — by eagerness; apahṛta — carried away; ātmanām — their minds.

Translation
The festive rāsa dance commenced, with the gopīs arrayed in a circle. Lord Kṛṣṇa expanded Himself and entered between each pair of gopīs, and as that master of mystic power placed His arms around their necks, each girl thought He was standing next to her alone. The demigods and their wives were overwhelmed with eagerness to witness the rāsa dance, and they soon crowded the sky with their hundreds of celestial airplanes.

Text 4
ततो दुन्दुभयो नेदुर्निपेतु: पुष्पवृष्टय: ।
जगुर्गन्धर्वपतय: सस्त्रीकास्तद्यशोऽमलम् ॥ ४ ॥
tato dundubhayo nedur
nipetuḥ puṣpa-vṛṣṭayaḥ
jagur gandharva-patayaḥ
sa-strīkās tad-yaśo ’malam
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; dundubhayaḥ — kettledrums; neduḥ — resounded; nipetuḥ — fell down; puṣpa — of flowers; vṛṣṭayaḥ — rain; jaguḥ — they sang; gandharva-patayaḥ — the chief Gandharvas; sa-strīkāḥ — along with their wives; tat — of Him, Lord Kṛṣṇa; yaśaḥ — the glories; amalam — spotless.

Translation
Kettledrums then resounded in the sky while flowers rained down and the chief Gandharvas and their wives sang Lord Kṛṣṇa’s spotless glories.

Text 5
वलयानां नूपुराणां किङ्किणीनां च योषिताम् ।
सप्रियाणामभूच्छब्दस्तुमुलो रासमण्डले ॥ ५ ॥
valayānāṁ nūpurāṇāṁ
kiṅkiṇīnāṁ ca yoṣitām
sa-priyāṇām abhūc chabdas
tumulo rāsa-maṇḍale
Synonyms
valayānām — of the armlets; nūpurāṇām — ankle bells; kiṅkiṇīnām — bells worn around the waist; ca — and; yoṣitām — of the women; sa-priyāṇām — who were with their beloved; abhūt — there was; śabdaḥ — a sound; tumulaḥ — tumultuous; rāsa-maṇḍale — in the circle of the rāsa dance.

Translation
A tumultuous sound arose from the armlets, ankle bells and waist bells of the gopīs as they sported with their beloved Kṛṣṇa in the circle of the rāsa dance.

Text 6
तत्रातिशुशुभे ताभिर्भगवान् देवकीसुत: ।
मध्ये मणीनां हैमानां महामरकतो यथा ॥ ६ ॥
tatrātiśuśubhe tābhir
bhagavān devakī-sutaḥ
madhye maṇīnāṁ haimānāṁ
mahā-marakato yathā
Synonyms
tatra — there; atiśuśubhe — appeared most brilliant; tābhiḥ — with them; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; devakī-sutaḥ — Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī; madhye — in the midst; maṇīnām — of ornaments; haimānām — golden; mahā — great; marakataḥ — a sapphire; yathā — as.

Translation
In the midst of the dancing gopīs, Lord Kṛṣṇa appeared most brilliant, like an exquisite sapphire in the midst of golden ornaments.

Text 7
पादन्यासैर्भुजविधुतिभि: सस्मितैर्भ्रूविलासै-
र्भज्यन्मध्यैश्चलकुचपटै: कुण्डलैर्गण्डलोलै: ।
स्विद्यन्मुख्य: कवररसनाग्रन्थय: कृष्णवध्वो
गायन्त्यस्तं तडित इव ता मेघचक्रे विरेजु: ॥ ७ ॥
pāda-nyāsair bhuja-vidhutibhiḥ sa-smitair bhrū-vilāsair
bhajyan madhyaiś cala-kuca-paṭaiḥ kuṇḍalair gaṇḍa-lolaiḥ
svidyan-mukhyaḥ kavara-rasanāgranthayaḥ kṛṣṇa-vadhvo
gāyantyas taṁ taḍita iva tā megha-cakre virejuḥ
Synonyms
pāda — of their feet; nyāsaiḥ — by the placement; bhuja — of their hands; vidhutibhiḥ — by the gestures; sa-smitaiḥ — smiling; bhrū — of their eyebrows; vilāsaiḥ — by the playful movements; bhajyan — bending; madhyaiḥ — by their middles; cala — moving; kuca — covering their breasts; paṭaiḥ — by the cloths; kuṇḍalaiḥ — by their earrings; gaṇḍa — on their cheeks; lolaiḥ — rolling; svidyan — perspiring; mukhyaḥ — whose faces; kavara — the braids of their hair; rasanā — and their belts; āgranthayaḥ — having tightly tied; kṛṣṇa-vadhvaḥ — the consorts of Lord Kṛṣṇa; gāyantyaḥ — singing; tam — about Him; taḍitaḥ — bolts of lightning; iva — as if; tāḥ — they; megha-cakre — in a range of clouds; virejuḥ — shone.

Translation
As the gopīs sang in praise of Kṛṣṇa, their feet danced, their hands gestured, and their eyebrows moved with playful smiles. With their braids and belts tied tight, their waists bending, their faces perspiring, the garments on their breasts moving this way and that, and their earrings swinging on their cheeks, Lord Kṛṣṇa’s young consorts shone like streaks of lightning in a mass of clouds.

Text 8
उच्चैर्जगुर्नृत्यमाना रक्तकण्ठ्यो रतिप्रिया: ।
कृष्णाभिमर्शमुदिता यद्गीतेनेदमावृतम् ॥ ८ ॥
uccair jagur nṛtyamānā
rakta-kaṇṭhyo rati-priyāḥ
kṛṣṇābhimarśa-muditā
yad-gītenedam āvṛtam
Synonyms
uccaiḥ — loudly; jaguḥ — they sang; nṛtyamānāḥ — while dancing; rakta — colored; kaṇṭhyaḥ — their throats; rati — conjugal enjoyment; priyāḥ — dedicated to; kṛṣṇa-abhimarśa — by the touch of Lord Kṛṣṇa; muditāḥ — joyful; yat — whose; gītena — by the singing; idam — this entire universe; āvṛtam — is pervaded.

Translation
Eager to enjoy conjugal love, their throats colored with various pigments, the gopīs sang loudly and danced. They were overjoyed by Kṛṣṇa’s touch, and they sang songs that filled the entire universe.

Text 9
काचित् समं मुकुन्देन स्वरजातीरमिश्रिता: ।
उन्निन्ये पूजिता तेन प्रीयता साधु साध्विति ।
तदेव ध्रुवमुन्निन्ये तस्यै मानं च बह्वदात् ॥ ९ ॥
kācit samaṁ mukundena
svara-jātīr amiśritāḥ
unninye pūjitā tena
prīyatā sādhu sādhv iti
tad eva dhruvam unninye
tasyai mānaṁ ca bahv adāt
Synonyms
kācit — a certain gopī; samam — together; mukundena — with Lord Kṛṣṇa; svara-jātīḥ — pure musical tones; amiśritāḥ — not confused with the sounds vibrated by Kṛṣṇa; unninye — she raised; pūjitā — honored; tena — by Him; prīyatā — who was pleased; sādhu sādhu iti — saying, “excellent, excellent”; tat eva — that same (melody); dhruvam — with a particular metrical pattern; unninye — vibrated (another gopī); tasyai — to her; mānam — special respect; ca — and; bahu — much; adāt — He gave.

Translation
One gopī, joining Lord Mukunda in His singing, sang pure melodious tones that rose harmoniously above His. Kṛṣṇa was pleased and showed great appreciation for her performance, saying “Excellent! Excellent!” Then another gopī repeated the same melody, but in a special metrical pattern, and Kṛṣṇa praised her also.

Text 10
काचिद् रासपरिश्रान्ता पार्श्वस्थस्य गदाभृत: ।
जग्राह बाहुना स्कन्धं श्लथद्वलयमल्लिका ॥ १० ॥
kācid rāsa-pariśrāntā
pārśva-sthasya gadā-bhṛtaḥ
jagrāha bāhunā skandhaṁ
ślathad-valaya-mallikā
Synonyms
kācit — a certain gopī; rāsa — by the rāsa dance; pariśrāntā — fatigued; pārśva — at Her side; sthasya — who was standing; gadā-bhṛtaḥ — of Lord Kṛṣṇa, holding a baton; jagrāha — took hold of; bāhunā — with Her arm; skandham — the shoulder; ślathat — loosening; valaya — Her bracelets; mallikā — and the flowers (in Her hair).

Translation
When one gopī grew tired from the rāsa dance, She turned to Kṛṣṇa, standing at Her side holding a baton, and grasped His shoulder with Her arm. The dancing had loosened Her bracelets and the flowers in Her hair.

Text 11
तत्रैकांसगतं बाहुं कृष्णस्योत्पलसौरभम् ।
चन्दनालिप्तमाघ्राय हृष्टरोमा चुचुम्ब ह ॥ ११ ॥
tatraikāṁsa-gataṁ bāhuṁ
kṛṣṇasyotpala-saurabham
candanāliptam āghrāya
hṛṣṭa-romā cucumba ha
Synonyms
tatra — there; ekā — one (gopī); aṁsa — upon her shoulder; gatam — placed; bāhum — the arm; kṛṣṇasya — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; utpala — like a blue lotus; saurabham — the fragrance of which; candana — with sandalwood pulp; āliptam — smeared; āghrāya — smelling; hṛṣṭa — standing on end; romā — her bodily hairs; cucumba ha — she kissed.

Translation
Upon the shoulder of one gopī Kṛṣṇa placed His arm, whose natural blue-lotus fragrance was mixed with that of the sandalwood pulp anointing it. As the gopī relished that fragrance, her bodily hair stood on end in jubilation, and she kissed His arm.

Text 12
कस्याश्‍चिन्नाट्यविक्षिप्त कुण्डलत्विषमण्डितम् ।
गण्डं गण्डे सन्दधत्या: प्रादात्ताम्बूलचर्वितम् ॥ १२ ॥
kasyāścin nāṭya-vikṣipta
kuṇḍala-tviṣa-maṇḍitam
gaṇḍaṁ gaṇḍe sandadhatyāḥ
prādāt tāmbūla-carvitam
Synonyms
kasyāścit — to a certain gopī; nāṭya — by the dancing; vikṣipta — shaken; kuṇḍala — whose earrings; tviṣa — with the glitter; maṇḍitam — adorned; gaṇḍam — her cheek; gaṇḍe — next to His cheek; sandadhatyāḥ — who was placing; prādāt — He carefully gave; tāmbūla — the betel nut; carvitam — chewed.

Translation
Next to Kṛṣṇa’s cheek one gopī put her own, beautified by the effulgence of her earrings, which glittered as she danced. Kṛṣṇa then carefully gave her the betel nut He was chewing.

Text 13
नृत्यती गायती काचित् कूजन्नूपुरमेखला ।
पार्श्वस्थाच्युतहस्ताब्जं श्रान्ताधात्स्तनयो: शिवम् ॥ १३ ॥
nṛtyatī gāyatī kācit
kūjan nūpura-mekhalā
pārśva-sthācyuta-hastābjaṁ
śrāntādhāt stanayoḥ śivam
Synonyms
nṛtyatī — dancing; gāyatī — singing; kācit — a certain gopī; kūjan — murmuring; nūpura — her ankle bells; mekhalā — and her belt; pārśva-stha — standing at her side; acyuta — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; hasta-abjam — the lotus hand; śrāntā — feeling tired; adhāt — placed; stanayoḥ — upon her breasts; śivam — pleasing.

Translation
Another gopī became fatigued as she danced and sang, the bells on her ankles and waist tinkling. So she placed upon her breasts the comforting lotus hand of Lord Acyuta, who was standing by her side.

Text 14
गोप्यो लब्ध्वाच्युतं कान्तं श्रिय एकान्तवल्लभम् ।
गृहीतकण्ठ्यस्तद्दोर्भ्यां गायन्त्यस्तं विजह्रिरे ॥ १४ ॥
gopyo labdhvācyutaṁ kāntaṁ
śriya ekānta-vallabham
gṛhīta-kaṇṭhyas tad-dorbhyāṁ
gāyantyas tam vijahrire
Synonyms
gopyaḥ — the gopīs; labdhvā — having attained; acyutam — the infallible Lord; kāntam — as their lover; śriyaḥ — of the goddess of fortune; ekānta — the exclusive; vallabham — lover; gṛhīta — held; kaṇṭhyaḥ — their necks; tat — His; dorbhyām — by the arms; gāyantyaḥ — singing; tam — about Him; vijahrire — they took pleasure.

Translation
Having attained as their intimate lover Lord Acyuta, the exclusive consort of the goddess of fortune, the gopīs enjoyed great pleasure. They sang His glories as He held their necks with His arms.

Text 15
कर्णोत्पलालकविटङ्ककपोलघर्म-
वक्त्रश्रियो वलयनूपुरघोषवाद्यै: ।
गोप्य: समं भगवता ननृतु: स्वकेश-
स्रस्तस्रजो भ्रमरगायकरासगोष्ठ्याम् ॥ १५ ॥
karṇotpalālaka-viṭaṅka-kapola-gharma-
vaktra-śriyo valaya-nūpura-ghoṣa-vādyaiḥ
gopyaḥ samaṁ bhagavatā nanṛtuḥ sva-keśa-
srasta-srajo bhramara-gāyaka-rāsa-goṣṭhyām
Synonyms
karṇa — upon their ears; utpala — with the lotus flowers; alaka — by locks of their hair; vitaṅka — decorated; kapola — their cheeks; gharma — with perspiration; vaktra — of their faces; śriyaḥ — the beauty; valaya — of their armlets; nūpura — and ankle bells; ghoṣa — of the reverberation; vādyaiḥ — with the musical sound; gopyaḥ — the gopīs; samam — together; bhagavatā — with the Personality of Godhead; nanṛtuḥ — danced; sva — their own; keśa — from the hair; srasta — scattered; srajaḥ — the garlands; bhramara — the bees; gāyaka — singers; rāsa — of the rāsa dance; goṣṭhyām — in the assembly.

Translation
Enhancing the beauty of the gopīs’ faces were the lotus flowers behind their ears, the locks of hair decorating their cheeks, and drops of perspiration. The reverberation of their armlets and ankle bells made a loud musical sound, and their chaplets scattered. Thus the gopīs danced with the Supreme Lord in the arena of the rāsa dance as swarms of bees sang in accompaniment.

Text 16
एवं परिष्वङ्गकराभिमर्श-
स्निग्धेक्षणोद्दामविलासहासै: ।
रेमे रमेशो व्रजसुन्दरीभि-
र्यथार्भक: स्वप्रतिबिम्बविभ्रम: ॥ १६ ॥
evaṁ pariṣvaṅga-karābhimarśa-
snigdhekṣaṇoddāma-vilāsa-hāsaiḥ
reme rameśo vraja-sundarībhir
yathārbhakaḥ sva-pratibimba-vibhramaḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; pariṣvaṅga — with embracing; kara — by His hand; abhimarśa — with touching; snigdha — affectionate; īkṣaṇa — with glances; uddāma — broad; vilāsa — playful; hāsaiḥ — with smiles; reme — He took pleasure; ramā — of the goddess of fortune; īśaḥ — the master; vraja-sundarībhiḥ — with the young women of the cowherd community; yathā — just as; arbhakaḥ — a boy; sva — His own; pratibimba — with the reflection; vibhramaḥ — whose playing.

Translation
In this way Lord Kṛṣṇa, the original Lord Nārāyaṇa, master of the goddess of fortune, took pleasure in the company of the young women of Vraja by embracing them, caressing them and glancing lovingly at them as He smiled His broad, playful smiles. It was just as if a child were playing with his own reflection.

Text 17
तदङ्गसङ्गप्रमुदाकुलेन्द्रिया:
केशान् दुकूलं कुचपट्टिकां वा ।
नाञ्ज: प्रतिव्योढुमलं व्रजस्त्रियो
विस्रस्तमालाभरणा: कुरूद्वह ॥ १७ ॥
tad-aṅga-saṅga-pramudākulendriyāḥ
keśān dukūlaṁ kuca-paṭṭikāṁ vā
nāñjaḥ prativyoḍhum alaṁ vraja-striyo
visrasta-mālābharaṇāḥ kurūdvaha
Synonyms
tat — with Him; aṅga-saṅga — from the bodily contact; pramudā — by the joy; ākula — overflowing; indriyāḥ — whose senses; keśān — their hair; dukūlam — dresses; kuca-paṭṭikām — the garments covering their breasts; vā — or; na — not; añjaḥ — easily; prativyoḍhum — to keep properly arranged; alam — capable; vraja-striyaḥ — the women of Vraja; visrasta — scattered; mālā — their flower garlands; ābharaṇāḥ — and ornaments; kuru-udvaha — O most eminent member of the Kuru dynasty.

Translation
Their senses overwhelmed by the joy of having His physical association, the gopīs could not prevent their hair, their dresses and the cloths covering their breasts from becoming disheveled. Their garlands and ornaments scattered, O hero of the Kuru dynasty.

Text 18
कृष्णविक्रीडितं वीक्ष्य मुमुहु: खेचरस्त्रिय: ।
कामार्दिता: शशाङ्कश्च सगणो विस्मितोऽभवत् ॥ १८ ॥
kṛṣṇa-vikrīḍitaṁ vīkṣya
mumuhuḥ khe-cara-striyaḥ
kāmārditāḥ śaśāṅkaś ca
sa-gaṇo vismito ’bhavat
Synonyms
kṛṣṇa-vikrīḍitam — the playing of Kṛṣṇa; vīkṣya — seeing; mumuhuḥ — became entranced; khe-cara — traveling in the sky; striyaḥ — the women (demigoddesses); kāma — by lusty desires; arditāḥ — agitated; śaśāṅkaḥ — the moon; ca — also; sa-gaṇaḥ — with his followers, the stars; vismitaḥ — amazed; abhavat — became.

Translation
The wives of the demigods, observing Kṛṣṇa’s playful activities from their airplanes, were entranced and became agitated with lust. Indeed, even the moon and his entourage, the stars, became astonished.

Text 19
कृत्वा तावन्तमात्मानं यावतीर्गोपयोषित: ।
रेमे स भगवांस्ताभिरात्मारामोऽपि लीलया ॥ १९ ॥
kṛtvā tāvantam ātmānaṁ
yāvatīr gopa-yoṣitaḥ
reme sa bhagavāṁs tābhir
ātmārāmo ’pi līlayā
Synonyms
kṛtvā — making; tāvantam — expanded that many times; ātmānam — Himself; yāvatīḥ — as many as; gopa-yoṣitaḥ — cowherd women; reme — enjoyed; saḥ — He; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; tābhiḥ — with them; ātma-ārāmaḥ — self-satisfied; api — although; līlayā — as a pastime.

Translation
Expanding Himself as many times as there were cowherd women to associate with, the Supreme Lord, though self-satisfied, playfully enjoyed their company.

Text 20
तासां रतिविहारेण श्रान्तानां वदनानि स: ।
प्रामृजत् करुण: प्रेम्णा शन्तमेनाङ्ग पाणिना ॥ २० ॥
tāsāṁ rati-vihāreṇa
śrāntānāṁ vadanāni saḥ
prāmṛjat karuṇaḥ premṇā
śantamenāṅga pāṇinā
Synonyms
tāsām — of them, the gopīs; rati — of conjugal love; vihāreṇa — by the enjoyment; śrāntānām — who were fatigued; vadanāni — the faces; saḥ — He; prāmṛjat — wiped; karuṇaḥ — merciful; premṇā — lovingly; śantamena — most comforting; aṅga — my dear (King Parīkṣit); pāṇinā — with His hand.

Translation
Seeing that the gopīs were fatigued from conjugal enjoyment, my dear King, merciful Kṛṣṇa lovingly wiped their faces with His comforting hand.

Text 21
गोप्य: स्फुरत्पुरटकुण्डलकुन्तलत्विड्-
गण्डश्रिया सुधितहासनिरीक्षणेन ।
मानं दधत्य ऋषभस्य जगु: कृतानि
पुण्यानि तत्कररुहस्पर्शप्रमोदा: ॥ २१ ॥
gopyaḥ sphurat-puraṭa-kuṇḍala-kuntala-tviḍ-
gaṇḍa-śriyā sudhita-hāsa-nirīkṣaṇena
mānaṁ dadhatya ṛṣabhasya jaguḥ kṛtāni
puṇyāni tat-kara-ruha-sparśa-pramodāḥ
Synonyms
gopyaḥ — the gopīs; sphurat — shining; puraṭa — golden; kuṇḍala — of their earrings; kuntala — and of the locks of their hair; tviṭ — of the effulgence; gaṇḍa — of their cheeks; śriyā — by the beauty; sudhita — made nectarean; hāsa — smiling; nirīkṣaṇena — by their glances; mānam — honor; dadhatyaḥ — giving; ṛṣabhasya — of their hero; jaguḥ — they sang; kṛtāni — the activities; puṇyāni — auspicious; tat — His; kara-ruha — of the fingernails; sparśa — by the touch; pramodāḥ — greatly pleased.

Translation
The gopīs honored their hero with smiling glances sweetened by the beauty of their cheeks and the effulgence of their curly locks and glittering golden earrings. Overjoyed from the touch of His fingernails, they chanted the glories of His all-auspicious transcendental pastimes.

Text 22
ताभिर्युत: श्रममपोहितुमङ्गसङ्ग-
घृष्टस्रज: स कुचकुङ्कुमरञ्जिताया: ।
गन्धर्वपालिभिरनुद्रुत आविशद् वा:
श्रान्तो गजीभिरिभराडिव भिन्नसेतु: ॥ २२ ॥
tābhir yutaḥ śramam apohitum aṅga-saṅga-
ghṛṣṭa-srajaḥ sa kuca-kuṅkuma-rañjitāyāḥ
gandharva-pālibhir anudruta āviśad vāḥ
śrānto gajībhir ibha-rāḍ iva bhinna-setuḥ
Synonyms
tābhiḥ — by them; yutaḥ — accompanied; śramam — fatigue; apohitum — to dispel; aṅga-saṅga — by their conjugal association; ghṛṣṭa — crushed; srajaḥ — whose garland; saḥ — He; kuca — from their breasts; kuṅkuma — of the vermilion powder; rañjitāyāḥ — which was smeared by the color; gandharva-pa — (who appeared like) leaders of the heavenly singers; alibhiḥ — by bees; anudrutaḥ — swiftly followed; āviśat — He entered; vāḥ — the water; śrāntaḥ — tired; gajībhiḥ — together with His female elephant consorts; ibha-rāṭ — a lordly elephant; iva — as; bhinna — having broken; setuḥ — the walls of a paddy field.

Translation
Lord Kṛṣṇa’s garland had been crushed during His conjugal dalliance with the gopīs and colored vermilion by the kuṅkuma powder on their breasts. To dispel the fatigue of the gopīs, Kṛṣṇa entered the water of the Yamunā, followed swiftly by bees who were singing like the best of the Gandharvas. He appeared like a lordly elephant entering the water to relax in the company of his consorts. Indeed, the Lord had transgressed all worldly and Vedic morality just as a powerful elephant might break the dikes in a paddy field.

Text 23
सोऽम्भस्यलं युवतिभि: परिषिच्यमान:
प्रेम्णेक्षित: प्रहसतीभिरितस्ततोऽङ्ग ।
वैमानिकै: कुसुमवर्षिभिरीड्यमानो
रेमे स्वयं स्वरतिरत्र गजेन्द्रलील: ॥ २३ ॥
so ’mbhasy alaṁ yuvatibhiḥ pariṣicyamānaḥ
premṇekṣitaḥ prahasatībhir itas tato ’ṅga
vaimānikaiḥ kusuma-varṣibhir īdyamāno
reme svayaṁ sva-ratir atra gajendra-līlaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — He; ambhasi — in the water; alam — very much; yuvatibhiḥ — by the girls; pariṣicyamānaḥ — being splashed; premṇā — with love; īkṣitaḥ — glanced upon; prahasatībhiḥ — by them, who were laughing; itaḥ tataḥ — here and there; aṅga — my dear King; vaimānikaiḥ — by those traveling in their airplanes; kusuma — flowers; varṣibhiḥ — who were raining down; īḍyamānaḥ — being worshiped; reme — enjoyed; svayam — personally; sva-ratiḥ — satisfied within Himself; atra — here; gaja-indra — of a king of the elephants; līlaḥ — whose playing.

Translation
My dear King, in the water Kṛṣṇa found Himself being splashed on all sides by the laughing gopīs, who looked at Him with love. As the demigods worshiped Him by showering flowers from their airplanes, the self-satisfied Lord took pleasure in playing like the king of the elephants.

Text 24
ततश्च कृष्णोपवने जलस्थल-
प्रसूनगन्धानिलजुष्टदिक्तटे ।
चचार भृङ्गप्रमदागणावृतो
यथा मदच्युद् द्विरद: करेणुभि: ॥ २४ ॥
tataś ca kṛṣṇopavane jala-sthala
prasūna-gandhānila-juṣṭa-dik-taṭe
cacāra bhṛṅga-pramadā-gaṇāvṛto
yathā mada-cyud dviradaḥ kareṇubhiḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; ca — and; kṛṣṇā — of the river Yamunā; upavane — in a small forest; jala — of the water; sthala — and the land; prasūna — of flowers; gandha — with the fragrance; anila — by the wind; juṣṭa — joined; dik-taṭe — the edges of the directions; cacāra — He passed; bhṛṅga — of bees; pramadā — and women; gaṇa — by the groups; āvṛtaḥ — surrounded; yathā — just as; mada-cyut — exuding a secretion from its forehead because of excitement; dviradaḥ — an elephant; kareṇubhiḥ — with his she-elephants.

Translation
Then the Lord strolled through a small forest on the bank of the Yamunā. This forest was filled to its limits with breezes carrying the fragrances of all the flowers growing on the land and in the water. Followed by His entourage of bees and beautiful women, Lord Kṛṣṇa appeared like an intoxicated elephant with his she-elephants.

Text 25
एवं शशाङ्कांशुविराजिता निशा:
स सत्यकामोऽनुरताबलागण: ।
सिषेव आत्मन्यवरुद्धसौरत:
सर्वा: शरत्काव्यकथारसाश्रया: ॥ २५ ॥
evaṁ śaśāṅkāṁśu-virājitā niśāḥ
sa satya-kāmo ’nuratābalā-gaṇaḥ
siṣeva ātmany avaruddha-saurataḥ
sarvāḥ śarat-kāvya-kathā-rasāśrayāḥ
Synonyms
evam — in this manner; śaśāṅka — of the moon; aṁśu — by the rays; virājitāḥ — made brilliant; niśāḥ — the nights; saḥ — He; satya-kāmaḥ — whose desires are always fulfilled; anurata — constantly attached to Him; abalā-gaṇaḥ — His many girlfriends; siṣeve — He utilized; ātmani — within Himself; avaruddha — reserved; saurataḥ — conjugal feelings; sarvāḥ — all (the nights); śarat — of the autumn; kāvya — poetic; kathā — of narrations; rasa — of the transcendental moods; āśrayāḥ — the repositories.

Translation
Although the gopīs were firmly attached to Lord Kṛṣṇa, whose desires are always fulfilled, the Lord was not internally affected by any mundane sex desire. Still, to perform His pastimes the Lord took advantage of all those moonlit autumn nights, which inspire poetic descriptions of transcendental affairs.

Texts 26-27
श्रीपरीक्षिदुवाच
संस्थापनाय धर्मस्य प्रशमायेतरस्य च ।
अवतीर्णो हि भगवानंशेन जगदीश्वर: ॥ २६ ॥
स कथं धर्मसेतूनां वक्ता कर्ताभिरक्षिता ।
प्रतीपमाचरद् ब्रह्मन् परदाराभिमर्शनम् ॥ २७ ॥
śrī-parīkṣid uvāca
saṁsthāpanāya dharmasya
praśamāyetarasya ca
avatīrṇo hi bhagavān
aṁśena jagad-īśvaraḥ
sa kathaṁ dharma-setūnāṁ
vaktā kartābhirakṣitā
pratīpam ācarad brahman
para-dārābhimarśanam
Synonyms
śrī-parīkṣit uvāca — Śrī Parīkṣit Mahārāja said; saṁsthāpanāya — for the establishment; dharmasya — of religious principles; praśamāya — for the subduing; itarasya — of the opposite; ca — and; avatīrṇaḥ — descended (upon this earth); hi — indeed; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; aṁśena — with His plenary expansion (Śrī Balarāma); jagat — of the entire universe; īśvaraḥ — the Lord; saḥ — He; katham — how; dharma-setūnām — of the restrictive codes of moral behavior; vaktā — the original speaker; kartā — the executor; abhirakṣitā — the protector; pratīpam — contrary; ācarat — behaved; brahman — O brāhmaṇa, Śukadeva Gosvāmī; para — of others; dāra — the wives; abhimarśanam — touching.

Translation
Parīkṣit Mahārāja said: O brāhmaṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Lord of the universe, has descended to this earth along with His plenary portion to destroy irreligion and reestablish religious principles. Indeed, He is the original speaker, follower and guardian of moral laws. How, then, could He have violated them by touching other men’s wives?

Text 28
आप्तकामो यदुपति: कृतवान्वै जुगुप्सितम् ।
किमभिप्राय एतन्न: शंशयं छिन्धि सुव्रत ॥ २८ ॥
āpta-kāmo yadu-patiḥ
kṛtavān vai jugupsitam
kim-abhiprāya etan naḥ
śaṁśayaṁ chindhi su-vrata
Synonyms
āpta-kāmaḥ — self-satisfied; yadu-patiḥ — the master of the Yadu dynasty; kṛtavān — has performed; vai — certainly; jugupsitam — that which is contemptible; kim-abhiprāyaḥ — with what intent; etat — this; naḥ — our; śaṁśayam — doubt; chindhi — please cut; su-vrata — O faithful upholder of vows.

Translation
O faithful upholder of vows, please destroy our doubt by explaining to us what purpose the self-satisfied Lord of the Yadus had in mind when He behaved so contemptibly.

Text 29
श्रीशुक उवाच
धर्मव्यतिक्रमो द‍ृष्ट ईश्वराणां च साहसम् ।
तेजीयसां न दोषाय वह्ने: सर्वभुजो यथा ॥ २९ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
dharma-vyatikramo dṛṣṭa
īśvarāṇāṁ ca sāhasam
tejīyasāṁ na doṣāya
vahneḥ sarva-bhujo yathā
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; dharma-vyatikramaḥ — the transgression of religious or moral principles; dṛṣṭaḥ — seen; īśvarāṇām — of powerful controllers; ca — even; sāhasam — due to audacity; tejīyasām — who are spiritually potent; na — does not; doṣāya — (lead) to any fault; vahneḥ — of fire; sarva — everything; bhujaḥ — devouring; yathā — as.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: The status of powerful controllers is not harmed by any apparently audacious transgression of morality we may see in them, for they are just like fire, which devours everything fed into it and remains unpolluted.

Text 30
नैतत् समाचरेज्जातु मनसापि ह्यनीश्वर: ।
विनश्यत्याचरन् मौढ्याद्यथारुद्रोऽब्धिजं विषम् ॥ ३० ॥
naitat samācarej jātu
manasāpi hy anīśvaraḥ
vinaśyaty ācaran mauḍhyād
yathārudro ’bdhi-jaṁ viṣam
Synonyms
na — not; etat — this; samācaret — should perform; jātu — ever; manasā — with the mind; api — even; hi — certainly; anīśvaraḥ — one who is not a controller; vinaśyati — he is destroyed; ācaran — acting; mauḍhyāt — out of foolishness; yathā — as; arudraḥ — one who is not Lord Rudra; abdhijam — generated from the ocean; viṣam — poison.

Translation
One who is not a great controller should never imitate the behavior of ruling personalities, even mentally. If out of foolishness an ordinary person does imitate such behavior, he will simply destroy himself, just as a person who is not Rudra would destroy himself if he tried to drink an ocean of poison.

Text 31
ईश्वराणां वच: सत्यं तथैवाचरितं क्‍वचित् ।
तेषां यत् स्ववचोयुक्तं बुद्धिमांस्तत् समाचरेत् ॥ ३१ ॥
īśvarāṇāṁ vacaḥ satyaṁ
tathaivācaritaṁ kvacit
teṣāṁ yat sva-vaco-yuktaṁ
buddhimāṁs tat samācaret
Synonyms
īśvarānām — of the Lord’s empowered servants; vacaḥ — the words; satyam — true; tathā eva — also; ācaritam — what they do; kvacit — sometimes; teṣām — of them; yat — which; sva-vacaḥ — with their own words; yuktam — in agreement; buddhi-mān — one who is intelligent; tat — that; samācaret — should perform.

Translation
The statements of the Lord’s empowered servants are always true, and the acts they perform are exemplary when consistent with those statements. Therefore one who is intelligent should carry out their instructions.

Text 32
कुशलाचरितेनैषामिह स्वार्थो न विद्यते ।
विपर्ययेण वानर्थो निरहङ्कारिणां प्रभो ॥ ३२ ॥
kuśalācaritenaiṣām
iha svārtho na vidyate
viparyayeṇa vānartho
nirahaṅkāriṇāṁ prabho
Synonyms
kuśala — pious; ācaritena — by activity; eṣām — for them; iha — in this world; sva-arthaḥ — selfish benefit; na vidyate — does not accrue; viparyayeṇa — by the opposite; vā — or; anarthaḥ — undesirable reactions; nirahaṅkāriṇām — who are free from false ego; prabho — my dear sir.

Translation
My dear Prabhu, when these great persons who are free from false ego act piously in this world, they have no selfish motives to fulfill, and even when they act in apparent contradiction to the laws of piety, they are not subject to sinful reactions.

Text 33
किमुताखिलसत्त्वानां तिर्यङ्‌मर्त्यदिवौकसाम् ।
ईशितुश्चेशितव्यानां कुशलाकुशलान्वय: ॥ ३३ ॥
kim utākhila-sattvānāṁ
tiryaṅ-martya-divaukasām
īśituś ceśitavyānāṁ
kuśalākuśalānvayaḥ
Synonyms
kim uta — what to speak then; akhila — of all; sattvānām — created beings; tiryak — animals; martya — humans; diva-okasām — and inhabitants of heaven; īśituḥ — for the controller; ca — and; īśitavyānām — of those who are controlled; kuśala — with piety; akuśala — and impiety; anvayaḥ — causal connection.

Translation
How, then, could the Lord of all created beings — animals, men and demigods — have any connection with the piety and impiety that affect His subject creatures?

Text 34
यत्पादपङ्कजपरागनिषेवतृप्ता
योगप्रभावविधुताखिलकर्मबन्धा: ।
स्वैरं चरन्ति मुनयोऽपि न नह्यमाना-
स्तस्येच्छयात्तवपुष: कुत एव बन्ध: ॥ ३४ ॥
yat-pāda-paṅkaja-parāga-niṣeva-tṛptā
yoga-prabhāva-vidhutākhila-karma-bandhāḥ
svairaṁ caranti munayo ’pi na nahyamānās
tasyecchayātta-vapuṣaḥ kuta eva bandhaḥ
Synonyms
yat — whose; pāda-paṅkaja — of the lotus feet; parāga — of the dust; niṣeva — by the service; tṛptāḥ — satisfied; yoga-prabhāva — by the power of yoga; vidhuta — washed away; akhila — all; karma — of fruitive activity; bandhāḥ — whose bondage; svairam — freely; caranti — they act; munayaḥ — wise sages; api — also; na — never; nahyamānāḥ — becoming bound up; tasya — of Him; icchayā — by His desire; ātta — accepted; vapuṣaḥ — transcendental bodies; kutaḥ — where; eva — indeed; bandhaḥ — bondage.

Translation
Material activities never entangle the devotees of the Supreme Lord, who are fully satisfied by serving the dust of His lotus feet. Nor do material activities entangle those intelligent sages who have freed themselves from the bondage of all fruitive reactions by the power of yoga. So how could there be any question of bondage for the Lord Himself, who assumes His transcendental forms according to His own sweet will?

Text 35
गोपीनां तत्पतीनां च सर्वेषामेव देहिनाम् ।
योऽन्तश्चरति सोऽध्यक्ष: क्रीडनेनेह देहभाक् ॥ ३५ ॥
gopīnāṁ tat-patīnāṁ ca
sarveṣām eva dehinām
yo ’ntaś carati so ’dhyakṣaḥ
krīḍaneneha deha-bhāk
Synonyms
gopīnām — of the gopīs; tat-patīnām — of their husbands; ca — and; sarveṣām — of all; eva — indeed; dehinām — embodied living beings; yaḥ — who; antaḥ — within; carati — lives; saḥ — He; adhyakṣaḥ — the overseeing witness; krīḍanena — for sport; iha — in this world; deha — His form; bhāk — assuming.

Translation
He who lives as the overseeing witness within the gopīs and their husbands, and indeed within all embodied living beings, assumes forms in this world to enjoy transcendental pastimes.

Text 36
अनुग्रहाय भक्तानां मानुषं देहमास्थित: ।
भजते ताद‍ृशी: क्रीडा या: श्रुत्वा तत्परो भवेत् ॥ ३६ ॥
anugrahāya bhaktānāṁ
mānuṣaṁ deham āsthitaḥ
bhajate tādṛśīḥ krīḍa
yāḥ śrutvā tat-paro bhavet
Synonyms
anugrahāya — to show mercy; bhaktānām — to His devotees; mānuṣam — humanlike; deham — a body; āsthitaḥ — assuming; bhajate — He accepts; tādṛśīḥ — such; kriḍāḥ — pastimes; yāḥ — about which; śrutvā — hearing; tat-paraḥ — dedicated to Him; bhavet — one becomes.

Translation
When the Lord assumes a humanlike body to show mercy to His devotees, He engages in such pastimes as will attract those who hear about them to become dedicated to Him.

Text 37
नासूयन् खलु कृष्णाय मोहितास्तस्य मायया ।
मन्यमाना: स्वपार्श्वस्थान्स्वान्स्वान्दारान् व्रजौकस: ॥ ३७ ॥
nāsūyan khalu kṛṣṇāya
mohitās tasya māyayā
manyamānāḥ sva-pārśva-sthān
svān svān dārān vrajaukasaḥ
Synonyms
na asūyan — were not jealous; khalu — even; kṛṣṇāya — against Kṛṣṇa; mohitāḥ — bewildered; tasya — His; māyayā — by the spiritual potency of illusion; manyamānāḥ — thinking; sva-pārśva — at their own sides; sthān — standing; svān svān — each their own; dārān — wives; vraja-okasaḥ — the cowherd men of Vraja.

Translation
The cowherd men, bewildered by Kṛṣṇa’s illusory potency, thought their wives had remained home at their sides. Thus they did not harbor any jealous feelings against Him.

Text 38
ब्रह्मरात्र उपावृत्ते वासुदेवानुमोदिता: ।
अनिच्छन्त्यो ययुर्गोप्य: स्वगृहान्भगवत्प्रिया: ॥ ३८ ॥
brahma-rātra upāvṛtte
vāsudevānumoditāḥ
anicchantyo yayur gopyaḥ
sva-gṛhān bhagavat-priyāḥ
Synonyms
brahma-rātre — the nighttime of Brahmā; upāvṛtte — being completed; vāsudeva — by Lord Kṛṣṇa; anumoditāḥ — advised; anicchantyaḥ — unwilling; yayuḥ — went; gopyaḥ — the gopīs; sva-gṛhān — to their homes; bhagavat — of the Supreme Lord; priyāḥ — the dear consorts.

Translation
After an entire night of Brahmā had passed, Lord Kṛṣṇa advised the gopīs to return to their homes. Although they did not wish to do so, the Lord’s beloved consorts complied with His command.

Text 39
विक्रीडितं व्रजवधूभिरिदं च विष्णो:
श्रद्धान्वितोऽनुश‍ृणुयादथ वर्णयेद् य: ।
भक्तिं परां भगवति प्रतिलभ्य कामं
हृद्रोगमाश्वपहिनोत्यचिरेण धीर: ॥ ३९ ॥
vikrīḍitaṁ vraja-vadhūbhir idaṁ ca viṣṇoḥ
śraddhānvito ’nuśṛṇuyād atha varṇayed yaḥ
bhaktiṁ parāṁ bhagavati pratilabhya kāmaṁ
hṛd-rogam āśv apahinoty acireṇa dhīraḥ
Synonyms
vikrīḍitam — the sporting; vraja-vadhūbhiḥ — with the young women of Vṛndāvana; idam — this; ca — and; viṣṇoḥ — by Lord Viṣṇu; śraddhā-anvitaḥ — faithfully; anuśṛṇuyāt — hears; atha — or; varṇayet — describes; yaḥ — who; bhaktim — devotional service; parām — transcendental; bhagavati — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pratilabhya — obtaining; kāmam — material lust; hṛt — in the heart; rogam — the disease; āśu — quickly; apahinoti — he drives away; acireṇa — without delay; dhīraḥ — sober.

Translation
Anyone who faithfully hears or describes the Lord’s playful affairs with the young gopīs of Vṛndāvana will attain the Lord’s pure devotional service. Thus he will quickly become sober and conquer lust, the disease of the heart.