Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
बहिरन्त:पुरद्वार: सर्वा: पूर्ववदावृता: ।
ततो बालध्वनिं श्रुत्वा गृहपाला: समुत्थिता: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
bahir-antaḥ-pura-dvāraḥ
sarvāḥ pūrvavad āvṛtāḥ
tato bāla-dhvaniṁ śrutvā
gṛha-pālāḥ samutthitāḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; bahiḥ-antaḥ-pura-dvāraḥ — the doors inside and outside the house; sarvāḥ — all; pūrva-vat — like before; āvṛtāḥ — closed; tataḥ — thereafter; bāla-dhvanim — the crying of the newborn child; śrutvā — hearing; gṛha-pālāḥ — all the inhabitants of the house, especially the doormen; samutthitāḥ — awakened.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King Parīkṣit, the doors inside and outside the house closed as before. Thereafter, the inhabitants of the house, especially the watchmen, heard the crying of the newborn child and thus awakened from their beds.

Text 2
ते तु तूर्णमुपव्रज्य देवक्या गर्भजन्म तत् ।
आचख्युर्भोजराजाय यदुद्विग्न: प्रतीक्षते ॥ २ ॥
te tu tūrṇam upavrajya
devakyā garbha-janma tat
ācakhyur bhoja-rājāya
yad udvignaḥ pratīkṣate
Synonyms
te — all the watchmen; tu — indeed; tūrṇam — very quickly; upavrajya — going before (the King); devakyāḥ — of Devakī; garbha-janma — the deliverance from the womb; tat — that (child); ācakhyuḥ — submitted; bhoja-rājāya — unto the King of the Bhojas, Kaṁsa; yat — of whom; udvignaḥ — with great anxiety; pratīkṣate — was waiting (for the child’s birth).

Translation
Thereafter, all the watchmen very quickly approached King Kaṁsa, the ruler of the Bhoja dynasty, and submitted the news of the birth of Devakī’s child. Kaṁsa, who had awaited this news very anxiously, immediately took action.

Text 3
स तल्पात् तूर्णमुत्थाय कालोऽयमिति विह्वल: ।
सूतीगृहमगात् तूर्णं प्रस्खलन् मुक्तमूर्धज: ॥ ३ ॥
sa talpāt tūrṇam utthāya
kālo ’yam iti vihvalaḥ
sūtī-gṛham agāt tūrṇaṁ
praskhalan mukta-mūrdhajaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he (King Kaṁsa); talpāt — from the bed; tūrṇam — very quickly; utthāya — getting up; kālaḥ ayam — here is my death, the supreme time; iti — in this way; vihvalaḥ — overwhelmed; sūtī-gṛham — to the maternity home; agāt — went; tūrṇam — without delay; praskhalan — scattering; mukta — had become opened; mūrdha-jaḥ — the hair on the head.

Translation
Kaṁsa immediately got up from bed, thinking, “Here is Kāla, the supreme time factor, which has taken birth to kill me!” Thus overwhelmed, Kaṁsa, his hair scattered on his head, at once approached the place where the child had been born.

Text 4
तमाह भ्रातरं देवी कृपणा करुणं सती । स्‍नुषेयं तव कल्याण स्त्रियं मा हन्तुमर्हसि ॥ ४ ॥
tam āha bhrātaraṁ devī
kṛpaṇā karuṇaṁ satī
snuṣeyaṁ tava kalyāṇa
striyaṁ mā hantum arhasi
Synonyms
tam — unto Kaṁsa; āha — said; bhrātaram — her brother; devī — mother Devakī; kṛpaṇā — helplessly; karuṇam — piteously; satī — the chaste lady; snuṣā iyam tava — this child will be your daughter-in-law, the wife of your future son; kalyāṇa — O all-auspicious one; striyam — a woman; mā — not; hantum — to kill; arhasi — you deserve.

Translation
Devakī helplessly, piteously appealed to Kaṁsa: My dear brother, all good fortune unto you. Don’t kill this girl. She will be your daughter-in-law. Indeed, it is unworthy of you to kill a woman.

Text 5
बहवो हिंसिता भ्रात: शिशव: पावकोपमा: ।
त्वया दैवनिसृष्टेन पुत्रिकैका प्रदीयताम् ॥ ५ ॥
bahavo hiṁsitā bhrātaḥ
śiśavaḥ pāvakopamāḥ
tvayā daiva-nisṛṣṭena
putrikaikā pradīyatām
Synonyms
bahavaḥ — many; hiṁsitāḥ — killed out of envy; bhrātaḥ — my dear brother; śiśavaḥ — small children; pāvaka-upamāḥ — all of them equal to fire in brightness and beauty; tvayā — by you; daiva-nisṛṣṭena — as spoken by destiny; putrikā — daughter; ekā — one; pradīyatām — give me as your gift.

Translation
My dear brother, by the influence of destiny you have already killed many babies, each of them as bright and beautiful as fire. But kindly spare this daughter. Give her to me as your gift.

Text 6
नन्वहं ते ह्यवरजा दीना हतसुता प्रभो ।
दातुमर्हसि मन्दाया अङ्गेमां चरमां प्रजाम् ॥ ६ ॥
nanv ahaṁ te hy avarajā
dīnā hata-sutā prabho
dātum arhasi mandāyā
aṅgemāṁ caramāṁ prajām
Synonyms
nanu — however; aham — I am; te — your; hi — indeed; avarajā — younger sister; dīnā — very poor; hata-sutā — deprived of all children; prabho — O my lord; dātum arhasi — you deserve to give (some gift); mandāyāḥ — to me, who am so poor; aṅga — my dear brother; imām — this; caramām — last; prajām — child.

Translation
My lord, my brother, I am very poor, being bereft of all my children, but still I am your younger sister, and therefore it would be worthy of you to give me this last child as a gift.

Text 7
श्रीशुक उवाच
उपगुह्यात्मजामेवं रुदत्या दीनदीनवत् ।
याचितस्तां विनिर्भर्त्स्य हस्तादाचिच्छिदे खल: ॥ ७ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
upaguhyātmajām evaṁ
rudatyā dīna-dīnavat
yācitas tāṁ vinirbhartsya
hastād ācicchide khalaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; upaguhya — embracing; ātmajām — her daughter; evam — in this way; rudatyā — by Devakī, who was crying; dīna-dīna-vat — very piteously, like a poor woman; yācitaḥ — being begged; tām — her (Devakī); vinirbhartsya — chastising; hastāt — from her hands; ācicchide — separated the child by force; khalaḥ — Kaṁsa, the most cruel.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Piteously embracing her daughter and crying, Devakī begged Kaṁsa for the child, but he was so cruel that he chastised her and forcibly snatched the child from her hands.

Text 8
तां गृहीत्वा चरणयोर्जातमात्रां स्वसु: सुताम् ।
अपोथयच्छिलापृष्ठे स्वार्थोन्मूलितसौहृद: ॥ ८ ॥
tāṁ gṛhītvā caraṇayor
jāta-mātrāṁ svasuḥ sutām
apothayac chilā-pṛṣṭhe
svārthonmūlita-sauhṛdaḥ
Synonyms
tām — the child; gṛhītvā — taking by force; caraṇayoḥ — by the two legs; jāta-mātrām — the newborn child; svasuḥ — of his sister; sutām — the daughter; apothayat — smashed; śilā-pṛṣṭhe — on the surface of a stone; sva-artha-unmūlita — uprooted because of intense selfishness; sauhṛdaḥ — all friendship or family relationships.

Translation
Having uprooted all relationships with his sister because of intense selfishness, Kaṁsa, who was sitting on his knees, grasped the newborn child by the legs and tried to dash her against the surface of a stone.

Text 9
सा तद्धस्तात् समुत्पत्य सद्यो देव्यम्बरं गता ।
अद‍ृश्यतानुजा विष्णो: सायुधाष्टमहाभुजा ॥ ९ ॥
sā tad-dhastāt samutpatya
sadyo devy ambaraṁ gatā
adṛśyatānujā viṣṇoḥ
sāyudhāṣṭa-mahābhujā
Synonyms
sā — that female child; tat-hastāt — from the hand of Kaṁsa; sam-utpatya — slipped upward; sadyaḥ — immediately; devī — the form of a demigoddess; ambaram — into the sky; gatā — went; adṛśyata — was seen; anujā — the younger sister; viṣṇoḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sa-āyudhā — with weapons; aṣṭa — eight; mahā-bhujā — with mighty arms.

Translation
The child, Yoga-māyā-devī, the younger sister of Lord Viṣṇu, slipped upward from Kaṁsa’s hands and appeared in the sky as Devī, the goddess Durgā, with eight arms, completely equipped with weapons.

Texts 10-11
दिव्यस्रगम्बरालेपरत्नाभरणभूषिता ।
धनु:शूलेषुचर्मासिशङ्खचक्रगदाधरा ॥ १० ॥
सिद्धचारणगन्धर्वैरप्सर:किन्नरोरगै: ।
उपाहृतोरुबलिभि: स्तूयमानेदमब्रवीत् ॥ ११ ॥
divya-srag-ambarālepa-
ratnābharaṇa-bhūṣitā
dhanuḥ-śūleṣu-carmāsi-
śaṅkha-cakra-gadā-dharā
siddha-cāraṇa-gandharvair
apsaraḥ-kinnaroragaiḥ
upāhṛtoru-balibhiḥ
stūyamānedam abravīt
Synonyms
divya-srak-ambara-ālepa — she then assumed the form of a demigoddess, completely decorated with sandalwood pulp, flower garlands and a nice dress; ratna-ābharaṇa-bhūṣitā — decorated with ornaments of valuable jewels; dhanuḥ-śūla-iṣu-carma-asi — with bow, trident, arrows, shield and sword; śaṅkha-cakra-gadā-dharā — and holding the weapons of Viṣṇu (conchshell, disc and club); siddha-cāraṇa-gandharvaiḥ — by the Siddhas, Cāraṇas and Gandharvas; apsaraḥ-kinnara-uragaiḥ — and by the Apsarās, Kinnaras and Uragas; upāhṛta-uru-balibhiḥ — who brought all kinds of presentations to her; stūyamānā — being praised; idam — these words; abravīt — she said.

Translation
The goddess Durgā was decorated with flower garlands, smeared with sandalwood pulp and dressed with excellent garments and ornaments made of valuable jewels. Holding in her hands a bow, a trident, arrows, a shield, a sword, a conchshell, a disc and a club, and being praised by celestial beings like Apsarās, Kinnaras, Uragas, Siddhas, Cāraṇas and Gandharvas, who worshiped her with all kinds of presentations, she spoke as follows.

Text 12
किं मया हतया मन्द जात: खलु तवान्तकृत् ।
यत्र क्‍व वा पूर्वशत्रुर्मा हिंसी: कृपणान् वृथा ॥ १२ ॥
kiṁ mayā hatayā manda
jātaḥ khalu tavānta-kṛt
yatra kva vā pūrva-śatrur
mā hiṁsīḥ kṛpaṇān vṛthā
Synonyms
kim — what is the use; mayā — me; hatayā — in killing; manda — O you fool; jātaḥ — has already been born; khalu — indeed; tava anta-kṛt — who will kill you; yatra kva vā — somewhere else; pūrva-śatruḥ — your former enemy; mā — do not; hiṁsīḥ — kill; kṛpaṇān — other poor children; vṛthā — unnecessarily.

Translation
O Kaṁsa, you fool, what will be the use of killing me? The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who has been your enemy from the very beginning and who will certainly kill you, has already taken His birth somewhere else. Therefore, do not unnecessarily kill other children.

Text 13
इति प्रभाष्य तं देवी माया भगवती भुवि ।
बहुनामनिकेतेषु बहुनामा बभूव ह ॥ १३ ॥
iti prabhāṣya taṁ devī
māyā bhagavatī bhuvi
bahu-nāma-niketeṣu
bahu-nāmā babhūva ha
Synonyms
iti — in this way; prabhāṣya — addressing; tam — Kaṁsa; devī — the goddess Durgā; māyā — Yoga-māyā; bhagavatī — possessing immense power, like that of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhuvi — on the surface of the earth; bahu-nāma — of different names; niketeṣu — in different places; bahu-nāmā — different names; babhūva — became; ha — indeed.

Translation
After speaking to Kaṁsa in this way, the goddess Durgā, Yoga-māyā, appeared in different places, such as Vārāṇasī, and became celebrated by different names, such as Annapūrṇā, Durgā, Kālī and Bhadrā.

Text 14
तयाभिहितमाकर्ण्य कंस: परमविस्मित: ।
देवकीं वसुदेवं च विमुच्य प्रश्रितोऽब्रवीत् ॥ १४ ॥
tayābhihitam ākarṇya
kaṁsaḥ parama-vismitaḥ
devakīṁ vasudevaṁ ca
vimucya praśrito ’bravīt
Synonyms
tayā — by the goddess Durgā; abhihitam — the words spoken; ākarṇya — by hearing; kaṁsaḥ — Kaṁsa; parama-vismitaḥ — was struck with wonder; devakīm — unto Devakī; vasudevam ca — and Vasudeva; vimucya — releasing immediately; praśritaḥ — with great humility; abravīt — spoke as follows.

Translation
After hearing the words of the goddess Durgā, Kaṁsa was struck with wonder. Thus he approached his sister Devakī and brother-in-law Vasudeva, released them immediately from their shackles, and very humbly spoke as follows.

Text 15
अहो भगिन्यहो भाम मया वां बत पाप्मना ।
पुरुषाद इवापत्यं बहवो हिंसिता: सुता: ॥ १५ ॥
aho bhaginy aho bhāma
mayā vāṁ bata pāpmanā
puruṣāda ivāpatyaṁ
bahavo hiṁsitāḥ sutāḥ
Synonyms
aho — alas; bhagini — my dear sister; aho — alas; bhāma — my dear brother-in-law; mayā — by me; vām — of you; bata — indeed; pāpmanā — because of sinful activities; puruṣa-adaḥ — a Rākṣasa, man-eater; iva — like; apatyam — child; bahavaḥ — many; hiṁsitāḥ — have been killed; sutāḥ — sons.

Translation
Alas, my sister! Alas, my brother-in-law! I am indeed so sinful that exactly like a man-eater [Rākṣasa] who eats his own child, I have killed so many sons born of you.

Text 16
स त्वहं त्यक्तकारुण्यस्त्यक्तज्ञातिसुहृत् खल: । कान्लोकान् वै गमिष्यामि ब्रह्महेव मृत: श्वसन् ॥ १६ ॥
sa tv ahaṁ tyakta-kāruṇyas
tyakta-jñāti-suhṛt khalaḥ
kān lokān vai gamiṣyāmi
brahma-heva mṛtaḥ śvasan
Synonyms
saḥ — that person (Kaṁsa); tu — indeed; aham — I; tyakta-kāruṇyaḥ — devoid of all mercy; tyakta-jñāti-suhṛt — my relatives and friends have been rejected by me; khalaḥ — cruel; kān lokān — which planets; vai — indeed; gamiṣyāmi — shall go; brahma-hā iva — like the killer of a brāhmaṇa; mṛtaḥ śvasan — either after death or while breathing.

Translation
Being merciless and cruel, I have forsaken all my relatives and friends. Therefore, like a person who has killed a brāhmaṇa, I do not know to which planet I shall go, either after death or while breathing.

Text 17
दैवमप्यनृतं वक्ति न मर्त्या एव केवलम् ।
यद्विश्रम्भादहं पाप: स्वसुर्निहतवाञ्छिशून् ॥ १७ ॥
daivam apy anṛtaṁ vakti
na martyā eva kevalam
yad-viśrambhād ahaṁ pāpaḥ
svasur nihatavāñ chiśūn
Synonyms
daivam — providence; api — also; anṛtam — lies; vakti — say; na — not; martyāḥ — human beings; eva — certainly; kevalam — only; yat-viśrambhāt — because of believing that prophecy; aham — I; pāpaḥ — the most sinful; svasuḥ — of my sister; nihatavān — killed; śiśūn — so many children.

Translation
Alas, not only human beings but sometimes even providence lies. And I am so sinful that I believed the omen of providence and killed so many of my sister’s children.

Text 18
मा शोचतं महाभागावात्मजान् स्वकृतंभुज: ।
जान्तवो न सदैकत्र दैवाधीनास्तदासते ॥ १८ ॥
mā śocataṁ mahā-bhāgāv
ātmajān sva-kṛtaṁ bhujaḥ
jāntavo na sadaikatra
daivādhīnās tadāsate
Synonyms
mā śocatam — kindly do not be aggrieved (for what happened in the past); mahā-bhāgau — O you who are learned and fortunate in spiritual knowledge; ātmajān — for your sons; sva-kṛtam — only because of their own acts; bhujaḥ — who are suffering; jāntavaḥ — all living entities; na — not; sadā — always; ekatra — in one place; daiva-adhīnāḥ — who are under the control of providence; tadā — hence; āsate — live.

Translation
O great souls, your children have suffered their own misfortune. Therefore, please do not lament for them. All living entities are under the control of the Supreme, and they cannot always live together.

Text 19
भुवि भौमानि भूतानि यथा यान्त्यपयान्ति च । नायमात्मा तथैतेषु विपर्येति यथैव भू: ॥ १९ ॥
bhuvi bhaumāni bhūtāni
yathā yānty apayānti ca
nāyam ātmā tathaiteṣu
viparyeti yathaiva bhūḥ
Synonyms
bhuvi — on the surface of the world; bhaumāni — all material products from earth, such as pots; bhūtāni — which are produced; yathā — as; yānti — appear (in form); apayānti — disappear (broken or mixed with the earth); ca — and; na — not; ayam ātmā — the soul or spiritual identity; tathā — similarly; eteṣu — among all these (products of material elements); viparyeti — is changed or broken; yathā — as; eva — certainly; bhūḥ — the earth.

Translation
In this world, we can see that pots, dolls and other products of the earth appear, break and then disappear, mixing with the earth. Similarly, the bodies of all conditioned living entities are annihilated, but the living entities, like the earth itself, are unchanging and never annihilated [na hanyate hanyamāne śarīre].

Text 20
यथानेवंविदो भेदो यत आत्मविपर्यय: ।
देहयोगवियोगौ च संसृतिर्न निवर्तते ॥ २० ॥
yathānevaṁ-vido bhedo
yata ātma-viparyayaḥ
deha-yoga-viyogau ca
saṁsṛtir na nivartate
Synonyms
yathā — as; an-evam-vidaḥ — of a person who has no knowledge (about ātma-tattva and the steadiness of the ātmā in his own identity, despite the changes of the body); bhedaḥ — the idea of difference between body and self; yataḥ — because of which; ātma-viparyayaḥ — the foolish understanding that one is the body; deha-yoga-viyogau ca — and this causes connections and separations among different bodies; saṁsṛtiḥ — the continuation of conditioned life; na — not; nivartate — does stop.

Translation
One who does not understand the constitutional position of the body and the soul [ātmā] becomes too attached to the bodily concept of life. Consequently, because of attachment to the body and its by-products, he feels affected by union with and separation from his family, society and nation. As long as this continues, one continues his material life. [Otherwise, one is liberated.]

Text 21
तस्माद् भद्रे स्वतनयान् मया व्यापादितानपि ।
मानुशोच यत: सर्व: स्वकृतं विन्दतेऽवश: ॥ २१ ॥
tasmād bhadre sva-tanayān
mayā vyāpāditān api
mānuśoca yataḥ sarvaḥ
sva-kṛtaṁ vindate ’vaśaḥ
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; bhadre — my dear sister (all auspiciousness unto you); sva-tanayān — for your own sons; mayā — by me; vyāpāditān — unfortunately killed; api — although; mā anuśoca — do not be aggrieved; yataḥ — because; sarvaḥ — everyone; sva-kṛtam — the fruitive results of one’s own deeds; vindate — suffers or enjoys; avaśaḥ — under the control of providence.

Translation
My dear sister Devakī, all good fortune unto you. Everyone suffers and enjoys the results of his own work under the control of providence. Therefore, although your sons have unfortunately been killed by me, please do not lament for them.

Text 22
यावद्धतोऽस्मि हन्तास्मीत्यात्मानं मन्यतेऽस्वद‍ृक् ।
तावत्तदभिमान्यज्ञो बाध्यबाधकतामियात् ॥ २२ ॥
yāvad dhato ’smi hantāsmī-
ty ātmānaṁ manyate ’sva-dṛk
tāvat tad-abhimāny ajño
bādhya-bādhakatām iyāt
Synonyms
yāvat — as long as; hataḥ asmi — I am now being killed (by others); hantā asmi — I am the killer (of others); iti — thus; ātmānam — own self; manyate — he considers; a-sva-dṛk — one who has not seen himself (because of the darkness of the bodily conception of life); tāvat — for that long; tat-abhimānī — regarding himself as the killed or the killer; ajñaḥ — a foolish person; bādhya-bādhakatām — the worldly transaction of being obliged to execute some responsibility; iyāt — continues.

Translation
In the bodily conception of life, one remains in darkness, without self-realization, thinking, “I am being killed” or “I have killed my enemies.” As long as a foolish person thus considers the self to be the killer or the killed, he continues to be responsible for material obligations, and consequently he suffers the reactions of happiness and distress.

Text 23
क्षमध्वं मम दौरात्म्यं साधवो दीनवत्सला: ।
इत्युक्त्वाश्रुमुख: पादौ श्याल: स्वस्रोरथाग्रहीत् ॥ २३ ॥
kṣamadhvaṁ mama daurātmyaṁ
sādhavo dīna-vatsalāḥ
ity uktvāśru-mukhaḥ pādau
śyālaḥ svasror athāgrahīt
Synonyms
kṣamadhvam — kindly excuse; mama — my; daurātmyam — atrocious activities; sādhavaḥ — both of you are great saintly persons; dīna-vatsalāḥ — and are very kind to poor, cripple-minded persons; iti uktvā — saying this; aśru-mukhaḥ — his face full of tears; pādau — the feet; śyālaḥ — his brother-in-law Kaṁsa; svasraḥ — of his sister and brother-in-law; atha — thus; agrahīt — captured.

Translation
Kaṁsa begged, “My dear sister and brother-in-law, please be merciful to such a poor-hearted person as me, since both of you are saintly persons. Please excuse my atrocities.” Having said this, Kaṁsa fell at the feet of Vasudeva and Devakī, his eyes full of tears of regret.

Text 24
मोचयामास निगडाद् विश्रब्ध: कन्यकागिरा ।
देवकीं वसुदेवं च दर्शयन्नात्मसौहृदम् ॥ २४ ॥
mocayām āsa nigaḍād
viśrabdhaḥ kanyakā-girā
devakīṁ vasudevaṁ ca
darśayann ātma-sauhṛdam
Synonyms
mocayām āsa — Kaṁsa released them; nigaḍāt — from their iron shackles; viśrabdhaḥ — with full confidence; kanyakā-girā — in the words of the goddess Durgā; devakīm — toward his sister Devakī; vasudevam ca — and his brother-in-law Vasudeva; darśayan — fully exhibiting; ātma-sauhṛdam — his family relationship.

Translation
Fully believing in the words of the goddess Durgā, Kaṁsa exhibited his familial affection for Devakī and Vasudeva by immediately releasing them from their iron shackles.

Text 25
भ्रातु: समनुतप्तस्य क्षान्तरोषा च देवकी ।
व्यसृजद् वसुदेवश्च प्रहस्य तमुवाच ह ॥ २५ ॥
bhrātuḥ samanutaptasya
kṣānta-roṣā ca devakī
vyasṛjad vasudevaś ca
prahasya tam uvāca ha
Synonyms
bhrātuḥ — toward her brother Kaṁsa; samanutaptasya — because of his being regretful; kṣānta-roṣā — was relieved of anger; ca — also; devakī — Kṛṣṇa’s mother, Devakī; vyasṛjat — gave up; vasudevaḥ ca — Vasudeva also; prahasya — smiling; tam — unto Kaṁsa; uvāca — said; ha — in the past.

Translation
When Devakī saw her brother actually repentant while explaining ordained events, she was relieved of all anger. Similarly, Vasudeva was also free from anger. Smiling, he spoke to Kaṁsa as follows.

Text 26
एवमेतन्महाभाग यथा वदसि देहिनाम् ।
अज्ञानप्रभवाहंधी: स्वपरेति भिदा यत: ॥ २६ ॥
evam etan mahā-bhāga
yathā vadasi dehinām
ajñāna-prabhavāhaṁ-dhīḥ
sva-pareti bhidā yataḥ
Synonyms
evam — yes, this is right; etat — what you have said; mahā-bhāga — O great personality; yathā — as; vadasi — you are speaking; dehinām — about living entities (accepting material bodies); ajñāna-prabhavā — by the influence of ignorance; aham-dhīḥ — this is my interest (false ego); sva-parā iti — this is another’s interest; bhidā — differentiation; yataḥ — because of such a conception of life.

Translation
O great personality Kaṁsa, only by the influence of ignorance does one accept the material body and bodily ego. What you have said about this philosophy is correct. Persons in the bodily concept of life, lacking self-realization, differentiate in terms of “This is mine” and “This belongs to another.”

Text 27
शोकहर्षभयद्वेषलोभमोहमदान्विता: ।
मिथो घ्नन्तं न पश्यन्ति भावैर्भावं पृथग्द‍ृश: ॥ २७ ॥
śoka-harṣa-bhaya-dveṣa-
lobha-moha-madānvitāḥ
mitho ghnantaṁ na paśyanti
bhāvair bhāvaṁ pṛthag-dṛśaḥ
Synonyms
śoka — lamentation; harṣa — jubilation; bhaya — fear; dveṣa — envy; lobha — greed; moha — illusion; mada — madness; anvitāḥ — endowed with; mithaḥ — one another; ghnantam — engaged in killing; na paśyanti — do not see; bhāvaiḥ — because of such differentiation; bhāvam — the situation in relation to the Supreme Lord; pṛthak-dṛśaḥ — persons who see everything as separate from the control of the Lord.

Translation
Persons with the vision of differentiation are imbued with the material qualities lamentation, jubilation, fear, envy, greed, illusion and madness. They are influenced by the immediate cause, which they are busy counteracting, because they have no knowledge of the remote, supreme cause, the Personality of Godhead.

Text 28
श्रीशुक उवाच
कंस एवं प्रसन्नाभ्यां विशुद्धं प्रतिभाषित: ।
देवकीवसुदेवाभ्यामनुज्ञातोऽविशद् गृहम् ॥ २८ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
kaṁsa evaṁ prasannābhyāṁ
viśuddhaṁ pratibhāṣitaḥ
devakī-vasudevābhyām
anujñāto ’viśad gṛham
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; kaṁsaḥ — King Kaṁsa; evam — thus; prasannābhyām — who were very much appeased; viśuddham — in purity; pratibhāṣitaḥ — being answered; devakī-vasudevābhyām — by Devakī and Vasudeva; anujñātaḥ — taking permission; aviśat — entered; gṛham — his own palace.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Thus having been addressed in purity by Devakī and Vasudeva, who were very much appeased, Kaṁsa felt pleased, and with their permission he entered his home.

Text 29
तस्यां रात्र्यां व्यतीतायां कंस आहूय मन्त्रिण: ।
तेभ्य आचष्ट तत् सर्वं यदुक्तं योगनिद्रया ॥ २९ ॥
tasyāṁ rātryāṁ vyatītāyāṁ
kaṁsa āhūya mantriṇaḥ
tebhya ācaṣṭa tat sarvaṁ
yad uktaṁ yoga-nidrayā
Synonyms
tasyām — that; rātryām — night; vyatītāyām — having passed; kaṁsaḥ — King Kaṁsa; āhūya — calling for; mantriṇaḥ — all the ministers; tebhyaḥ — them; ācaṣṭa — informed; tat — that; sarvam — all; yat uktam — which was spoken (that Kaṁsa’s murderer was already somewhere else); yoga-nidrayā — by Yoga-māyā, the goddess Durgā.

Translation
After that night passed, Kaṁsa summoned his ministers and informed them of all that had been spoken by Yoga-māyā [who had revealed that He who was to slay Kaṁsa had already been born somewhere else].

Text 30
आकर्ण्य भर्तुर्गदितं तमूचुर्देवशत्रव: ।
देवान् प्रति कृतामर्षा दैतेया नातिकोविदा: ॥ ३० ॥
ākarṇya bhartur gaditaṁ
tam ūcur deva-śatravaḥ
devān prati kṛtāmarṣā
daiteyā nāti-kovidāḥ
Synonyms
ākarṇya — after hearing; bhartuḥ — of their master; gaditam — the words or statement; tam ūcuḥ — replied to him; deva-śatravaḥ — all the asuras, who were enemies of the demigods; devān — the demigods; prati — toward; kṛta-amarṣāḥ — who were envious; daiteyāḥ — the asuras; na — not; ati-kovidāḥ — who were very expert in executing transactions.

Translation
After hearing their master’s statement, the envious asuras, who were enemies of the demigods and were not very expert in their dealings, advised Kaṁsa as follows.

Text 31
एवं चेत्तर्हि भोजेन्द्र पुरग्रामव्रजादिषु ।
अनिर्दशान् निर्दशांश्च हनिष्यामोऽद्य वै शिशून् ॥ ३१ ॥
evaṁ cet tarhi bhojendra
pura-grāma-vrajādiṣu
anirdaśān nirdaśāṁś ca
haniṣyāmo ’dya vai śiśūn
Synonyms
evam — thus; cet — if it is so; tarhi — then; bhoja-indra — O King of Bhoja; pura-grāma-vraja-ādiṣu — in all the towns, villages and pasturing grounds; anirdaśān — those who are less than ten days old; nirdaśān ca — and those who are just over ten days old; haniṣyāmaḥ — we shall kill; adya — beginning from today; vai — indeed; śiśūn — all such children.

Translation
If this is so, O King of the Bhoja dynasty, beginning today we shall kill all the children born in all the villages, towns and pasturing grounds within the past ten days or slightly more.

Text 32
किमुद्यमै: करिष्यन्ति देवा: समरभीरव: ।
नित्यमुद्विग्नमनसो ज्याघोषैर्धनुषस्तव ॥ ३२ ॥
kim udyamaiḥ kariṣyanti
devāḥ samara-bhīravaḥ
nityam udvigna-manaso
jyā-ghoṣair dhanuṣas tava
Synonyms
kim — what; udyamaiḥ — by their endeavors; kariṣyanti — will do; devāḥ — all the demigods; samara-bhīravaḥ — who are afraid of fighting; nityam — always; udvigna-manasaḥ — with agitated minds; jyā-ghoṣaiḥ — by the sound of the string; dhanuṣaḥ — of the bow; tava — your.

Translation
The demigods always fear the sound of your bowstring. They are constantly in anxiety, afraid of fighting. Therefore, what can they do by their endeavors to harm you?

Text 33
अस्यतस्ते शरव्रातैर्हन्यमाना: समन्तत: ।
जिजीविषव उत्सृज्य पलायनपरा ययु: ॥ ३३ ॥
asyatas te śara-vrātair
hanyamānāḥ samantataḥ
jijīviṣava utsṛjya
palāyana-parā yayuḥ
Synonyms
asyataḥ — pierced by your discharged arrows; te — your; śara-vrātaiḥ — by the multitude of arrows; hanyamānāḥ — being killed; samantataḥ — here and there; jijīviṣavaḥ — aspiring to live; utsṛjya — giving up the battlefield; palāyana-parāḥ — intent on escaping; yayuḥ — they fled (the fighting).

Translation
While being pierced by your arrows, which you discharged on all sides, some of them, who were injured by the multitude of arrows but who desired to live, fled the battlefield, intent on escaping.

Text 34
केचित् प्राञ्जलयो दीना न्यस्तशस्त्रा दिवौकस: ।
मुक्तकच्छशिखा: केचिद् भीता: स्म इति वादिन: ॥ ३४ ॥
kecit prāñjalayo dīnā
nyasta-śastrā divaukasaḥ
mukta-kaccha-śikhāḥ kecid
bhītāḥ sma iti vādinaḥ
Synonyms
kecit — some of them; prāñjalayaḥ — folded their hands just to please you; dīnāḥ — very poor; nyasta-śastrāḥ — being bereft of all weapons; divaukasaḥ — the demigods; mukta-kaccha-śikhāḥ — their garments and hair loosened and scattered; kecit — some of them; bhītāḥ — we are very much afraid; sma — so became; iti vādinaḥ — they spoke thus.

Translation
Defeated and bereft of all weapons, some of the demigods gave up fighting and praised you with folded hands, and some of them, appearing before you with loosened garments and hair, said, “O lord, we are very much afraid of you.”

Text 35
न त्वं विस्मृतशस्त्रास्त्रान् विरथान् भयसंवृतान् ।
हंस्यन्यासक्तविमुखान् भग्नचापानयुध्यत: ॥ ३५ ॥
na tvaṁ vismṛta-śastrāstrān
virathān bhaya-saṁvṛtān
haṁsy anyāsakta-vimukhān
bhagna-cāpān ayudhyataḥ
Synonyms
na — not; tvam — Your Majesty; vismṛta-śastra-astrān — those who have forgotten how to use weapons; virathān — without chariots; bhaya-saṁvṛtān — bewildered by fear; haṁsi — does kill; anya-āsakta-vimukhān — persons attached not to fighting but to some other subject matter; bhagna-cāpān — their bows broken; ayudhyataḥ — and thus not fighting.

Translation
When the demigods are bereft of their chariots, when they forget how to use weapons, when they are fearful or attached to something other than fighting, or when their bows are broken and they have thus lost the ability to fight, Your Majesty does not kill them.

Text 36
किं क्षेमशूरैर्विबुधैरसंयुगविकत्थनै: ।
रहोजुषा किं हरिणा शम्भुना वा वनौकसा ।
किमिन्द्रेणाल्पवीर्येण ब्रह्मणा वा तपस्यता ॥ ३६ ॥
kiṁ kṣema-śūrair vibudhair
asaṁyuga-vikatthanaiḥ
raho-juṣā kiṁ hariṇā
śambhunā vā vanaukasā
kim indreṇālpa-vīryeṇa
brahmaṇā vā tapasyatā
Synonyms
kim — what is there to fear; kṣema — in a place where there is a scarcity of the ability to fight; śūraiḥ — by the demigods; vibudhaiḥ — by such powerful persons; asaṁyuga-vikatthanaiḥ — by boasting and talking uselessly, away from the fighting; rahaḥ-juṣā — who is living in a solitary place within the core of the heart; kim hariṇā — what is the fear from Lord Viṣṇu; śambhunā — (and what is the fear) from Lord Śiva; vā — either; vana-okasā — who is living in the forest; kim indreṇa — what is the fear from Indra; alpa-vīryeṇa — he is not at all powerful (having no power to fight with you); brahmaṇā — and what is the fear from Brahmā; vā — either; tapasyatā — who is always engaged in meditation.

Translation
The demigods boast uselessly while away from the battlefield. Only where there is no fighting can they show their prowess. Therefore, from such demigods we have nothing to fear. As for Lord Viṣṇu, He is in seclusion in the core of the hearts of the yogīs. As for Lord Śiva, he has gone to the forest. And as for Lord Brahmā, he is always engaged in austerities and meditation. The other demigods, headed by Indra, are devoid of prowess. Therefore you have nothing to fear.

Text 37
तथापि देवा: सापत्न्‍यान्नोपेक्ष्या इति मन्महे ।
ततस्तन्मूलखनने नियुङ्‌क्ष्वास्माननुव्रतान् ॥ ३७ ॥
tathāpi devāḥ sāpatnyān
nopekṣyā iti manmahe
tatas tan-mūla-khanane
niyuṅkṣvāsmān anuvratān
Synonyms
tathā api — still; devāḥ — the demigods; sāpatnyāt — due to enmity; na upekṣyāḥ — should not be neglected; iti manmahe — this is our opinion; tataḥ — therefore; tat-mūla-khanane — to uproot them completely; niyuṅkṣva — engage; asmān — us; anuvratān — who are ready to follow you.

Translation
Nonetheless, because of their enmity, our opinion is that the demigods should not be neglected. Therefore, to uproot them completely, engage us in fighting with them, for we are ready to follow you.

Text 38
यथामयोऽङ्गे समुपेक्षितो नृभि-
र्न शक्यते रूढपदश्चिकित्सितुम् ।
यथेन्द्रियग्राम उपेक्षितस्तथा
रिपुर्महान् बद्धबलो न चाल्यते ॥ ३८ ॥
yathāmayo ’ṅge samupekṣito nṛbhir
na śakyate rūḍha-padaś cikitsitum
yathendriya-grāma upekṣitas tathā
ripur mahān baddha-balo na cālyate
Synonyms
yathā — as; āmayaḥ — a disease; aṅge — in the body; samupekṣitaḥ — being neglected; nṛbhiḥ — by men; na — not; śakyate — is able; rūḍha-padaḥ — when it is acute; cikitsitum — to be treated; yathā — and as; indriya-grāmaḥ — the senses; upekṣitaḥ — not controlled in the beginning; tathā — similarly; ripuḥ mahān — a great enemy; baddha-balaḥ — if he becomes strong; na — not; cālyate — can be controlled.

Translation
As a disease, if initially neglected, becomes acute and impossible to cure, or as the senses, if not controlled at first, are impossible to control later, an enemy, if neglected in the beginning, later becomes insurmountable.

Text 39
मूलं हि विष्णुर्देवानां यत्र धर्म: सनातन: ।
तस्य च ब्रह्म गोविप्रास्तपो यज्ञा: सदक्षिणा: ॥ ३९ ॥
mūlaṁ hi viṣṇur devānāṁ
yatra dharmaḥ sanātanaḥ
tasya ca brahma-go-viprās
tapo yajñāḥ sa-dakṣiṇāḥ
Synonyms
mūlam — the foundation; hi — indeed; viṣṇuḥ — is Lord Viṣṇu; devānām — of the demigods; yatra — wherein; dharmaḥ — religious principles; sanātanaḥ — traditional or eternal; tasya — of this (foundation); ca — also; brahma — brahminical civilization; go — cow protection; viprāḥ — brāhmaṇas; tapaḥ — austerity; yajñāḥ — performing sacrifices; sa-dakṣiṇāḥ — with proper remuneration.

Translation
The foundation of all the demigods is Lord Viṣṇu, who lives and is worshiped wherever there are religious principles, traditional culture, the Vedas, cows, brāhmaṇas, austerities, and sacrifices with proper remuneration.

Text 40
तस्मात् सर्वात्मना राजन् ब्राह्मणान् ब्रह्मवादिन: ।
तपस्विनो यज्ञशीलान् गाश्च हन्मो हविर्दुघा: ॥ ४० ॥
tasmāt sarvātmanā rājan
brāhmaṇān brahma-vādinaḥ
tapasvino yajña-śīlān
gāś ca hanmo havir-dughāḥ
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; sarva-ātmanā — in every respect; rājan — O King; brāhmaṇān — the brāhmaṇas; brahma-vādinaḥ — who maintain the brahminical culture, centered around Viṣṇu; tapasvinaḥ — persons who are engaged in austerities; yajña-śīlān — persons engaged in offering sacrifices; gāḥ ca — cows and persons engaged in protecting cows; hanmaḥ — we shall kill; haviḥ-dughāḥ — because they supply milk, from which clarified butter is obtained for the offering of sacrifice.

Translation
O King, we, who are your adherents in all respects, shall therefore kill the Vedic brāhmaṇas, the persons engaged in offering sacrifices and austerities, and the cows that supply milk, from which clarified butter is obtained for the ingredients of sacrifice.

Text 41
विप्रा गावश्च वेदाश्च तप: सत्यं दम: शम: ।
श्रद्धा दया तितिक्षा च क्रतवश्च हरेस्तनू: ॥ ४१ ॥
viprā gāvaś ca vedāś ca
tapaḥ satyaṁ damaḥ śamaḥ
śraddhā dayā titikṣā ca
kratavaś ca hares tanūḥ
Synonyms
viprāḥ — the brāhmaṇas; gāvaḥ ca — and the cows; vedāḥ ca — and the Vedic knowledge; tapaḥ — austerity; satyam — truthfulness; damaḥ — control of the senses; śamaḥ — control of the mind; śraddhā — faith; dayā — mercy; titikṣā — tolerance; ca — also; kratavaḥ ca — as well as sacrifices; hareḥ tanūḥ — are the different parts of the body of Lord Viṣṇu.

Translation
The brāhmaṇas, the cows, Vedic knowledge, austerity, truthfulness, control of the mind and senses, faith, mercy, tolerance and sacrifice are the different parts of the body of Lord Viṣṇu, and they are the paraphernalia for a godly civilization.

Text 42
स हि सर्वसुराध्यक्षो ह्यसुरद्विड् गुहाशय: ।
तन्मूला देवता: सर्वा: सेश्वरा: सचतुर्मुखा: ।
अयं वै तद्वधोपायो यद‍ृषीणां विहिंसनम् ॥ ४२ ॥
sa hi sarva-surādhyakṣo
hy asura-dviḍ guhā-śayaḥ
tan-mūlā devatāḥ sarvāḥ
seśvarāḥ sa-catur-mukhāḥ
ayaṁ vai tad-vadhopāyo
yad ṛṣīṇāṁ vihiṁsanam
Synonyms
saḥ — He (Lord Viṣṇu); hi — indeed; sarva-sura-adhyakṣaḥ — the leader of all the demigods; hi — indeed; asura-dviṭ — the enemy of the asuras; guhā-śayaḥ — He is the Supersoul within the core of everyone’s heart; tat-mūlāḥ — taking shelter at His lotus feet; devatāḥ — the demigods exist; sarvāḥ — all of them; sa-īśvarāḥ — including Lord Śiva; sa-catuḥ-mukhāḥ — as well as Lord Brahmā, who has four faces; ayam — this is; vai — indeed; tat-vadha-upāyaḥ — the only means of killing Him (Viṣṇu); yat — which; ṛṣīṇām — of great sages, saintly persons, or Vaiṣṇavas; vihiṁsanam — suppression with all kinds of persecution.

Translation
Lord Viṣṇu, the Supersoul within the core of everyone’s heart, is the ultimate enemy of the asuras and is therefore known as asura-dviṭ. He is the leader of all the demigods because all the demigods, including Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā, exist under His protection. The great saintly persons, sages and Vaiṣṇavas also depend upon Him. To persecute the Vaiṣṇavas, therefore, is the only way to kill Viṣṇu.

Text 43
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं दुर्मन्त्रिभि: कंस: सह सम्मन्‍त्र्य दुर्मति: ।
ब्रह्महिंसां हितं मेने कालपाशावृतोऽसुर: ॥ ४३ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ durmantribhiḥ kaṁsaḥ
saha sammantrya durmatiḥ
brahma-hiṁsāṁ hitaṁ mene
kāla-pāśāvṛto ’suraḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — in this way; durmantribhiḥ — his bad ministers; kaṁsaḥ — King Kaṁsa; saha — along with; sammantrya — after considering very elaborately; durmatiḥ — without good intelligence; brahma-hiṁsām — persecution of the brāhmaṇas; hitam — as the best way; mene — accepted; kāla-pāśa-āvṛtaḥ — being bound by the rules and regulations of Yamarāja; asuraḥ — because he was a demon.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Thus, having considered the instructions of his bad ministers, Kaṁsa, who was bound by the laws of Yamarāja and devoid of good intelligence because he was a demon, decided to persecute the saintly persons, the brāhmaṇas, as the only way to achieve his own good fortune.

Text 44
सन्दिश्य साधुलोकस्य कदने कदनप्रियान् ।
कामरूपधरान् दिक्षु दानवान् गृहमाविशत् ॥ ४४ ॥
sandiśya sādhu-lokasya
kadane kadana-priyān
kāma-rūpa-dharān dikṣu
dānavān gṛham āviśat
Synonyms
sandiśya — after giving permission; sādhu-lokasya — of the saintly persons; kadane — in persecution; kadana-priyān — to the demons, who were very expert at persecuting others; kāma-rūpa-dharān — who could assume any form, according to their own desire; dikṣu — in all directions; dānavān — to the demons; gṛham āviśat — Kaṁsa entered his own palace.

Translation
These demons, the followers of Kaṁsa, were expert at persecuting others, especially the Vaiṣṇavas, and could assume any form they desired. After giving these demons permission to go everywhere and persecute the saintly persons, Kaṁsa entered his palace.

Text 45
ते वै रज:प्रकृतयस्तमसा मूढचेतस: ।
सतां विद्वेषमाचेरुरारादागतमृत्यव: ॥ ४५ ॥
te vai rajaḥ-prakṛtayas
tamasā mūḍha-cetasaḥ
satāṁ vidveṣam ācerur
ārād āgata-mṛtyavaḥ
Synonyms
te — all the asuric ministers; vai — indeed; rajaḥ-prakṛtayaḥ — surcharged with the mode of passion; tamasā — overwhelmed by the mode of ignorance; mūḍha-cetasaḥ — foolish persons; satām — of saintly persons; vidveṣam — persecution; āceruḥ — executed; ārāt āgata-mṛtya-vaḥ — impending death having already overtaken them.

Translation
Surcharged with passion and ignorance and not knowing what was good or bad for them, the asuras, for whom impending death was waiting, began the persecution of the saintly persons.

Text 46
आयु: श्रियं यशो धर्मं लोकानाशिष एव च ।
हन्ति श्रेयांसि सर्वाणि पुंसो महदतिक्रम: ॥ ४६ ॥
āyuḥ śriyaṁ yaśo dharmaṁ
lokān āśiṣa eva ca
hanti śreyāṁsi sarvāṇi
puṁso mahad-atikramaḥ
Synonyms
āyuḥ — the duration of life; śriyam — beauty; yaśaḥ — fame; dharmam — religion; lokān — elevation to higher planets; āśiṣaḥ — blessings; eva — indeed; ca — also; hanti — destroys; śreyāṁsi — benedictions; sarvāṇi — all; puṁsaḥ — of a person; mahat-atikramaḥ — trespassing against great personalities.

Translation
My dear King, when a man persecutes great souls, all his benedictions of longevity, beauty, fame, religion, blessings and promotion to higher planets will be destroyed.