Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
पितरावुपलब्धार्थौ विदित्वा पुरुषोत्तम: ।
मा भूदिति निजां मायां ततान जनमोहिनीम् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
pitarāv upalabdhārthau
viditvā puruṣottamaḥ
mā bhūd iti nijāṁ māyāṁ
tatāna jana-mohinīm
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; pitarau — His parents; upalabdha — having realized; arthau — the idea (of His opulent position as God); viditvā — knowing; puruṣa-uttamaḥ — the Supreme Personality; mā bhūt iti — “this should not be”; nijām — His personal; māyām — illusory potency; tatāna — He expanded; jana — His devotees; mohinīm — which bewilders.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Understanding that His parents were becoming aware of His transcendental opulences, the Supreme Personality of Godhead thought that this should not be allowed to happen. Thus He expanded His Yoga-māyā, which bewilders His devotees.

Text 2
उवाच पितरावेत्य साग्रज: सात्वतर्षभ: ।
प्रश्रयावनत: प्रीणन्नम्ब तातेति सादरम् ॥ २ ॥
uvāca pitarāv etya
sāgrajaḥ sātvatarṣabhaḥ
praśrayāvanataḥ prīṇann
amba tāteti sādaram
Synonyms
uvāca — He said; pitarau — to His parents; etya — approaching them; sa — together with; agra-jaḥ — His elder brother, Lord Balarāma; sātvata — of the Sātvata dynasty; ṛṣabhaḥ — the greatest hero; praśraya — with humility; avanataḥ — bowing down; prīṇan — gratifying them; amba tāta iti — “My dear mother, My dear father”; sa-ādaram — respectfully.

Translation
Lord Kṛṣṇa, the greatest of the Sātvatas, approached His parents with His elder brother. Humbly bowing His head and gratifying them by respectfully addressing them as “My dear mother” and “My dear father,” Kṛṣṇa spoke as follows.

Text 3
नास्मत्तो युवयोस्तात नित्योत्कण्ठितयोरपि ।
बाल्यपौगण्डकैशोरा: पुत्राभ्यामभवन्‍क्‍वचित् ॥ ३ ॥
nāsmatto yuvayos tāta
nityotkaṇṭhitayor api
bālya-paugaṇḍa-kaiśorāḥ
putrābhyām abhavan kvacit
Synonyms
na — not; asmattaḥ — because of Us; yuvayoḥ — for you two; tāta — O dear father; nitya — always; utkaṇṭhitayoḥ — who have been in anxiety; api — indeed; bālya — (the pleasures of) the toddler age; paugaṇḍa — boyhood; kaiśoraḥ — and youth; putrābhyām — because of your two sons; abhavan — there were; kvacit — at all.

Translation
[Lord Kṛṣṇa said:] Dear Father, because of Us, your two sons, you and mother Devakī always remained in anxiety and could never enjoy Our childhood, boyhood or youth.

Text 4
न लब्धो दैवहतयोर्वासो नौ भवदन्तिके ।
यां बाला: पितृगेहस्था विन्दन्ते लालिता मुदम् ॥ ४ ॥
na labdho daiva-hatayor
vāso nau bhavad-antike
yāṁ bālāḥ pitṛ-geha-sthā
vindante lālitā mudam
Synonyms
na — not; labdhaḥ — obtained; daiva — by fate; hatayoḥ — who have been deprived; vāsaḥ — residence; nau — by Us; bhavat-antike — in your presence; yām — which; bālāḥ — children; pitṛ — of their parents; geha — in the home; sthaḥ — staying; vindante — experience; lālitāḥ — pampered; mudam — happiness.

Translation
Deprived by fate, We could not live with you and enjoy the pampered happiness most children enjoy in their parents’ home.

Text 5
सर्वार्थसम्भवो देहो जनित: पोषितो यत: ।
न तयोर्याति निर्वेशं पित्रोर्मर्त्य: शतायुषा ॥ ५ ॥
sarvārtha-sambhavo deho
janitaḥ poṣito yataḥ
na tayor yāti nirveśaṁ
pitror martyaḥ śatāyuṣā
Synonyms
sarva — of all; artha — goals of life; sambhavaḥ — the source; dehaḥ — one’s body; janitaḥ — born; poṣitaḥ — maintained; yataḥ — from whom; na — not; tayoḥ — to them; yāti — one achieves; nirveśam — repayment of the debt; pitroḥ — to the parents; martyaḥ — a mortal; śata — of one hundred (years); āyuṣā — with a life span.

Translation
With one’s body one can acquire all goals of life, and it is one’s parents who give the body birth and sustenance. Therefore no mortal man can repay his debt to his parents, even if he serves them for a full lifetime of a hundred years.

Text 6
यस्तयोरात्मज: कल्प आत्मना च धनेन च ।
वृत्तिं न दद्यात्तं प्रेत्य स्वमांसं खादयन्ति हि ॥ ६ ॥
yas tayor ātmajaḥ kalpa
ātmanā ca dhanena ca
vṛttiṁ na dadyāt taṁ pretya
sva-māṁsaṁ khādayanti hi
Synonyms
yaḥ — who; tayoḥ — of them; ātma-jaḥ — a son; kalpaḥ — capable; ātmanā — with his physical resources; ca — and; dhanena — with his wealth; ca — also; vṛttim — a livelihood; na dadyāt — does not give; tam — him; pretya — after passing away; sva — his own; māṁsam — flesh; khādayanti — they make eat; hi — indeed.

Translation
A son who, though able to do so, fails to provide for his parents with his physical resources and wealth is forced after his death to eat his own flesh.

Text 7
मातरं पितरं वृद्धं भार्यां साध्वीं सुतं शिशुम् ।
गुरुं विप्रं प्रपन्नं च कल्पोऽबिभ्रच्छ्वसन् मृत: ॥ ७ ॥
mātaraṁ pitaraṁ vṛddhaṁ
bhāryāṁ sādhvīṁ sutam śiśum
guruṁ vipraṁ prapannaṁ ca
kalpo ’bibhrac chvasan-mṛtaḥ
Synonyms
mātaram — one’s mother; pitaram — and father; vṛddham — elderly; bhāryām — one’s wife; sādhvīm — chaste; sutam — one’s child; śiśum — very young; gurum — a spiritual master; vipram — a brāhmaṇa; prapannam — a person who has come to one for shelter; ca — and; kalpaḥ — able; abibhrat — not maintaining; śvasan — breathing; mṛtaḥ — dead.

Translation
A man who, though able to do so, fails to support his elderly parents, chaste wife, young child or spiritual master, or who neglects a brāhmaṇa or anyone who comes to him for shelter, is considered dead, though breathing.

Text 8
तन्नावकल्पयो: कंसान्नित्यमुद्विग्नचेतसो: ।
मोघमेते व्यतिक्रान्ता दिवसा वामनर्चतो: ॥ ८ ॥
tan nāv akalpayoḥ kaṁsān
nityam udvigna-cetasoḥ
mogham ete vyatikrāntā
divasā vām anarcatoḥ
Synonyms
tat — therefore; nau — of Us two; akalpayoḥ — who were unable; kaṁsāt — because of Kaṁsa; nityam — always; udvigna — disturbed; cetasoḥ — whose minds; mogham — uselessly; ete — these; vyatikrāntāḥ — spent; divasāḥ — days; vām — you; anarcatoḥ — not honoring.

Translation
Thus We have wasted all these days, unable as We were to properly honor you because Our minds were always disturbed by fear of Kaṁsa.

Text 9
तत् क्षन्तुमर्हथस्तात मातर्नौ परतन्त्रयो: ।
अकुर्वतोर्वां शुश्रूषां क्लिष्टयोर्दुर्हृदा भृशम् ॥ ९ ॥
tat kṣantum arhathas tāta
mātar nau para-tantrayoḥ
akurvator vāṁ śuśrūṣāṁ
kliṣṭayor durhṛdā bhṛśam
Synonyms
tat — that; kṣantum — forgive; arhathaḥ — you may please; tāta — O Father; mātaḥ — O Mother; nau — on the part of Us; para-tantrayoḥ — who are under the control of others; akurvatoḥ — not executing; vām — your; śuśrūṣām — service; kliṣṭayoḥ — caused pain; durhṛdā — by the hardhearted (Kaṁsa); bhṛśam — greatly.

Translation
Dear Father and Mother, please forgive Us for not serving you. We are not independent and have been greatly frustrated by cruel Kaṁsa.

Text 10
श्रीशुक उवाच
इति मायामनुष्यस्य हरेर्विश्वात्मनो गिरा ।
मोहितावङ्कमारोप्य परिष्वज्यापतुर्मुदम् ॥ १० ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
iti māyā-manuṣyasya
harer viśvātmano girā
mohitāv aṅkam āropya
pariṣvajyāpatur mudam
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti — thus; māyā — by His internal illusory potency; manuṣyasya — of Him who appears as a human; hareḥ — Lord Śrī Hari; viśva — of the universe; ātmanaḥ — the Soul; girā — by the words; mohitau — bewildered; aṅkam — upon their laps; āropya — raising; pariṣvajya — embracing; āpatuḥ — they both experienced; mudam — joy.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus beguiled by the words of Lord Hari, the Supreme Soul of the universe, who by His internal illusory potency appeared to be a human, His parents joyfully raised Him up on their laps and embraced Him.

Text 11
सिञ्चन्तावश्रुधाराभि: स्‍नेहपाशेन चावृतौ ।
न किञ्चिदूचतू राजन्बाष्पकण्ठौ विमोहितौ ॥ ११ ॥
siñcantāv aśru-dhārābhiḥ
sneha-pāśena cāvṛtau
na kiñcid ūcatū rājan
bāṣpa-kaṇṭhau vimohitau
Synonyms
siñcantau — sprinkling; aśru — of tears; dhārābhiḥ — with showers; sneha — of affection; pāśena — by the rope; ca — and; āvṛtau — enveloped; na — not; kiñcit — anything; ūcatuḥ — they spoke; rājan — O King (Parīkṣit); bāṣpa — (full of) tears; kaṇṭhau — whose throats; vimohitau — overwhelmed.

Translation
Pouring out a shower of tears upon the Lord, His parents, who were bound up by the rope of affection, could not speak. They were overwhelmed, O King, and their throats choked up with tears.

Text 12
एवमाश्वास्य पितरौ भगवान्देवकीसुत: ।
मातामहं तूग्रसेनं यदूनामकरोन्नृपम् ॥ १२ ॥
evam āśvāsya pitarau
bhagavān devakī-sutaḥ
mātāmahaṁ tūgrasenaṁ
yadūnām akaron ṇṛpam
Synonyms
evam — in this way; āśvāsya — assuring; pitarau — His parents; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; devakī-sutaḥ — the son of Devakī; mātāmaham — His maternal grandfather; tu — and; ugrasenam — Ugrasena; yadūnām — of the Yadus; akarot — He made; nṛpam — King.

Translation
Thus having comforted His mother and father, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, appearing as the son of Devakī, installed His maternal grandfather, Ugrasena, as King of the Yadus.

Text 13
आह चास्मान् महाराज प्रजाश्चाज्ञप्तुमर्हसि ।
ययातिशापाद् यदुभिर्नासितव्यं नृपासने ॥ १३ ॥
āha cāsmān mahā-rāja
prajāś cājñaptum arhasi
yayāti-śāpād yadubhir
nāsitavyaṁ nṛpāsane
Synonyms
āha — He (Lord Kṛṣṇa) said; ca — and; asmān — Us; mahā-rāja — O great King; prajāḥ — your subjects; ca — also; ājñaptum arhasi — please command; yayāti — by the ancient King Yayāti; śāpāt — because of the curse; yadubhiḥ — the Yadus; na āsitavyam — should not sit; nṛpa — royal; āsane — on the throne.

Translation
The Lord told him: O mighty King, We are your subjects, so please command Us. Indeed, because of the curse of Yayāti, no Yadu may sit on the royal throne.

Text 14
मयि भृत्य उपासीने भवतो विबुधादय: ।
बलिं हरन्त्यवनता: किमुतान्ये नराधिपा: ॥ १४ ॥
mayi bhṛtya upāsīne
bhavato vibudhādayaḥ
baliṁ haranty avanatāḥ
kim utānye narādhipāḥ
Synonyms
mayi — when I; bhṛtye — as a servant; upāsīne — am present in attendance; bhavataḥ — to you; vibudha — the demigods; ādayaḥ — and so on; balim — tribute; haranti — will bring; avanatāḥ — bowed down in humility; kim uta — what then to speak of; anye — other; nara — of men; adhipāḥ — rulers.

Translation
Since I am present in your entourage as your personal attendant, all the demigods and other exalted personalities will come with heads bowed to offer you tribute. What, then, to speak of the rulers of men?

Texts 15-16
सर्वान्स्वान्ज्ञतिसम्बन्धान्दिग्भ्य: कंसभयाकुलान् ।
यदुवृष्ण्यन्धकमधुदाशार्हकुकुरादिकान् ॥ १५ ॥
सभाजितान् समाश्वास्य विदेशावासकर्शितान् ।
न्यवासयत् स्वगेहेषु वित्तै: सन्तर्प्य विश्वकृत् ॥ १६ ॥
sarvān svān jñati-sambandhān
digbhyaḥ kaṁsa-bhayākulān
yadu-vṛṣṇy-andhaka-madhu
dāśārha-kukurādikān
sabhājitān samāśvāsya
videśāvāsa-karśitān
nyavāsayat sva-geheṣu
vittaiḥ santarpya viśva-kṛt
Synonyms
sarvān — all; svān — His; jñāti — close family members; sambandhān — and other relations; digbhyaḥ — from all directions; kaṁsa-bhaya — by fear of Kaṁsa; ākulān — disturbed; yadu-vṛṣṇi-andhaka-madhu-dāśārha kukura-ādikān — the Yadus, Vṛṣṇis, Andhakas, Madhus, Dāśārhas, Kukuras and so on; sabhājitān — shown honor; samāśvāsya — consoling them; videśa — in foreign regions; āvāsa — by living; karśitān — made weary; nyavāsayat — He settled; sva — in their own; geheṣu — homes; vittaiḥ — with valuable gifts; santarpya — gratifying; viśva — of the universe; kṛt — the maker.

Translation
The Lord then brought all His close family members and other relatives back from the various places to which they had fled in fear of Kaṁsa. He received the Yadus, Vṛṣṇis, Andhakas, Madhus, Dāśārhas, Kukuras and other clans with due honor, and He also consoled them, for they were weary of living in foreign lands. Then Lord Kṛṣṇa, the creator of the universe, resettled them in their homes and gratified them with valuable gifts.

Texts 17-18
कृष्णसङ्कर्षणभुजैर्गुप्ता लब्धमनोरथा: ।
गृहेषु रेमिरे सिद्धा: कृष्णरामगतज्वरा: ॥ १७ ॥
वीक्षन्तोऽहरह: प्रीता मुकुन्दवदनाम्बुजम् ।
नित्यं प्रमुदितं श्रीमत्सदयस्मितवीक्षणम् ॥ १८ ॥
kṛṣṇa-saṅkarṣaṇa-bhujair
guptā labdha-manorathāḥ
gṛheṣu remire siddhāḥ
kṛṣṇa-rāma-gata-jvarāḥ
vīkṣanto ’har ahaḥ prītā
mukunda-vadanāmbujam
nityaṁ pramuditaṁ śrīmat
sa-daya-smita-vīkṣaṇam
Synonyms
kṛṣṇa-saṅkarṣaṇa — of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma; bhujaiḥ — by the arms; guptāḥ — protected; labdha — obtaining; manaḥ-rathāḥ — their desires; gṛheṣu — in their homes; remire — they enjoyed; siddhāḥ — perfectly fulfilled; kṛṣṇa-rāma — because of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma; gata — ceased; jvarāḥ — the fever (of material life); vīkṣantaḥ — seeing; ahaḥ ahaḥ — day after day; prītāḥ — loving; mukunda — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; vadana — the face; ambujam — lotuslike; nityam — always; pramuditam — cheerful; śrīmat — beautiful; sa-daya — merciful; smita — smiling; vīkṣaṇam — with glances.

Translation
The members of these clans, protected by the arms of Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa, felt that all their desires were fulfilled. Thus they enjoyed perfect happiness while living at home with their families. Because of the presence of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, they no longer suffered from the fever of material existence. Every day these loving devotees could see Mukunda’s ever-cheerful lotus face, which was decorated with beautiful, merciful smiling glances.

Text 19
तत्र प्रवयसोऽप्यासन् युवानोऽतिबलौजस: ।
पिबन्तोऽक्षैर्मुकुन्दस्य मुखाम्बुजसुधां मुहु: ॥ १९ ॥
tatra pravayaso ’py āsan
yuvāno ’ti-balaujasaḥ
pibanto ’kṣair mukundasya
mukhāmbuja-sudhāṁ muhuḥ
Synonyms
tatra — there (in Mathurā); pravayasaḥ — the most elderly; api — even; āsan — were; yuvānaḥ — youthful; ati — having abundant; bala — strength; ojasaḥ — and vitality; pibantaḥ — drinking; akṣaiḥ — with their eyes; mukundasya — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; mukha-ambuja — of the lotus face; sudhām — the nectar; muhuḥ — repeatedly.

Translation
Even the most elderly inhabitants of the city appeared youthful, full of strength and vitality, for with their eyes they constantly drank the elixir of Lord Mukunda’s lotus face.

Text 20
अथ नन्दं समसाद्य भगवान् देवकीसुत: ।
सङ्कर्षणश्च राजेन्द्र परिष्वज्येदमूचतु: ॥ २० ॥
atha nandaṁ samasādya
bhagavān devakī-sutaḥ
saṅkarṣaṇaś ca rājendra
pariṣvajyedam ūcatuḥ
Synonyms
atha — then; nandam — Nanda Mahārāja; samāsādya — approaching; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; devakī-sutaḥ — Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī; saṅkarṣaṇaḥ — Lord Balarāma; ca — and; rāja-indra — O exalted King (Parīkṣit); pariṣvajya — embracing him; idam — this; ūcatuḥ — They said.

Translation
Then, O exalted Parīkṣit, the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī, along with Lord Balarāma, approached Nanda Mahārāja. The two Lords embraced him and then addressed him as follows.

Text 21
पितर्युवाभ्यां स्‍निग्धाभ्यां पोषितौ लालितौ भृशम् ।
पित्रोरभ्यधिका प्रीतिरात्मजेष्वात्मनोऽपि हि ॥ २१ ॥
pitar yuvābhyāṁ snigdhābhyāṁ
poṣitau lālitau bhṛśam
pitror abhyadhikā prītir
ātmajeṣv ātmano ’pi hi
Synonyms
pitaḥ — O Father; yuvābhyām — by you two; snigdhābhyām — affectionate; poṣitau — maintained; lālitau — coddled; bhṛśam — thoroughly; pitroḥ — for parents; abhyadhikā — greater; prītiḥ — love; ātmajeṣu — for their children; ātmanaḥ — than for themselves; api — even; hi — indeed.

Translation
[Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma said:] O Father, you and mother Yaśodā have affectionately maintained Us and cared for Us so much! Indeed, parents love their children more than their own lives.

Text 22
स पिता सा च जननी यौ पुष्णीतां स्वपुत्रवत् ।
शिशून् बन्धुभिरुत्सृष्टानकल्पै: पोषरक्षणे ॥ २२ ॥
sa pitā sā ca jananī
yau puṣṇītāṁ sva-putra-vat
śiśūn bandhubhir utsṛṣṭān
akalpaiḥ poṣa-rakṣaṇe
Synonyms
saḥ — he; pitā — father; sā — she; ca — and; jananī — mother; yau — who; puṣṇītām — nourish; sva — their own; putra — sons; vat — like; śiśūn — children; bandhubhiḥ — by their family; utsṛṣṭān — abandoned; akalpaiḥ — who are unable; poṣa — to maintain; rakṣaṇe — and protect.

Translation
They are the real father and mother who care for, as they would their own sons, children abandoned by relatives unable to maintain and protect them.

Text 23
यात यूयं व्रजं तात वयं च स्‍नेहदु:खितान् ।
ज्ञातीन् वो द्रष्टुमेष्यामो विधाय सुहृदां सुखम् ॥ २३ ॥
yāta yūyaṁ vrajaṁn tāta
vayaṁ ca sneha-duḥkhitān
jñātīn vo draṣṭum eṣyāmo
vidhāya suhṛdāṁ sukham
Synonyms
yata — please go; yūyam — all of you (cowherds); vrajam — to Vraja; tāta — My dear father; vayam — We; ca — and; sneha — due to loving affection; duḥkhitān — miserable; jñātīn — relatives; vaḥ — you; draṣṭum — to see; eṣyāmaḥ — will come; vidhāya — after bestowing; suhṛdām — to your loving friends; sukham — happiness.

Translation
Now you should all return to Vraja, dear Father. We shall come to see you, Our dear relatives who suffer in separation from Us, as soon as We have given some happiness to your well-wishing friends.

Text 24
एवं सान्‍त्‍वय्य भगवान् नन्दं सव्रजमच्युत: ।
वासोऽलङ्कारकुप्याद्यैरर्हयामास सादरम् ॥ २४ ॥
evaṁ sāntvayya bhagavān
nandaṁ sa-vrajam acyutaḥ
vāso-’laṅkāra-kupyādyair
arhayām āsa sādaram
Synonyms
evam — in this manner; sāntvayya — consoling; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nandam — King Nanda; sa-vrajam — together with the other men of Vraja; acyutaḥ — the infallible Lord; vāsaḥ — with clothing; alaṅkāra — jewelry; kupya — vessels made of metals other than gold or silver; ādyaiḥ — and so on; arhayām āsa — He honored them; sa-ādaram — respectfully.

Translation
Thus consoling Nanda Mahārāja and the other men of Vraja, the infallible Supreme Lord respectfully honored them with gifts of clothing, jewelry, household utensils and so on.

Text 25
इत्युक्तस्तौ परिष्वज्य नन्द: प्रणयविह्वल: ।
पूरयन्नश्रुभिर्नेत्रे सह गोपैर्व्रजं ययौ ॥ २५ ॥
ity uktas tau pariṣvajya
nandaḥ praṇaya-vihvalaḥ
pūrayann aśrubhir netre
saha gopair vrajaṁ yayau
Synonyms
iti — thus; uktaḥ — addressed; tau — the two of Them; pariṣvajya — embracing; nandaḥ — Nanda Mahārāja; praṇaya — with affection; vihvalaḥ — overwhelmed; pūrayan — filling; aśrubhiḥ — with tears; netre — his eyes; saha — together with; gopaiḥ — the cowherds; vrajam — to Vraja; yayau — went.

Translation
Nanda Mahārāja was overwhelmed with affection upon hearing Kṛṣṇa’s words, and his eyes brimmed with tears as he embraced the two Lords. Then he went back to Vraja with the cowherd men.

Text 26
अथ शूरसुतो राजन् पुत्रयो: समकारयत् ।
पुरोधसा ब्राह्मणैश्च यथावद् द्विजसंस्कृतिम् ॥ २६ ॥
atha śūra-suto rājan
putrayoḥ samakārayat
purodhasā brāhmaṇaiś ca
yathāvad dvija-saṁskṛtim
Synonyms
atha — then; śūra-sutaḥ — the son of Śūrasena (Vasudeva); rājan — O King (Parīkṣit); putrayoḥ — of his two sons; samakārayat — had performed; purodhasā — by a priest; brāhmaṇaiḥ — by brāhmaṇas; ca — and; yathā-vat — properly; dvija-saṁskṛtim — second-birth initiation.

Translation
My dear King, then Vasudeva, the son of Śūrasena, arranged for a priest and other brāhmaṇas to perform his two sons’ second-birth initiation.

Text 27
तेभ्योऽदाद्दक्षिणा गावो रुक्‍ममाला: स्वलङ्कृता: ।
स्वलङ्कृतेभ्य: सम्पूज्य सवत्सा: क्षौममालिनी: ॥ २७ ॥
tebhyo ’dād dakṣiṇā gāvo
rukma-mālāḥ sv-alaṅkṛtāḥ
sv-alaṅkṛtebhyaḥ sampūjya
sa-vatsāḥ kṣauma-mālinīḥ
Synonyms
tebhyaḥ — to them (the brāhmaṇas); adāt — he gave; dakṣiṇāḥ — gifts in remuneration; gāvaḥ — cows; rukma — of gold; mālāḥ — with necklaces; su — well; alaṅkṛtāḥ — ornamented; su-alaṅkṛtebhyaḥ — to the well-ornamented (brāhmaṇas); sampūjya — worshiping them; sa — having; vatsāḥ — calves; kṣauma — of linen; mālinīḥ — wearing garlands.

Translation
Vasudeva honored these brāhmaṇas by worshiping them and giving them fine ornaments and well-ornamented cows with their calves. All these cows wore gold necklaces and linen wreaths.

Text 28
या: कृष्णरामजन्मर्क्षे मनोदत्ता महामति: ।
ताश्चाददादनुस्मृत्य कंसेनाधर्मतो हृता: ॥ २८ ॥
yāḥ kṛṣṇa-rāma-janmarkṣe
mano-dattā mahā-matiḥ
tāś cādadād anusmṛtya
kaṁsenādharmato hṛtāḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — which (cows); kṛṣṇa-rāma — of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma; janmaṛkṣe — on the day of birth; manaḥ — in his mind; dattāḥ — given in charity; mahā-matiḥ — the magnanimous (Vasudeva); tāḥ — them; ca — and; ādadāt — he gave; anusmṛtya — remembering; kaṁsena — by Kaṁsa; adharmataḥ — impiously; hṛtaḥ — taken away.

Translation
The magnanimous Vasudeva then remembered the cows he had mentally given away on the occasion of Kṛṣṇa’s and Balarāma’s birth. Kaṁsa had stolen those cows, and Vasudeva now recovered them and gave them away in charity also.

Text 29
ततश्च लब्धसंस्कारौ द्विजत्वं प्राप्य सुव्रतौ ।
गर्गाद् यदुकुलाचार्याद्गायत्रं व्रतमास्थितौ ॥ २९ ॥
tataś ca labdha-saṁskārau
dvijatvaṁ prāpya su-vratau
gargād yadu-kulācāryād
gāyatraṁ vratam āsthitau
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; ca — and; labdha — having received; saṁskārau — initiation (Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma); dvijatvam — twice-born status; prāpya — attaining; su-vratau — sincere in Their vows; gargāt — from Garga Muni; yadu-kula — of the Yadu dynasty; ācāryāt — from the spiritual master; gāyatram — of celibacy; vratam — the vow; āsthitau — assumed.

Translation
After attaining twice-born status through initiation, the Lords, sincere in Their vows, took the further vow of celibacy from Garga Muni, the spiritual master of the Yadus.

Texts 30-31
प्रभवौ सर्वविद्यानां सर्वज्ञौ जगदीश्वरौ ।
नान्यसिद्धामलं ज्ञानं गूहमानौ नरेहितै: ॥ ३० ॥
अथो गुरुकुले वासमिच्छन्तावुपजग्मतु: ।
काश्यं सान्दीपनिं नाम ह्यवन्तिपुरवासिनम् ॥ ३१ ॥
prabhavau sarva-vidyānāṁ
sarva-jñau jagad-īśvarau
nānya-siddhāmalaṁ jñānaṁ
gūhamānau narehitaiḥ
atho gurukule vāsam
icchantāv upajagmatuḥ
kāśyaṁ sāndīpaniṁ nāma
hy avanti-pura-vāsinam
Synonyms
prabhavau — They who were the origin; sarva — of all varieties; vidyānām — of knowledge; sarva-jñau — omniscient; jagat-īśvarau — the Lords of the universe; na — not; anya — from any other source; siddha — achieved; amalam — impeccable; jñānam — knowledge; gūhamānau — hiding; nara — humanlike; īhitaiḥ — by Their activities; atha u — then; guru — of the spiritual master; kule — in the school; vāsam — residence; icchantau — desiring; upajagatuḥ — They approached; kāśyam — the native of Kāśī (Benares); sāndīpanim nāma — named Sāndīpani; hi — indeed; avanti-pura — in the city of Avantī (modern Ujjain); vāsinam — living.

Translation
Concealing Their innately perfect knowledge by Their humanlike activities, those two omniscient Lords of the universe, Themselves the origin of all branches of knowledge, next desired to reside at the school of a spiritual master. Thus They approached Sāndīpani Muni, a native of Kāsī living in the city of Avantī.

Text 32
यथोपसाद्य तौ दान्तौ गुरौ वृत्तिमनिन्दिताम् ।
ग्राहयन्तावुपेतौ स्म भक्त्या देवमिवाद‍ृतौ ॥ ३२ ॥
yathopasādya tau dāntau
gurau vṛttim aninditām
grāhayantāv upetau sma
bhaktyā devam ivādṛtau
Synonyms
yathā — fittingly; upasādya — obtaining; tau — Them; dāntau — who were self-controlled; gurau — to one’s spiritual master; vṛttim — service; aninditām — irreproachable; grāhayantau — making others take to; upetau — approaching for service; sma — indeed; bhaktyā — with devotion; devam — the Supreme Lord; iva — as if; ādṛtau — respected (by the guru).

Translation
Sāndīpani thought very highly of these two self-controlled disciples, whom he had obtained so fortuitously. By serving him as devotedly as one would serve the Supreme Lord Himself, They showed others an irreproachable example of how to worship the spiritual master.

Text 33
तयोर्द्विजवरस्तुष्ट: शुद्धभावानुवृत्तिभि: ।
प्रोवाच वेदानखिलान्सङ्गोपनिषदो गुरु: ॥ ३३ ॥
tayor dvija-varas tuṣṭaḥ
śuddha-bhāvānuvṛttibhiḥ
provāca vedān akhilān
sāṅgopaniṣado guruḥ
Synonyms
tayoḥ — Their; dvija-varaḥ — the best of brāhmaṇas (Sāndīpani); tuṣṭaḥ — satisfied; śuddha — pure; bhāva — with love; anuvṛttibhiḥ — by the submissive acts; provāca — he spoke; vedān — the Vedas; akhilān — all; sa — together with; aṅga — the (six) corollary literatures; upaniṣadaḥ — and the Upaniṣads; guruḥ — the spiritual master.

Translation
That best of brāhmaṇas, the spiritual master Sāndīpani, was satisfied with Their submissive behavior, and thus he taught Them the entire Vedas, together with their six corollaries and the Upaniṣads.

Text 34
सरहस्यं धनुर्वेदं धर्मान् न्यायपथांस्तथा ।
तथा चान्वीक्षिकीं विद्यां राजनीतिं च षड्‍‍विधाम् ॥ ३४ ॥
sa-rahasyaṁ dhanur-vedaṁ
dharmān nyāya-pathāṁs tathā
tathā cānvīkṣikīṁ vidyāṁ
rāja-nītiṁ ca ṣaḍ-vidhām
Synonyms
sa-rahasyam — along with its confidential portion; dhanuḥ-vedam — the science of military weapons; dharmān — the doctrines of human law; nyāya — of logic; pathān — the methods; tathā — also; tathā ca — and similarly; ānvīkṣikīm — of philosophical debate; vidyām — the branch of knowledge; rāja-nītim — political science; ca — and; ṣaṭ-vidhām — in six aspects.

Translation
He also taught Them the Dhanur-veda, with its most confidential secrets; the standard books of law; the methods of logical reasoning and philosophical debate; and the sixfold science of politics.

Texts 35-36
सर्वं नरवरश्रेष्ठौ सर्वविद्याप्रवर्तकौ ।
सकृन्निगदमात्रेण तौ सञ्जगृहतुर्नृप ॥ ३५ ॥
अहोरात्रैश्चतु:षष्‍ट्या संयत्तौ तावती: कला: ।
गुरुदक्षिणयाचार्यं छन्दयामासतुर्नृप ॥ ३६ ॥
sarvaṁ nara-vara-śreṣṭhau
sarva-vidyā-pravartakau
sakṛn nigada-mātreṇa
tau sañjagṛhatur nṛpa
aho-rātraiś catuḥ-ṣaṣṭyā
saṁyattau tāvatīḥ kalāḥ
guru-dakṣiṇayācāryaṁ
chandayām āsatur nṛpa
Synonyms
sarvam — everything; nara-vara — of first-class men; śreṣṭhau — the best; sarva — of all; vidyā — branches of knowledge; pravartakau — the initiators; sakṛt — once; nigada — being related; mātreṇa — simply; tau — They; sañjagṛhatuḥ — fully assimilated; nṛpa — O King (Parīkṣit); ahaḥ — in days; rātraiḥ — and nights; catuḥ-ṣaṣṭyā — sixty-four; saṁyattau — fixed in concentration; tāvatīḥ — that many; kalāḥ — arts; guru-dakṣiṇayā — with the traditional gift for the spiritual master before one leaves him; ācāryam — Their teacher; chandayām āsatuḥ — They satisfied; nṛpa — O King.

Translation
O King, those best of persons, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, being Themselves the original promulgators of all varieties of knowledge, could immediately assimilate each and every subject after hearing it explained just once. Thus with fixed concentration They learned the sixty-four arts and skills in as many days and nights. Thereafter, O King, They satisfied Their spiritual master by offering him guru-dakṣiṇā.

Text 37
द्विजस्तयोस्तं महिमानमद्भ‍ुतं
संलक्ष्य राजन्नतिमानुषीं मतिम् ।
सम्मन्‍त्र्य पत्न्‍या स महार्णवे मृतं
बालं प्रभासे वरयां बभूव ह ॥ ३७ ॥
dvijas tayos taṁ mahimānam adbhutaṁ
saṁlokṣya rājann ati-mānusīṁ matim
sammantrya patnyā sa mahārṇave mṛtaṁ
bālaṁ prabhāse varayāṁ babhūva ha
Synonyms
dvijaḥ — the learned brāhmaṇa; tayoḥ — of the two of Them; tam — that; mahimānam — greatness; adbhutam — amazing; saṁlakṣya — observing well; rājan — O King; ati-mānuṣīm — beyond human capacity; matim — intelligence; sammantrya — after consulting; patnyā — with his wife; saḥ — he; mahā-arṇave — in the great ocean; mṛtam — who had died; bālam — his child; prabhāse — at the holy place Prabhāsa; varayām babhūva ha — he chose.

Translation
O King, the learned brāhmaṇa Sāndīpani carefully considered the two Lords’ glorious and amazing qualities and Their superhuman intelligence. Then, after consulting with his wife, he chose as his remuneration the return of his young son, who had died in the ocean at Prabhāsa.

Text 38
तथेत्यथारुह्य महारथौ रथं
प्रभासमासाद्य दुरन्तविक्रमौ ।
वेलामुपव्रज्य निषीदतु: क्षणं
सिन्धुर्विदित्वार्हणमाहरत्तयो: ॥ ३८ ॥
tethety athāruhya mahā-rathau rathaṁ
prabhāsam āsādya duranta-vikramau
velām upavrajya niṣīdatuḥ kṣanaṁ
sindhur viditvārhanam āharat tayoḥ
Synonyms
tathā — so be it; iti — saying this; atha — then; āruhya — mounting; mahā-rathau — the two great chariot warriors; ratham — a chariot; prabhāsam — Prabhāsa-tīrtha; āsādya — reaching; duranta — limitless; vikramau — whose prowess; velām — up to the shore; upavrajya — walking; niṣīdatuḥ — They sat down; kṣaṇam — for a moment; sindhuḥ — the (presiding demigod of the) ocean; viditvā — recognizing; arhaṇam — respectful offering; āharat — brought; tayoḥ — for Them.

Translation
“So be it,” replied those two great chariot warriors of limitless might, and They at once mounted Their chariot and set off for Prabhāsa. When They reached that place, They walked up to the shore and sat down. In a moment the deity of the ocean, recognizing Them to be the Supreme Lords, approached Them with offerings of tribute.

Text 39
तमाह भगवानाशु गुरुपुत्र: प्रदीयताम् ।
योऽसाविह त्वया ग्रस्तो बालको महतोर्मिणा ॥ ३९ ॥
tam āha bhagavān āśu
guru-putraḥ pradīyatām
yo ’sāv iha tvayā grasto
bālako mahatormiṇā
Synonyms
tam — to him; āha — said; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; āśu — quickly; guru — of My spiritual master; putraḥ — the son; pradīyatām — must be presented; yaḥ — who; asau — he; iha — in this place; tvayā — by you; grastaḥ — seized; bālakaḥ — a young boy; mahatā — mighty; ūrmiṇā — by your wave.

Translation
The Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa addressed the lord of the ocean: Let the son of My guru be presented at once — the one you seized here with your mighty waves.

Text 40
श्रीसमुद्र उवाच
न चाहार्षमहं देव दैत्य: पञ्चजनो महान् ।
अन्तर्जलचर: कृष्ण शङ्खरूपधरोऽसुर: ॥ ४० ॥
śrī-samudra uvāca
na cāhārṣam ahaṁ deva
daityaḥ pañcajano mahān
antar-jala-caraḥ kṛṣṇa
śaṅkha-rūpa-dharo ’suraḥ
Synonyms
śrī-samudraḥ uvāca — the ocean personified said; na — not; ca — and; ahārṣam — did take (him) away; aham — I; deva — O Lord; daityaḥ — a descendant of Diti; pañcajanaḥ — named Pañcajana; mahān — powerful; antaḥ — within; jala — the water; caraḥ — going; kṛṣṇa — O Kṛṣṇa; śaṅkha — of a conch; rūpa — the form; dharaḥ — assuming; asuraḥ — the demon.

Translation
The ocean replied: O Lord Kṛṣṇa, it was not I who abducted him, but a demonic descendant of Diti named Pañcajana, who travels in the water in the form of a conch.

Text 41
आस्ते तेनाहृतो नूनं तच्छ्रुत्वा सत्वरं प्रभु: ।
जलमाविश्य तं हत्वा नापश्यदुदरेऽर्भकम् ॥ ४१ ॥
āste tenāhṛto nūnaṁ
tac chrutvā satvaraṁ prabhuḥ
jalam āviśya taṁ hatvā
nāpaśyad udare ’rbhakam
Synonyms
āste — he is there; tena — by him, Pañcajana; āhṛtaḥ — taken away; nūnam — indeed; tat — that; śrutvā — hearing; satvaram — with haste; prabhuḥ — the Lord; jalam — the water; āviśya — entering; tam — him, the demon; hatvā — killing; na apaśyat — did not see; udare — in his abdomen; arbhakam — the boy.

Translation
“Indeed,” the ocean said, “that demon has taken him away.” Hearing this, Lord Kṛṣṇa entered the ocean, found Pañcajana and killed him. But the Lord did not find the boy within the demon’s belly.

Texts 42-44
तदङ्गप्रभवं शङ्खमादाय रथमागमत् ।
तत: संयमनीं नाम यमस्य दयितां पुरीम् ॥ ४२ ॥
गत्वा जनार्दन: शङ्खं प्रदध्मौ सहलायुध: ।
शङ्खनिर्ह्रादमाकर्ण्य प्रजासंयमनो यम: ॥ ४३ ॥
तयो: सपर्यां महतीं चक्रे भक्त्युपबृंहिताम् ।
उवाचावनत: कृष्णं सर्वभूताशयालयम् ।
लीलामनुष्ययोर्विष्णो युवयो: करवाम किम् ॥ ४४ ॥
tad-aṅga-prabhavaṁ śaṅkham
ādāya ratham āgamat
tataḥ saṁyamanīṁ nāma
yamasya dayitāṁ purīm
gatvā janārdanaḥ śaṅkhaṁ
pradadhmau sa-halāyudhaḥ
śaṅkha-nirhrādam ākarṇya
prajā-saṁyamano yamaḥ
tayoḥ saparyāṁ mahatīṁ
cakre bhakty-upabṛṁhitām
uvācāvanataḥ kṛṣṇaṁ
sarva-bhūtāśayālayam
līlā-manuṣyayor viṣṇo
yuvayoḥ karavāma kim
Synonyms
tat — his (the demon’s); aṅga — from the body; prabhavam — grown; śaṅkham — the conchshell; ādāya — taking; ratham — to the chariot; āgamat — He returned; tataḥ — then; saṁyamanīm nāma — known as Saṁyamanī; yamasya — of Lord Yamarāja; dayitām — beloved; purīm — to the city; gatvā — going; jana-ardanaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa, the abode of all persons; śaṅkham — the conchshell; pradadhmau — blew loudly; sa — accompanied by; hala-āyudhaḥ — Lord Balarāma, whose weapon is a plow; śaṅkha — of the conchshell; nirhrādam — the resounding; ākarṇya — hearing; prajā — of those who take birth; saṁyamanaḥ — the restrainer; yamaḥ — Yamarāja; tayoḥ — of Them; saparyām — worship; mahatīm — elaborate; cakre — performed; bhakti — with devotion; upabṛṁhitām — overflowing; uvāca — he said; avanataḥ — bowing down humbly; kṛṣṇam — to Lord Kṛṣṇa; sarva — of all; bhūta — living beings; āśaya — the minds; ālayam — whose residence; līlā — as Your pastime; manuṣyayoḥ — appearing as human beings; viṣṇo — O Supreme Lord Viṣṇu; yuvayoḥ — for the two of You; karavāma — I should do; kim — what.

Translation
Lord Janārdana took the conchshell that had grown around the demon’s body and went back to the chariot. Then He proceeded to Saṁyamanī, the beloved capital of Yamarāja, the lord of death. Upon arriving there with Lord Balarāma, He loudly blew His conchshell, and Yamarāja, who keeps the conditioned souls in check, came as soon as he heard the resounding vibration. Yamarāja elaborately worshiped the two Lords with great devotion, and then he addressed Lord Kṛṣṇa, who lives in everyone’s heart: “O Supreme Lord Viṣṇu, what shall I do for You and Lord Balarāma, who are playing the part of ordinary humans?”

Text 45
श्रीभगवानुवाच
गुरुपुत्रमिहानीतं निजकर्मनिबन्धनम् ।
आनयस्व महाराज मच्छासनपुरस्कृत: ॥ ४५ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
guru-putram ihānītaṁ
nija-karma-nibandhanam
ānayasva mahā-rāja
mac-chāsana-puraskṛtaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Lord said; guru-putram — the son of My spiritual master; iha — here; ānītam — brought; nija — his own; karma — of reactions of past activity; nibandhanam — suffering the bondage; ānayasva — please bring; mahā-rāja — O great King; mat — My; śāsana — to the command; puraḥ-kṛtaḥ — giving first priority.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Suffering the bondage of his past activity, My spiritual master’s son was brought here to you. O great King, obey My command and bring this boy to Me without delay.

Text 46
तथेति तेनोपानीतं गुरुपुत्रं यदूत्तमौ ।
दत्त्वा स्वगुरवे भूयो वृणीष्वेति तमूचतु: ॥ ४६ ॥
tatheti tenopānītaṁ
guru-putraṁ yadūttamau
dattvā sva-gurave bhūyo
vṛṇīṣveti tam ūcatuḥ
Synonyms
tathā — so be it; iti — (Yamarāja) thus saying; tena — by him; upānītam — brought forward; guru-putram — the spiritual master’s son; yadu-uttamau — the best of the Yadus, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma; dattvā — giving; sva-gurave — to Their guru; bhūyaḥ — again; vṛṇīṣva — please choose; iti — thus; tam — to him; ūcatuḥ — They said.

Translation
Yamarāja said, “So be it,” and brought forth the guru’s son. Then those two most exalted Yadus presented the boy to Their spiritual master and said to him, “Please select another boon.”

Text 47
श्रीगुरुरुवाच
सम्यक् सम्पादितो वत्स भवद्भ‍य‍ां गुरुनिष्क्रय: ।
को नु युष्मद्विधगुरो: कामानामवशिष्यते ॥ ४७ ॥
śrī-gurur uvāca
samyak sampādito vatsa
bhavadbhyāṁ guru-niṣkrayaḥ
ko nu yuṣmad-vidha-guroḥ
kāmānām avaśiṣyate
Synonyms
śrī-guruḥ uvāca — Their spiritual master, Sāndīpani Muni, said; samyak — completely; sampāditaḥ — fulfilled; vatsa — my dear boy; bhavadbhyām — by You two; guru-niṣkrayaḥ — the remuneration of one’s guru; kaḥ — which; nu — indeed; yuṣmat-vidha — of persons like You; guroḥ — for the spiritual master; kāmānām — of his desires; avaśiṣyate — remains.

Translation
The spiritual master said: My dear boys, You two have completely fulfilled the disciple’s obligation to reward his spiritual master. Indeed, with disciples like You, what further desires could a guru have?

Text 48
गच्छतं स्वगृहं वीरौ कीर्तिर्वामस्तु पावनी ।
छन्दांस्ययातयामानि भवन्‍त्‍विह परत्र च ॥ ४८ ॥
gacchataṁ sva-gṛhaṁ vīrau
kīrtir vām astu pāvanī
chandāṁsy ayāta-yāmāni
bhavantv iha paratra ca
Synonyms
gacchatam — please go; sva-gṛham — to Your home; vīrau — O heroes; kīrtiḥ — fame; vām — Your; astu — may it be; pāvanī — purifying; chandāṁsi — Vedic hymns; ayāta-yāmāni — ever fresh; bhavantu — may there be; iha — in this life; paratra — in the next life; ca — and.

Translation
O heroes, now please return home. May Your fame sanctify the world, and may the Vedic hymns be ever fresh in Your minds, both in this life and the next.

Text 49
गुरुणैवमनुज्ञातौ रथेनानिलरंहसा ।
आयातौ स्वपुरं तात पर्जन्यनिनदेन वै ॥ ४९ ॥
guruṇaivam anujñātau
rathenānila-raṁhasā
āyātau sva-puraṁ tāta
parjanya-ninadena vai
Synonyms
guruṇā — by Their spiritual master; evam — in this way; anujñātau — given leave; rathena — in Their chariot; anila — like the wind; raṁhasā — whose speed; āyātau — came; sva — to Their own; puram — city (Mathurā); tāta — my dear (King Parīkṣit); parjanya — like a cloud; ninadena — whose reverberation; vai — indeed.

Translation
Thus receiving Their guru’s permission to leave, the two Lords returned to Their city on Their chariot, which moved as swiftly as the wind and resounded like a cloud.

Text 50
समनन्दन् प्रजा: सर्वा द‍ृष्ट्वा रामजनार्दनौ ।
अपश्यन्त्यो बह्वहानि नष्टलब्धधना इव ॥ ५० ॥
samanandan prajāḥ sarvā
dṛṣṭvā rāma-janārdanau
apaśyantyo bahv ahāni
naṣṭa-labdha-dhanā iva
Synonyms
samanandan — rejoiced; prajāḥ — the citizens; sarvāḥ — all; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; rāma-janārdanau — Balarāma and Kṛṣṇa; apaśyantyaḥ — not having seen; bahu — for many; ahāni — days; naṣṭa — lost; labdha — and regained; dhanāḥ — those whose wealth; iva — like.

Translation
All the citizens rejoiced upon seeing Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, whom they had not seen for many days. The people felt just like those who have lost their wealth and then regained it.