Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
वृष्णीनां प्रवरो मन्त्री कृष्णस्य दयित: सखा ।
शिष्यो बृहस्पते:
साक्षादुद्धवो बुद्धिसत्तम: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
vṛṣṇīnāṁ pravaro mantrī
kṛṣṇasya dayitaḥ sakhā
śiṣyo bṛhaspateḥ sākṣād
uddhavo buddhi-sattamaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; vṛṣṇīnām — of the Vṛṣṇis; pravaraḥ — the best; mantrī — adviser; kṛṣṇasya — of Kṛṣṇa; dayitaḥ — beloved; sakhā — friend; śiṣyaḥ — disciple; bṛhaspateḥ — of Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods; sākṣāt — directly; uddhavaḥ — Uddhava; buddhi — having intelligence; sat-tamaḥ — of the highest quality.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: The supremely intelligent Uddhava was the best counselor of the Vṛṣṇi dynasty, a beloved friend of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa and a direct disciple of Bṛhaspati.

Text 2
तमाह भगवान्प्रेष्ठं भक्तमेकान्तिनं क्व‍‍चित् ।
गृहीत्वा पाणिना पाणिं प्रपन्नार्तिहरो हरि: ॥ २ ॥
tam āha bhagavān preṣṭhaṁ
bhaktam ekāntinaṁ kvacit
gṛhītvā pāṇinā pāṇiṁ
prapannārti-haro hariḥ
Synonyms
tam — to him; āha — spoke; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; preṣṭham — to His most dear; bhaktam — devotee; ekāntinam — exclusive; kvacit — on one occasion; gṛhītvā — taking; pāṇinā — with His hand; pāṇim — (Uddhava’s) hand; prapanna — of those who surrender; ārti — the distress; haraḥ — who takes away; hariḥ — Lord Hari.

Translation
The Supreme Lord Hari, who relieves the distress of all who surrender to Him, once took the hand of His fully devoted, dearmost friend Uddhava and addressed him as follows.

Text 3
गच्छोद्धव व्रजं सौम्य पित्रोर्नौ प्रीतिमावह ।
गोपीनां मद्वियोगाधिं मत्सन्देशैर्विमोचय ॥ ३ ॥
gacchoddhava vrajaṁ saumya
pitror nau prītim āvaha
gopīnāṁ mad-viyogādhiṁ
mat-sandeśair vimocaya
Synonyms
gaccha — please go; uddhava — O Uddhava; vrajam — to Vraja; saumya — O gentle one; pitroḥ — to the parents; nau — Our; prītim — satisfaction; āvaha — carry; gopīnām — of the gopīs; mat — from Me; viyoga — caused by separation; ādhim — of the mental pain; mat — brought from Me; sandeśaiḥ — by messages; vimocaya — relieve them.

Translation
[Lord Kṛṣṇa said:] Dear gentle Uddhava, go to Vraja and give pleasure to Our parents. And also relieve the gopīs, suffering in separation from Me, by giving them My message.

Text 4
ता मन्मनस्का मत्प्राणा मतर्थे त्यक्तदैहिका: ।
मामेव दयितं प्रेष्ठमात्मानं मनसा गता: ।
ये त्यक्तलोकधर्माश्च मदर्थे तान्बिभर्म्यहम् ॥ ४ ॥
tā man-manaskā mat-prāṇā
mat-arthe tyakta-daihikāḥ
mām eva dayitaṁ preṣṭham
ātmānaṁ manasā gatāḥ
ye tyakta-loka-dharmāś ca
mad-arthe tān bibharmy aham
Synonyms
tāḥ — they (the gopīs); mat — absorbed in Me; manaskāḥ — their minds; mat — fixed upon Me; prāṇāḥ — their lives; mat-arthe — for My sake; tyakta — abandoning; daihikāḥ — everything on the bodily platform; mām — Me; eva — alone; dayitam — their beloved; preṣṭham — dearmost; ātmānam — Self; manasā gatāḥ — understood; ye — who (the gopīs, or anyone); tyakta — giving up; loka — this world; dharmāḥ — religiosity; ca — and; mat-arthe — for My sake; tān — them; bibharmi — sustain; aham — I.

Translation
The minds of those gopīs are always absorbed in Me, and their very lives are ever devoted to Me. For My sake they have abandoned everything related to their bodies, renouncing ordinary happiness in this life, as well as religious duties necessary for such happiness in the next life. I alone am their dearmost beloved and, indeed, their very Self. I personally sustain such devotees, who for My sake give up all worldly duties.

Text 5
मयि ता: प्रेयसां प्रेष्ठे दूरस्थे गोकुलस्‍त्रिय: ।
स्मरन्त्योऽङ्ग विमुह्यन्ति विरहौत्कण्ठ्यविह्वला: ॥ ५ ॥
mayi tāḥ preyasāṁ preṣṭhe
dūra-sthe gokula-striyaḥ
smarantyo ’ṅga vimuhyanti
virahautkaṇṭhya-vihvalāḥ
Synonyms
mayi — I; tāḥ — they; preyasām — of all objects of endearment; preṣṭhe — the most dear; dūra-sthe — being far away; gokula-striyaḥ — the women of Gokula; smarantyaḥ — remembering; aṅga — dear (Uddhava); vimuhyanti — become stunned; viraha — of separation; autkaṇṭhya — by the anxiety; vihvalāḥ — overwhelmed.

Translation
My dear Uddhava, for those women of Gokula I am the most cherished object of love. Thus when they remember Me, who am so far away, they are overwhelmed by the anxiety of separation.

Text 6
धारयन्त्यतिकृच्छ्रेण प्राय: प्राणान् कथञ्चन ।
प्रत्यागमनसन्देशैर्बल्ल‍व्यो मे मदात्मिका: ॥ ६ ॥
dhārayanty ati-kṛcchreṇa
prāyaḥ prāṇān kathañcana
pratyāgamana-sandeśair
ballavyo me mad-ātmikāḥ
Synonyms
dhārayanti — they hold on; ati-kṛcchreṇa — with great difficulty; prāyaḥ — barely; prāṇān — to their lives; kathañcana — somehow; prati-āgamana — of return; sandeśaiḥ — by the promises; ballavyaḥ — the cowherd women; me — My; mat-ātmikāḥ — who are fully dedicated to Me.

Translation
Simply because I have promised to return to them, My fully devoted cowherd girlfriends struggle to maintain their lives somehow or other.

Text 7
श्रीशुक उवाच
इत्युक्त उद्धवो राजन्सन्देशं भर्तुराद‍ृत: ।
आदाय रथमारुह्य प्रययौ नन्दगोकुलम् ॥ ७ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
ity ukta uddhavo rājan
sandeśaṁ bhartur ādṛtaḥ
ādāya ratham āruhya
prayayau nanda-gokulam
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti — thus; uktaḥ — spoken to; uddhavaḥ — Uddhava; rājan — O King (Parīkṣit); sandeśam — the message; bhartuḥ — of his master; ādṛtaḥ — respectfully; ādāya — taking; ratham — his chariot; āruhya — mounting; prayayau — went off; nanda-gokulam — to the cowherd village of Nanda Mahārāja.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus addressed, O King, Uddhava respectfully accepted his master’s message, mounted his chariot and set off for Nanda-gokula.

Text 8
प्राप्तो नन्दव्रजं श्रीमान् निम्‍लोचति विभावसौ ।
छन्नयान: प्रविशतां पशूनां खुररेणुभि: ॥ ८ ॥
prāpto nanda-vrajaṁ śrīmān
nimlocati vibhāvasau
channa-yānaḥ praviśatāṁ
paśūnāṁ khura-reṇubhiḥ
Synonyms
prāptaḥ — reaching; nanda-vrajam — the pastures of Nanda Mahārāja; śrīmān — the fortunate (Uddhava); nimlocati — while it was setting; vibhāvasau — the sun; channa — invisible; yānaḥ — whose passing; praviśatām — who were entering; paśūnām — of the animals; khura — of the hooves; reṇubhiḥ — by the dust.

Translation
The fortunate Uddhava reached Nanda Mahārāja’s pastures just as the sun was setting, and since the returning cows and other animals were raising dust with their hooves, his chariot passed unnoticed.

Texts 9-13
वासितार्थेऽभियुध्यद्भ‍िर्नादितं शुश्मिभिर्वृषै: ।
धावन्तीभिश्च वास्राभिरुधोभारै: स्ववत्सकान् ॥ ९ ॥
इतस्ततो विलङ्घद्भ‍िर्गोवत्सैर्मण्डितं सितै: ।
गोदोहशब्दाभिरवं वेणूनां नि:स्वनेन च ॥ १० ॥
गायन्तीभिश्च कर्माणि शुभानि बलकृष्णयो: ।
स्वलङ्कृताभिर्गोपीभिर्गोपैश्च सुविराजितम् ॥ ११ ॥
अग्‍न्यर्कातिथिगोविप्रपितृदेवार्चनान्वितै: ।
धूपदीपैश्च माल्यैश्च गोपावासैर्मनोरमम् ॥ १२ ॥
सर्वत: पुष्पितवनं द्विजालिकुलनादितम् ।
हंसकारण्डवाकीर्णै: पद्मषण्डैश्च मण्डितम् ॥ १३ ॥
vāsitārthe ’bhiyudhyadbhir
nāditaṁ śuśmibhir vṛṣaiḥ
dhāvantībhiś ca vāsrābhir
udho-bhāraiḥ sva-vatsakān
itas tato vilaṅghadbhir
go-vatsair maṇḍitaṁ sitaiḥ
go-doha-śabdābhiravaṁ
veṇūnāṁ niḥsvanena ca
gāyantībhiś ca karmāṇi
śubhāni bala-kṛṣṇayoḥ
sv-alaṅkṛtābhir gopībhir
gopaiś ca su-virājitam
agny-arkātithi-go-vipra-
pitṛ-devārcanānvitaiḥ
dhūpa-dīpaiś ca mālyaiś ca
gopāvāsair mano-ramam
sarvataḥ puṣpita-vanaṁ
dvijāli-kula-nāditam
haṁsa-kāraṇḍavākīrṇaiḥ
padma-ṣaṇḍaiś ca maṇḍitam
Synonyms
vāsita — of the fertile (cows); arthe — for the sake; abhiyudhyadbhiḥ — who were fighting with one another; nāditam — resounding; śuśmibhiḥ — sexually aroused; vṛṣaiḥ — with the bulls; dhāvantībhiḥ — running; ca — and; vāsrābhiḥ — with the cows; udhaḥ — by their udders; bhāraiḥ — burdened; sva — after their own; vatsakān — calves; itaḥ tataḥ — here and there; vilaṅghadbhiḥ — jumping; go-vatsaiḥ — by the calves; maṇḍitam — adorned; sitaiḥ — white; go-doha — of the milking of the cows; śabda — by the sounds; abhiravam — reverberating; veṇūnām — of flutes; niḥsvanena — with the loud vibration; ca — and; gāyantībhiḥ — who were singing; ca — and; karmāṇi — about the deeds; śubhāni — auspicious; bala-kṛṣṇayoḥ — of Balarāma and Kṛṣṇa; su — finely; alaṅkṛtābhiḥ — ornamented; gopībhiḥ — with the cowherd women; gopaiḥ — the cowherd men; ca — and; su-virājitam — resplendent; agni — of the sacrificial fire; arka — the sun; atithi — guests; go — the cows; vipra — the brāhmaṇas; pitṛ — forefathers; deva — and demigods; arcana — with worship; anvitaiḥ — filled; dhūpa — with incense; dīpaiḥ — lamps; ca — and; mālyaiḥ — with flower garlands; ca — also; gopa-āvāsaiḥ — because of the homes of the cowherds; manaḥ-ramam — very attractive; sarvataḥ — on all sides; puṣpita — flowering; vanam — with the forest; dvija — of birds; ali — and bees; kula — with the swarms; nāditam — resounding; haṁsa — with swans; kāraṇḍava — and a certain species of duck; ākīrṇaiḥ — crowded; padma-ṣaṇḍaiḥ — with bowers of lotuses; ca — and; maṇḍitam — beautified.

Translation
Gokula resounded on all sides with the sounds of bulls in rut fighting with one another for fertile cows; with the mooing of cows, burdened by their udders, chasing after their calves; with the noise of milking and of the white calves jumping here and there; with the loud reverberation of flute-playing; and with the singing of the all-auspicious deeds of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma by the cowherd men and women, who made the village resplendent with their wonderfully ornamented attire. The cowherds’ homes in Gokula appeared most charming with their abundant paraphernalia for worship of the sacrificial fire, the sun, unexpected guests, the cows, the brāhmaṇas, the forefathers and the demigods. On all sides lay the flowering forest, echoing with flocks of birds and swarms of bees and beautified by its lakes crowded with swans, kāraṇḍava ducks and bowers of lotuses.

Text 14
तमागतं समागम्य कृष्णस्यानुचरं प्रियम् ।
नन्द: प्रीत: परिष्वज्य वासुदेवधियार्चयत् ॥ १४ ॥
tam āgataṁ samāgamya
kṛṣṇasyānucaraṁ priyam
nandaḥ prītaḥ pariṣvajya
vāsudeva-dhiyārcayat
Synonyms
tam — him (Uddhava); āgatam — arrived; samāgamya — approaching; kṛṣṇasya — of Kṛṣṇa; anucaram — the follower; priyam — dear; nandaḥ — Nanda Mahārāja; prītaḥ — happy; pariṣvajya — embracing; vāsudeva-dhiyā — thinking of Lord Vāsudeva; ārcayat — worshiped.

Translation
As soon as Uddhava arrived at Nanda Mahārāja’s home, Nanda came forward to meet him. The cowherd King embraced him in great happiness and worshiped him as nondifferent from Lord Vāsudeva.

Text 15
भोजितं परमान्नेन संविष्टं कशिपौ सुखम् ।
गतश्रमं पर्यपृच्छत् पादसंवाहनादिभि: ॥ १५ ॥
bhojitaṁ paramānnena
saṁviṣṭaṁ kaśipau sukham
gata-śramaṁ paryapṛcchat
pāda-saṁvāhanādibhiḥ
Synonyms
bhojitam — fed; parama-annena — with first-class food; saṁviṣṭam — seated; kaśipau — on a nice bed; sukham — comfortably; gata — relieved; śramam — of fatigue; paryapṛcchat — he inquired; pāda — of his feet; saṁvāhana — with massaging; ādibhiḥ — and so on.

Translation
After Uddhava had eaten first-class food, been seated comfortably on a bed and been relieved of his fatigue by a foot massage and other means, Nanda inquired from him as follows.

Text 16
कच्चिदङ्ग महाभाग सखा न: शूरनन्दन: ।
आस्ते कुशल्यपत्याद्यैर्युक्तो मुक्त: सुहृद्‍व्रत: ॥ १६ ॥
kaccid aṅga mahā-bhāga
sakhā naḥ śūra-nandanaḥ
āste kuśaly apatyādyair
yukto muktaḥ suhṛd-vrataḥ
Synonyms
kaccit — whether; aṅga — my dear; mahā-bhāga — O most fortunate one; sakhā — the friend; naḥ — our; śūra-nandanaḥ — the son of King Śūra (Vasudeva); āste — lives; kuśalī — well; apatya-ādyaiḥ — with his children and so on; yuktaḥ — joined; muktaḥ — freed; suhṛt — to his friends; vrataḥ — who is devoted.

Translation
[Nanda Mahārāja said:] My dear most fortunate one, does the son of Śūra fare well, now that he is free and has rejoined his children and other relatives?

Text 17
दिष्‍ट्या कंसो हत: पाप: सानुग: स्वेन पाप्मना ।
साधूनां धर्मशीलानां यदूनां द्वेष्टि य: सदा ॥ १७ ॥
diṣṭyā kaṁso hataḥ pāpaḥ
sānugaḥ svena pāpmanā
sādhūnāṁ dharma-śīlānāṁ
yadūnāṁ dveṣṭi yaḥ sadā
Synonyms
diṣṭyā — by good fortune; kaṁsaḥ — King Kaṁsa; hataḥ — has been killed; pāpaḥ — the sinful; sa — along with; anugaḥ — his followers (brothers); svena — because of his own; pāpmanā — sinfulness; sādhūnām — saintly; dharma-śīlānām — always righteous in their behavior; yadūnām — the Yadus; dveṣṭi — hated; yaḥ — who; sadā — always.

Translation
Fortunately, because of his own sins, the sinful Kaṁsa has been killed, along with all his brothers. He always hated the saintly and righteous Yadus.

Text 18
अपि स्मरति न: कृष्णो मातरं सुहृद: सखीन् ।
गोपान् व्रजं चात्मनाथं गावो वृन्दावनं गिरिम् ॥ १८ ॥
api smarati naḥ kṛṣṇo
mātaraṁ suhṛdaḥ sakhīn
gopān vrajaṁ cātma-nāthaṁ
gāvo vṛndāvanaṁ girim
Synonyms
api — perhaps; smarati — remembers; naḥ — us; kṛṣṇaḥ — Kṛṣṇa; mātaram — His mother; suhṛdaḥ — His well-wishers; sakhīn — and dear friends; gopān — the cowherds; vrajam — the village of Vraja; ca — and; ātma — Himself; nātham — whose master; gāvaḥ — the cows; vṛndāvanam — the forest of Vṛndāvana; girim — the mountain Govardhana.

Translation
Does Kṛṣṇa remember us? Does He remember His mother and His friends and well-wishers? Does He remember the cowherds and their village of Vraja, of which He is the master? Does He remember the cows, Vṛndāvana forest and Govardhana Hill?

Text 19
अप्यायास्यति गोविन्द: स्वजनान्सकृदीक्षितुम् ।
तर्हि द्रक्ष्याम तद्वक्त्रं सुनसं सुस्मितेक्षणम् ॥ १९ ॥
apy āyāsyati govindaḥ
sva-janān sakṛd īkṣitum
tarhi drakṣyāma tad-vaktraṁ
su-nasaṁ su-smitekṣaṇam
Synonyms
api — whether; āyāsyati — will come back; govindaḥ — Kṛṣṇa; sva-janān — His relatives; sakṛt — once; īkṣitum — to see; tarhi — then; drakṣyāma — we may glance upon; tat — His; vaktram — face; su-nasam — with beautiful nose; su — beautiful; smita — smile; īkṣaṇam — and eyes.

Translation
Will Govinda return even once to see His family? If He ever does, we may then glance upon His beautiful face, with its beautiful eyes, nose and smile.

Text 20
दावाग्नेर्वातवर्षाच्च वृषसर्पाच्च रक्षिता: ।
दुरत्ययेभ्यो मृत्युभ्य: कृष्णेन सुमहात्मना ॥ २० ॥
dāvāgner vāta-varṣāc ca
vṛṣa-sarpāc ca rakṣitāḥ
duratyayebhyo mṛtyubhyaḥ
kṛṣṇena su-mahātmanā
Synonyms
dāva-agneḥ — from the forest fire; vāta — from the wind; varṣāt — and rain; ca — also; vṛṣa — from the bull; sarpāt — from the serpent; ca — and; rakṣitāḥ — protected; duratyayebhyaḥ — insurmountable; mṛtyubhyaḥ — from mortal dangers; kṛṣṇena — by Kṛṣṇa; su-mahā-ātmanā — the very great soul.

Translation
We were saved from the forest fire, the wind and rain, the bull and serpent demons — from all such insurmountable, deadly dangers — by that very great soul, Kṛṣṇa.

Text 21
स्मरतां कृष्णवीर्याणि लीलापाङ्गनिरीक्षितम् ।
हसितं भाषितं चाङ्ग सर्वा न: शिथिला: क्रिया: ॥ २१ ॥
smaratāṁ kṛṣṇa-vīryāṇi
līlāpāṅga-nirīkṣitam
hasitaṁ bhāṣitaṁ cāṅga
sarvā naḥ śithilāḥ kriyāḥ
Synonyms
smaratām — who are remembering; kṛṣṇa-vīryāṇi — the valorous deeds of Kṛṣṇa; līlā — playful; apāṅga — with sidelong glances; nirīkṣitam — His looking; hasitam — smiling; bhāṣitam — speaking; ca — and; aṅga — my dear (Uddhava); sarvāḥ — all; naḥ — for us; śithilāḥ — slackened; kriyāḥ — material activities.

Translation
As we remember the wonderful deeds Kṛṣṇa performed, His playful sidelong glances, His smiles and His words, O Uddhava, we forget all our material engagements.

Text 22
सरिच्छैलवनोद्देशान् मुकुन्दपदभूषितान् ।
आक्रीडानीक्ष्यमाणानां मनो याति तदात्मताम् ॥ २२ ॥
saric-chaila-vanoddeśān
mukunda-pada-bhūṣitān
ākrīḍān īkṣyamāṇānāṁ
mano yāti tad-ātmatām
Synonyms
sarit — the rivers; śaila — hills; vana — of the forests; uddeśān — and the various parts; mukunda — of Kṛṣṇa; pada — by the feet; bhūṣitān — ornamented; ākrīḍān — the locations of His play; īkṣyamāṇānām — for those who are seeing; manaḥ — the mind; yāti — attains; tat-ātmatām — total absorption in Him.

Translation
When we see the places where Mukunda enjoyed His sporting pastimes — the rivers, hills and forests He decorated with His feet — our minds become totally absorbed in Him.

Text 23
मन्ये कृष्णं च रामं च प्राप्ताविह सुरोत्तमौ ।
सुराणां महदर्थाय गर्गस्य वचनं यथा ॥ २३ ॥
manye kṛṣṇaṁ ca rāmaṁ ca
prāptāv iha surottamau
surāṇāṁ mahad-arthāya
gargasya vacanaṁ yathā
Synonyms
manye — I think; kṛṣṇam — Kṛṣṇa; ca — and; rāmam — Balarāma; ca — and; prāptau — obtained; iha — on this planet; sura — of demigods; uttamau — two of the most elevated; surāṇām — of the demigods; mahat — great; arthāya — for a purpose; gargasya — of the sage Garga; vacanam — the statement; yathā — as.

Translation
In my opinion, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma must be two exalted demigods who have come to this planet to fulfill some great mission of the demigods. Such was foretold by Garga Ṛṣi.

Text 24
कंसं नागायुतप्राणं मल्लौ गजपतिं यथा ।
अवधिष्टां लीलयैव पशूनिव मृगाधिप: ॥ २४ ॥
kaṁsaṁ nāgāyuta-prāṇaṁ
mallau gaja-patiṁ yathā
avadhiṣṭāṁ līlayaiva
paśūn iva mṛgādhipaḥ
Synonyms
kaṁsam — Kaṁsa; nāga — of elephants; ayuta — ten thousand; prāṇam — whose vital strength; mallau — the two wrestlers (Cāṇūra and Muṣṭika); gaja-patim — the king of the elephants (Kuvalayāpīḍa); yathā — inasmuch as; avadhiṣṭām — the two of Them killed; līlayā — as a game; eva — simply; paśūn — animals; iva — as; mṛga-adhipaḥ — the lion, king of animals.

Translation
After all, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma killed Kaṁsa, who was as strong as ten thousand elephants, as well as the wrestlers Cāṇūra and Muṣṭika and the elephant Kuvalayāpīḍa. They killed them all sportingly, as easily as a lion disposes of small animals.

Text 25
तालत्रयं महासारं धनुर्यष्टिमिवेभराट् ।
बभञ्जैकेन हस्तेन सप्ताहमदधाद् गिरिम् ॥ २५ ॥
tāla-trayaṁ mahā-sāraṁ
dhanur yaṣṭim ivebha-rāṭ
babhañjaikena hastena
saptāham adadhād girim
Synonyms
tāla-trayam — as long as three palm trees; mahā-sāram — extremely solid; dhanuḥ — the bow; yaṣṭim — a stick; iva — as; ibha-rāṭ — a royal elephant; babhañja — He broke; ekena — with one; hastena — hand; sapta-aham — for seven days; adadhāt — held; girim — a mountain.

Translation
With the ease of a royal elephant breaking a stick, Kṛṣṇa broke a powerful, giant bow three tālas long. He also held a mountain aloft for seven days with just one hand.

Text 26
प्रलम्बो धेनुकोऽरिष्टस्तृणावर्तो बकादय: ।
दैत्या: सुरासुरजितो हता येनेह लीलया ॥ २६ ॥
pralambo dhenuko ’riṣṭas
tṛṇāvarto bakādayaḥ
daityāḥ surāsura-jito
hatā yeneha līlayā
Synonyms
pralambaḥ dhenukaḥ ariṣṭaḥ — Pralamba, Dhenuka and Ariṣṭa; tṛṇāvartaḥ — Tṛṇāvarta; baka-ādayaḥ — Baka and others; daityāḥ — demons; sura-asura — both the demigods and the demons; jitaḥ — who conquered; hatāḥ — killed; yena — by whom; iha — here (in Vṛndāvana); līlayā — easily.

Translation
Here in Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma easily destroyed demons like Pralamba, Dhenuka, Arista, Tṛṇāvarta and Baka, who had themselves defeated both demigods and other demons.

Text 27
श्रीशुक उवाच
इति संस्मृत्य संस्मृत्य नन्द: कृष्णानुरक्तधी: ।
अत्युत्कण्ठोऽभवत्तूष्णीं प्रेमप्रसरविह्वल: ॥ २७ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
iti saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya
nandaḥ kṛṣṇānurakta-dhīḥ
aty-utkaṇṭho ’bhavat tūṣṇīṁ
prema-prasara-vihvalaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti — thus; saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya — intensely and repeatedly remembering; nandaḥ — Nanda Mahārāja; kṛṣṇa — to Kṛṣṇa; anurakta — completely attracted; dhīḥ — whose mind; ati — extremely; utkaṇṭhaḥ — anxious; abhavat — he became; tūṣṇīm — silent; prema — of his pure love; prasara — by the force; vihvalaḥ — overcome.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus intensely remembering Kṛṣṇa again and again, Nanda Mahārāja, his mind completely attached to the Lord, felt extreme anxiety and fell silent, overcome by the strength of his love.

Text 28
यशोदा वर्ण्यमानानि पुत्रस्य चरितानि च ।
श‍ृण्वन्त्यश्रूण्यवास्राक्षीत् स्‍नेहस्‍नुतपयोधरा ॥ २८ ॥
yaśodā varṇyamānāni
putrasya caritāni ca
śṛṇvanty aśrūṇy avāsrākṣīt
sneha-snuta-payodharā
Synonyms
yaśodā — mother Yaśodā; varṇyamānāni — being described; putrasya — of her son; caritāni — the activities; ca — and; śṛṇvantī — as she heard; aśrūṇi — tears; avāsrākṣīt — poured down; sneha — out of love; snuta — moistened; payodharā — her breasts.

Translation
As mother Yaśodā heard the descriptions of her son’s activities, she poured out her tears, and milk flowed from her breasts out of love.

Text 29
तयोरित्थं भगवति कृष्णे नन्दयशोदयो: ।
वीक्ष्यानुरागं परमं नन्दमाहोद्धवो मुदा ॥ २९ ॥
tayor itthaṁ bhagavati
kṛṣṇe nanda-yaśodayoḥ
vīkṣyānurāgaṁ paramaṁ
nandam āhoddhavo mudā
Synonyms
tayoḥ — of the two of them; ittham — like this; bhagavati — for the Supreme Personality of Godhead; kṛṣṇe — Lord Kṛṣṇa; nanda-yaśodayoḥ — of Nanda and Yaśodā; vīkṣya — clearly seeing; anurāgam — the loving attraction; paramam — supreme; nandam — to Nanda; āha — spoke; uddhavaḥ — Uddhava; mudā — with joy.

Translation
Uddhava then joyfully addressed Nanda Mahārāja, having clearly seen the supreme loving attraction he and Yaśodā felt for Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 30
श्रीउद्धव उवाच
युवां श्लाघ्यतमौ नूनं देहिनामिह मानद ।
नारायणेऽखिलगुरौ यत्कृता मतिरीद‍ृशी ॥ ३० ॥
śrī-uddhava uvāca
yuvāṁ ślāghyatamau nūnaṁ
dehinām iha māna-da
nārāyaṇe ’khila-gurau
yat kṛtā matir īdṛśī
Synonyms
śrī-uddhavaḥ uvāca — Śrī Uddhava said; yuvām — you two; ślāghyatamau — the most praiseworthy; nūnam — for certain; dehinām — of embodied living beings; iha — in this world; mana-da — O respectful one; nārāyaṇe — for the Supreme Lord Nārāyaṇa; akhila-gurau — the spiritual master of all; yat — because; kṛtā — produced; matiḥ — a mentality; īdṛśī — like this.

Translation
Śrī Uddhava said: O respectful Nanda, certainly you and mother Yaśodā are the most praiseworthy persons in the entire world, since you have developed such a loving attitude toward Lord Nārāyaṇa, the spiritual master of all living beings.

Text 31
एतौ हि विश्वस्य च बीजयोनी
रामो मुकुन्द: पुरुष: प्रधानम् ।
अन्वीय भूतेषु विलक्षणस्य
ज्ञानस्य चेशात इमौ पुराणौ ॥ ३१ ॥
etau hi viśvasya ca bīja-yonī
rāmo mukundaḥ puruṣaḥ pradhānam
anvīya bhūteṣu vilakṣaṇasya
jñānasya ceśāta imau purāṇau
Synonyms
etau — these two; hi — indeed; viśvasya — of the universe; ca — and; bīja — the seed; yonī — and the womb; rāmaḥ — Lord Balarāma; mukundaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; puruṣaḥ — the creating Lord; pradhānam — His creative energy; anvīya — entering; bhūteṣu — within all living beings; vilakṣaṇasya — confused or perceiving; jñānasya — knowledge; ca — and; īśāte — control; imau — They; purāṇau — primeval.

Translation
These two Lords, Mukunda and Balarāma, are each the seed and womb of the universe, the creator and His creative potency. They enter the hearts of living beings and control their conditioned awareness. They are the primeval Supreme.

Texts 32-33
यस्मिन् जन: प्राणवियोगकाले
क्षणं समावेश्य मनोऽविशुद्धम् ।
निर्हृत्य कर्माशयमाशु याति
परां गतिं ब्रह्ममयोऽर्कवर्ण: ॥ ३२ ॥
तस्मिन् भवन्तावखिलात्महेतौ
नारायणे कारणमर्त्यमूर्तौ ।
भावं विधत्तां नितरां महात्मन्
किं वावशिष्टं युवयो: सुकृत्यम् ॥ ३३ ॥
yasmin janaḥ prāṇa-viyoga-kāle
kṣanaṁ samāveśya mano ’viśuddham
nirhṛtya karmāśayam āśu yāti
parāṁ gatiṁ brahma-mayo ’rka-varṇaḥ
tasmin bhavantāv akhilātma-hetau
nārāyaṇe kāraṇa-martya-mūrtau
bhāvaṁ vidhattāṁ nitarāṁ mahātman
kiṁ vāvaśiṣṭaṁ yuvayoḥ su-kṛtyam
Synonyms
yasmin — in whom; janaḥ — any person; prāṇa — from one’s life air; viyoga — of separation; kāle — at the time; kṣaṇam — for a moment; samāveśya — absorbing; manaḥ — one’s mind; aviśuddham — impure; nirhṛtya — eradicating; karma — of the reactions of material work; āśayam — all traces; āśu — immediately; yāti — he goes; parām — to the supreme; gatim — destination; brahma-mayaḥ — in a purely spiritual form; arka — like the sun; varṇaḥ — whose color; tasmin — to Him; bhavantau — your good selves; akhila — of all; ātma — the Supreme Soul; hetau — and reason for existence; nārāyaṇe — Lord Nārāyaṇa; kāraṇa — the cause of everything; martya — human; mūrtau — in a form; bhāvam — pure love; vidhattām — have given; nitarām — exceedingly; mahā-ātman — to the perfectly complete; kim vā — then what; avaśiṣṭam — remaining; yuvayoḥ — for you; su-kṛtyam — required pious activity.

Translation
Anyone, even a person in an impure state, who absorbs his mind in Him for just a moment at the time of death burns up all traces of sinful reactions and immediately attains the supreme transcendental destination in a pure, spiritual form as effulgent as the sun. You two have rendered exceptional loving service to Him, Lord Nārāyaṇa, the Supersoul of all and the cause of all existence, the great soul who, although the original cause of everything, has a humanlike form. What pious deeds could still be required of you?

Text 34
आगमिष्यत्यदीर्घेण कालेन व्रजमच्युत: ।
प्रियं विधास्यते पित्रोर्भगवान् सात्वतां पति: ॥ ३४ ॥
āgamiṣyaty adīrgheṇa
kālena vrajam acyutaḥ
priyaṁ vidhāsyate pitror
bhagavān sātvatāṁ patiḥ
Synonyms
āgamiṣyati — He will return; adīrgheṇa — not long; kālena — in time; vrajam — to Vraja; acyutaḥ — Kṛṣṇa, the infallible one; priyam — satisfaction; vidhāsyate — He will give; pitroḥ — to His parents; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; sātvatām — of the devotees; patiḥ — master and protector.

Translation
Infallible Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the devotees, will soon return to Vraja to satisfy His parents.

Text 35
हत्वा कंसं रङ्गमध्ये प्रतीपं सर्वसात्वताम् ।
यदाह व: समागत्य कृष्ण: सत्यं करोति तत् ॥ ३५ ॥
hatvā kaṁsaṁ raṅga-madhye
pratīpaṁ sarva-sātvatām
yad āha vaḥ samāgatya
kṛṣṇaḥ satyaṁ karoti tat
Synonyms
hatvā — having killed; kaṁsam — Kaṁsa; raṅga — the arena; madhye — within; pratīpam — the enemy; sarva-sātvatām — of all the Yadus; yat — what; āha — He spoke; vaḥ — to you; samāgatya — by coming back; kṛṣṇaḥ — Kṛṣṇa; satyam — true; karoti — will make; tat — that.

Translation
Having killed Kaṁsa, the enemy of all the Yadus, in the wrestling arena, Kṛṣṇa will now surely fulfill His promise to you by coming back.

Text 36
मा खिद्यतं महाभागौ द्रक्ष्यथ: कृष्णमन्तिके ।
अन्तर्हृदि स भूतानामास्ते ज्योतिरिवैधसि ॥ ३६ ॥
mā khidyataṁ mahā-bhāgau
drakṣyathaḥ kṛṣṇam antike
antar hṛdi sa bhūtānām
āste jyotir ivaidhasi
Synonyms
mā khidyatam — please do not lament; mahā-bhāgau — O most fortunate ones; drakṣyathaḥ — you will see; kṛṣṇam — Kṛṣṇa; antike — in the near future; antaḥ — within; hṛdi — the hearts; saḥ — He; bhūtānām — of all living beings; āste — is present; jyotiḥ — fire; iva — just as; edhasi — within firewood.

Translation
O most fortunate ones, do not lament. You will see Kṛṣṇa again very soon. He is present in the hearts of all living beings, just as fire lies dormant in wood.

Text 37
न ह्यस्यास्ति प्रिय: कश्चिन्नाप्रियो वास्त्यमानिन: ।
नोत्तमो नाधमो वापि समानस्यासमोऽपि वा ॥ ३७ ॥
na hy asyāsti priyaḥ kaścin
nāpriyo vāsty amāninaḥ
nottamo nādhamo vāpi
sa-mānasyāsamo ’pi vā
Synonyms
na — not; hi — indeed; asya — for Him; asti — there is; priyaḥ — dear; kaścit — anyone; na — not; apriyaḥ — not dear; vā — or; asti — there is; amāninaḥ — who is free from desire for respect; na — not; uttamaḥ — superior; na — not; adhamaḥ — inferior; vā — or; api — also; samānasya — for Him who has all respect for others; āsamaḥ — completely ordinary; api — also; vā — or.

Translation
For Him no one is especially dear or despicable, superior or inferior, and yet He is not indifferent to anyone. He is free from all desire for respect and yet gives respect to all others.

Text 38
न माता न पिता तस्य न भार्या न सुतादय: ।
नात्मीयो न परश्चापि न देहो जन्म एव च ॥ ३८ ॥
na mātā na pitā tasya
na bhāryā na sutādayaḥ
nātmīyo na paraś cāpi
na deho janma eva ca
Synonyms
na — there is no; mātā — mother; na — no; pitā — father; tasya — for Him; na — no; bhāryā — wife; na — no; suta-ādayaḥ — children and so forth; na — no one; ātmīyaḥ — related to Himself; na — nor; paraḥ — an outsider; ca api — also; na — no; dehaḥ — body; janma — birth; eva — either; ca — and.

Translation
He has no mother, no father, no wife, children or other relatives. No one is related to Him, and yet no one is a stranger to Him. He has no material body and no birth.

Text 39
न चास्य कर्म वा लोके सदसन्मिश्रयोनिषु ।
क्रीडार्थं सोऽपि साधूनां परित्राणाय कल्पते ॥ ३९ ॥
na cāsya karma vā loke
sad-asan-miśra-yoniṣu
krīḍārthaṁ so ’pi sādhūnāṁ
paritrāṇāya kalpate
Synonyms
na — there is not; ca — and; asya — for Him; karma — work; vā — or; loke — in this world; sat — pure; asat — impure; miśra — or mixed; yoniṣu — in wombs or species; krīḍā — of playing; artham — for the sake; saḥ — He; api — also; sādhūnām — of His saintly devotees; paritrāṇāya — for the saving; kalpate — appears.

Translation
He has no work to do in this world that would oblige Him to take birth in pure, impure or mixed species of life. Yet to enjoy His pastimes and deliver His saintly devotees, He manifests Himself.

Text 40
सत्त्वं रजस्तम इति भजते निर्गुणो गुणान् ।
क्रीडन्नतीतोऽपि गुणै: सृजत्यवति हन्त्यज: ॥ ४० ॥
sattvaṁ rajas tama iti
bhajate nirguṇo guṇān
krīḍann atīto ’pi guṇaiḥ
sṛjaty avan hanty ajaḥ
Synonyms
sattvam — goodness; rajaḥ — passion; tamaḥ — and ignorance; iti — thus called; bhajate — He accepts; nirguṇaḥ — beyond the material modes; guṇān — the modes; krīḍan — playing; atītaḥ — transcendental; api — although; guṇaiḥ — using the modes; sṛjati — He creates; avati — maintains; hanti — and destroys; ajaḥ — the unborn Lord.

Translation
Although beyond the three modes of material nature — goodness, passion and ignorance — the transcendental Lord accepts association with them as His play. Thus the unborn Supreme Lord utilizes the material modes to create, maintain and destroy.

Text 41
यथा भ्रमरिकाद‍ृष्‍ट्या भ्राम्यतीव महीयते ।
चित्ते कर्तरि तत्रात्मा कर्तेवाहंधिया स्मृत: ॥ ४१ ॥
yathā bhramarikā-dṛṣṭyā
bhrāmyatīva mahīyate
citte kartari tatrātmā
kartevāhaṁ-dhiyā smṛtaḥ
Synonyms
yathā — as; bhramarikā — because of whirling around; dṛṣṭyā — in one’s vision; bhrāmyati — whirling; iva — as if; mahī — the ground; īyate — appears; citte — the mind; kartari — being the doer; tatra — there; ātmā — the self; kartā — the doer; iva — as if; aham-dhiyā — because of false ego; smṛtaḥ — is thought.

Translation
Just as a person who is whirling around perceives the ground to be turning, one who is affected by false ego thinks himself the doer, when actually only his mind is acting.

Text 42
युवयोरेव नैवायमात्मजो भगवान् हरि: ।
सर्वेषामात्मजो ह्यात्मा पिता माता स ईश्वर: ॥ ४२ ॥
yuvayor eva naivāyam
ātmajo bhagavān hariḥ
sarveṣām ātmajo hy ātmā
pitā mātā sa īśvaraḥ
Synonyms
yuvayoḥ — of you two; eva — alone; na — not; eva — indeed; ayam — He; ātma-jaḥ — the son; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hariḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; sarveṣām — of all; ātma-jaḥ — the son; hi — indeed; ātmā — the very self; pitā — father; mātā — mother; saḥ — He; īśvaraḥ — the controlling Lord.

Translation
The Supreme Lord Hari is certainly not your son alone. Rather, being the Lord, He is the son, Soul, father and mother of everyone.

Text 43
द‍ृष्टं श्रुतं भूतभवद् भविष्यत्
स्थास्‍नुश्चरिष्णुर्महदल्पकं च ।
विनाच्युताद् वस्तु तरां न वाच्यं
स एव सर्वं परमात्मभूत: ॥ ४३ ॥
dṛṣṭaṁ śrutaṁ bhūta-bhavad-bhaviṣyat
sthāsnuś cariṣṇur mahad alpakaṁ ca
vinācyutād vastu tarāṁ na vācyaṁ
sa eva sarvaṁ paramātma-bhūtaḥ
Synonyms
dṛṣṭam — seen; śrutam — heard; bhūta — past; bhavat — present; bhaviṣyat — future; sthāsnuḥ — stationary; cariṣṇuḥ — mobile; mahat — large; alpakam — small; ca — and; vinā — apart from; acyutāt — the infallible Lord Kṛṣṇa; vastu — thing; tarām — at all; na — is not; varyam — capable of being named; saḥ — He; eva — alone; sarvam — everything; parama-ātma — as the Supersoul; bhūtaḥ — manifesting.

Translation
Nothing can be said to exist independent of Lord Acyuta — nothing heard or seen, nothing in the past, present or future, nothing moving or unmoving, great or small. He indeed is everything, for He is the Supreme Soul.

Text 44
एवं निशा सा ब्रुवतोर्व्यतीता
नन्दस्य कृष्णानुचरस्य राजन् ।
गोप्य: समुत्थाय निरूप्य दीपान्
वास्तून् समभ्यर्च्य दधीन्यमन्थन् ॥ ४४ ॥
evaṁ niśā sā bruvator vyatītā
nandasya kṛṣṇānucarasya rājan
gopyaḥ samutthāya nirūpya dīpān
vāstūn samabhyarcya daudhīny amanthun
Synonyms
evam — in this way; niśā — the night; sā — that; bruvatoḥ — as they were both speaking; vyatītā — was finished; nandasya — Nanda Mahārāja; kṛṣṇa-anucarasya — and the servant of Kṛṣṇa (Uddhava); rājan — O King (Parīkṣit); gopyaḥ — the cowherd women; samutthāya — rising from sleep; nirūpya — lighting; dīpān — lamps; vāstūn — the domestic deities; samabhyarcya — worshiping; dadhīni — curds; amanthan — churned.

Translation
While Kṛṣṇa’s messenger continued speaking with Nanda, the night ended, O King. The women of the cowherd village rose from bed and, lighting lamps, worshiped their household deities. Then they began churning the yogurt into butter.

Text 45
ता दीपदीप्तैर्मणिभिर्विरेजू
रज्जूर्विकर्षद्भ‍ुजकङ्कणस्रज: ।
चलन्नितम्बस्तनहारकुण्डल-
त्विषत्कपोलारुणकुङ्कुमानना: ॥ ४५ ॥
tā dīpa-dīptair maṇibhir virejū
rajjūr vikarṣad-bhuja-kaṅkaṇa-srajaḥ
calan-nitamba-stana-hāra-kuṇḍala-
tviṣat-kapolāruṇa-kuṅkumānanāḥ
Synonyms
tāḥ — those women; dīpa — by the lamps; dīptaiḥ — illumined; maṇibhiḥ — with jewels; virejuḥ — shone; rajjūḥ — the (churning) ropes; vikarṣat — pulling; bhuja — upon their arms; kaṅkaṇa — of bangles; srajaḥ — wearing rows; calan — moving; nitamba — their hips; stana — breasts; hāra — and necklaces; kuṇḍala — due to their earrings; tviṣat — glowing; kapola — their cheeks; aruṇa — reddish; kuṅkuma — with kuṅkuma powder; ānanāḥ — their faces.

Translation
As they pulled on the churning ropes with their bangled arms, the women of Vraja shone with the splendor of their jewels, which reflected the lamps’ light. Their hips, breasts and necklaces moved about, and their faces, anointed with reddish kuṅkuma, glowed radiantly with the luster of their earrings reflecting from their cheeks.

Text 46
उद्गायतीनामरविन्दलोचनं
व्रजाङ्गनानां दिवमस्पृशद् ध्वनि: ।
दध्नश्च निर्मन्थनशब्दमिश्रितो
निरस्यते येन दिशाममङ्गलम् ॥ ४६ ॥
udgāyatīnām aravinda-locanaṁ
vrajāṅganānāṁ divam aspṛśad dhvaniḥ
dadhnaś ca nirmanthana-śabda-miśrito
nirasyate yena diśām amaṅgalam
Synonyms
udgāyatīnām — who were loudly singing; aravinda — like lotuses; locanam — (about the Lord) whose eyes; vraja-aṅganānām — of the women of Vraja; divam — the sky; aspṛśat — touched; dhvaniḥ — the reverberation; dadhnaḥ — of the curds; ca — and; nirmanthana — of the churning; śabda — with the sound; miśritaḥ — mixed; nirasyate — is dispelled; yena — by which; diśām — of all directions; amaṅgalam — the inauspiciousness.

Translation
As the ladies of Vraja loudly sang the glories of lotus-eyed Kṛṣṇa, their songs blended with the sound of their churning, ascended to the sky and dissipated all inauspiciousness in every direction.

Text 47
भगवत्युदिते सूर्ये नन्दद्वारि व्रजौकस: ।
द‍ृष्ट्वा रथं शातकौम्भं कस्यायमिति चाब्रुवन् ॥ ४७ ॥
bhagavaty udite sūrye
nanda-dvāri vrajaukasaḥ
dṛṣṭvā rathaṁ śātakaumbhaṁ
kasyāyam iti cābruvan
Synonyms
bhagavati — the lord; udite — when he rose; sūrye — the sun; nanda-dvāri — in the doorway of Nanda Mahārāja’s home; vraja-okasaḥ — the residents of Vraja; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; ratham — the chariot; śātakaumbham — made of gold; kasya — whose; ayam — this; iti — thus; ca — and; abruvan — they spoke.

Translation
When the godly sun had risen, the people of Vraja noticed the golden chariot in front of Nanda Mahārāja’s doorway. “Who does this belong to?” they asked.

Text 48
अक्रूर आगत: किं वा य: कंसस्यार्थसाधक: ।
येन नीतो मधुपुरीं कृष्ण: कमललोचन: ॥ ४८ ॥
akrūra āgataḥ kiṁ vā
yaḥ kaṁsasyārtha-sādhakaḥ
yena nīto madhu-purīṁ
kṛṣṇaḥ kamala-locanaḥ
Synonyms
akrūraḥ — Akrūra; āgataḥ — has come; kim vā — perhaps; yaḥ — who; kaṁsasya — of King Kaṁsa; artha — of the purpose; sādhakaḥ — the executor; yena — by whom; nītaḥ — brought; madhu-purīm — to Mathurā City; kṛṣṇaḥ — Kṛṣṇa; kamala — lotuslike; locanaḥ — whose eyes.

Translation
“Perhaps Akrūra has returned — he who fulfilled Kaṁsa’s desire by taking lotus-eyed Kṛṣṇa to Mathurā.

Text 49
किं साधयिष्यत्यस्माभिर्भर्तु: प्रीतस्य निष्कृतिम् ।
तत: स्‍त्रीणां वदन्तीनामुद्धवोऽगात् कृताह्निक: ॥ ४९ ॥
kiṁ sādhayiṣyaty asmābhir
bhartuḥ prītasya niṣkṛtim
tataḥ strīṇāṁ vadantīnām
uddhavo ’gāt kṛtāhnikaḥ
Synonyms
kim — whether; sādhayiṣyati — will he accomplish; asmābhiḥ — with us; bhartuḥ — of his master; prītasya — who was satisfied with him; niṣkṛtim — the funeral ritual; tataḥ — then; strīṇām — the women; vadantīnām — as they were speaking; uddhavaḥ — Uddhava; agāt — came there; kṛta — having performed; ahnikaḥ — his early-morning religious duties.

Translation
“Is he going to use our flesh to offer funeral oblations for his master, who was so satisfied with his service?” As the women were speaking in this way, Uddhava appeared, having finished his early-morning duties.