Texts 1-2
श्रीशुक उवाच
तं वीक्ष्य कृष्णानुचरं व्रजस्‍त्रिय:
प्रलम्बबाहुं नवकञ्जलोचनम् ।
पीताम्बरं पुष्करमालिनं लस-
न्मुखारविन्दं परिमृष्टकुण्डलम् ॥ १ ॥
सुविस्मिता: कोऽयमपीव्यदर्शन:
कुतश्च कस्याच्युतवेषभूषण: ।
इति स्म सर्वा: परिवव्रुरुत्सुका-
स्तमुत्तम:श्लोकपदाम्बुजाश्रयम् ॥ २ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
taṁ vīkṣya kṛṣānucaraṁ vraja-striyaḥ
pralamba-bāhuṁ nava-kañja-locanam
pītāmbaraṁ puṣkara-mālinaṁ lasan-
mukhāravindaṁ parimṛṣṭa-kuṇḍalam
su-vismitāḥ ko ’yam apīvya-darśanaḥ
kutaś ca kasyācyuta-veṣa-bhūṣaṇaḥ
iti sma sarvāḥ parivavrur utsukās
tam uttamaḥ-śloka-padāmbujāśrayam
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tam — him; vīkṣya — seeing; kṛṣṇa-anucaram — the servant of Lord Kṛṣṇa (Uddhava); vraja-striyaḥ — the women of Vraja; pralamba — hanging down; bāhum — whose arms; nava — young; kañja — like lotuses; locanam — whose eyes; pīta — yellow; ambaram — wearing a garment; puṣkara — of lotuses; mālinam — wearing a garland; lasat — effulgently glowing; makha — whose face; aravindam — lotuslike; parimṛṣṭa — polished; kuṇḍalam — whose earrings; su-vismitāḥ — quite astonished; kaḥ — who; ayam — this; apīvya — handsome; darśanaḥ — whose appearance; kutaḥ — from where; ca — and; kasya — belonging to whom; acyuta — of Kṛṣṇa; veṣa — wearing the clothing; bhūṣaṇaḥ — and ornaments; iti — saying this; sma — indeed; sarvāḥ — all of them; parivavruḥ — surrounded; utsukāḥ — eager; tam — him; uttamaḥ-śloka — of Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is praised by the best poetry; pada-ambuja — by the lotus feet; āśrayam — who is sheltered.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: The young women of Vraja became astonished upon seeing Lord Kṛṣṇa’s servant, who had long arms, whose eyes resembled a newly grown lotus, who wore a yellow garment and a lotus garland, and whose lotuslike face glowed with brightly polished earrings. “Who is this handsome man?” the gopīs asked. “Where has he come from, and whom does he serve? He’s wearing Kṛṣṇa’s clothes and ornaments!” Saying this, the gopīs eagerly crowded around Uddhava, whose shelter was the lotus feet of Lord Uttamaḥśloka, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Text 3
तं प्रश्रयेणावनता: सुसत्कृतं
सव्रीडहासेक्षणसूनृतादिभि: ।
रहस्यपृच्छन्नुपविष्टमासने
विज्ञाय सन्देशहरं रमापते: ॥ ३ ॥
taṁ praśrayeṇāvanatāḥ su-sat-kṛtaṁ
sa-vrīḍa-hāsekṣaṇa-sūnṛtādibhiḥ
rahasy apṛcchann upaviṣṭam āsane
vijñāya sandeśa-haraṁ ramā-pateḥ
Synonyms
tam — him, Uddhava; praśrayeṇa — with humility; avanatāḥ — bowed down (the gopīs); su — properly; sat-kṛtam — honored; sa-vrīḍa — with shyness; hāsa — and smiling; īkṣaṇa — by their glances; sūnṛta — pleasing words; ādibhiḥ — and so forth; rahasi — in a secluded place; apṛcchan — they inquired; upaviṣṭam — who was seated; āsane — on a cushion; vijñāya — understanding him to be; sandeśa-haram — the message carrier; ramā-pateḥ — of the master of the goddess of fortune.

Translation
Bowing their heads in humility, the gopīs duly honored Uddhava with their shy, smiling glances and pleasing words. They took him to a quiet place, seated him comfortably and began to question him, for they recognized him to be a messenger from Kṛṣṇa, the master of the goddess of fortune.

Text 4
जानीमस्त्वां यदुपते: पार्षदं समुपागतम् ।
भर्त्रेह प्रेषित: पित्रोर्भवान् प्रियचिकीर्षया ॥ ४ ॥
jānīmas tvāṁ yadu-pateḥ
pārṣadaṁ samupāgatam
bhartreha preṣitaḥ pitror
bhavān priya-cikīrṣayā
Synonyms
jānīmaḥ — we know; tvām — you; yadu-pateḥ — of the chief of the Yadus; pārṣadam — the personal associate; samupāgatam — arrived here; bhartrā — by your master; iha — here; preṣitaḥ — sent; pitroḥ — of His parents; bhavān — your good self; priya — satisfaction; cikīrṣayā — wanting to give.

Translation
[The gopīs said:] We know that you are the personal servant of Kṛṣṇa, the chief of the Yadus, and that you have come here on the order of your good master, who desires to give pleasure to His parents.

Text 5
अन्यथा गोव्रजे तस्य स्मरणीयं न चक्ष्महे ।
स्‍नेहानुबन्धो बन्धूनां मुनेरपि सुदुस्त्यज: ॥ ५ ॥
anyathā go-vraje tasya
smaraṇīyaṁ na cakṣmahe
snehānubandho bandhūnāṁ
muner api su-dustyajaḥ
Synonyms
anyathā — otherwise; go-vraje — in the cow pasture; tasya — for Him; smaraṇīyam — that which is worth remembering; na cakṣmahe — we do not see; sneha — of affection; anubandhaḥ — the attachment; bandhūnām — to relatives; muneḥ — for a sage; api — even; su-dustyajaḥ — very difficult to abandon.

Translation
We see nothing else He might consider worth remembering in these cow pastures of Vraja. Indeed, the bonds of affection for one’s family members are difficult to break, even for a sage.

Text 6
अन्येष्वर्थकृता मैत्री यावदर्थविडम्बनम् ।
पुम्भि: स्‍त्रीषु कृता यद्वत् सुमन:स्विव षट्पदै: ॥ ६ ॥
anyeṣv artha-kṛtā maitrī
yāvad-artha-viḍambanam
pumbhiḥ strīṣu kṛtā yadvat
sumanaḥsv iva ṣaṭpadaiḥ
Synonyms
anyeṣu — toward others; artha — for some motivation; kṛtā — manifested; maitrī — friendship; yāvat — for as long; artha — (as one is fulfilling his) motive; viḍambanam — pretense; pumbhiḥ — by men; strīṣu — for women; kṛtā — shown; yadvat — as much; sumanaḥsu — for flowers; iva — as; ṣaṭ-padaiḥ — by bees.

Translation
The friendship shown toward others — those who are not family members — is motivated by personal interest, and thus it is a pretense that lasts only until one’s purpose is fulfilled. Such friendship is just like the interest men take in women, or bees in flowers.

Text 7
नि:स्वं त्यजन्ति गणिका अकल्पं नृपतिं प्रजा: ।
अधीतविद्या आचार्यमृत्विजो दत्तदक्षिणम् ॥ ७ ॥
niḥsvaṁ tyajanti gaṇikā
akalpaṁ nṛpatiṁ prajāḥ
adhīta-vidyā ācāryam
ṛtvijo datta-dakṣiṇam
Synonyms
niḥsvam — one without any assets; tyajanti — abandon; gaṇikāḥ — prostitutes; akalpam — incompetent; nṛ-patim — a king; prajaḥ — citizens; adhīta-vidyāḥ — those who have completed their education; ācāryam — the teacher; ṛtvijaḥ — priests; datta — (the sacrificer) who has given; dakṣiṇam — their remuneration.

Translation
Prostitutes abandon a penniless man, subjects an incompetent king, students their teacher once they have finished their education, and priests a man who has remunerated them for a sacrifice.

Text 8
खगा वीतफलं वृक्षं भुक्त्वा चातिथयो गृहम् ।
दग्धं मृगास्तथारण्यं जारा भुक्त्वा रतां स्‍त्रियम् ॥ ८ ॥
khagā vīta-phalaṁ vṛkṣaṁ
bhuktvā cātithayo gṛham
dagdhaṁ mṛgās tathāraṇyaṁ
jārā bhuktvā ratāṁ striyam
Synonyms
khagāḥ — birds; vīta — rid; phalam — of its fruits; vṛkṣam — a tree; bhuktvā — having eaten; ca — and; atithayaḥ — guests; gṛham — a house; dagdham — burned down; mṛgāḥ — animals; tathā — similarly; araṇyam — a forest; jārāḥ — paramours; bhuktvā — having enjoyed; ratām — attracted; striyam — a woman.

Translation
Birds abandon a tree when its fruits are gone, guests a house after they have eaten, animals a forest that has burnt down, and a lover the woman he has enjoyed, even though she remains attached to him.

Texts 9-10
इति गोप्यो हि गोविन्दे गतवाक्‍कायमानसा: ।
कृष्णदूते समायाते उद्धवे त्यक्तलौकिका: ॥ ९ ॥
गायन्त्य: प्रियकर्माणि रुदन्त्यश्च गतह्रिय: ।
तस्य संस्मृत्य संस्मृत्य यानि कैशोरबाल्ययो: ॥ १० ॥
iti gopyo hi govinde
gata-vāk-kāya-mānasāḥ
kṛṣṇa-dūte samāyāte
uddhave tyakta-laukikāḥ
gāyantyaḥ prīya-karmāṇi
rudantyaś ca gata-hriyaḥ
tasya saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya
yāni kaiśora-bālyayoḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus; gopyaḥ — the gopīs; hi — indeed; govinde — on Govinda; gata — focusing; vāk — their speech; kāya — bodies; mānasaḥ — and minds; kṛṣṇa-dūte — the messenger of Kṛṣṇa; samāyāte — having arrived and joined them; uddhave — Uddhava; tyakta — putting aside; laukikāḥ — worldly affairs; gāyantyaḥ — singing; priya — of their beloved; karmāṇi — about the activities; rudantyaḥ — crying; ca — and; gata-hriyaḥ — forgetting all shyness; tasya — His; saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya — intensely remembering again and again; yāni — which; kaiśora — of youth; bālyayoḥ — and childhood.

Translation
Thus speaking, the gopīs, whose words, bodies and minds were fully dedicated to Lord Govinda, put aside all their regular work now that Kṛṣṇa’s messenger, Śrī Uddhava, had arrived among them. Constantly remembering the activities their beloved Kṛṣṇa had performed in His childhood and youth, they sang about them and cried without shame.

Text 11
काचिन्मधुकरं द‍ृष्ट्वा ध्यायन्ती कृष्णसङ्गमम् ।
प्रियप्रस्थापितं दूतं कल्पयित्वेदमब्रवीत् ॥ ११ ॥
kācin madhukaraṁ dṛṣṭvā
dhyāyantī kṛṣṇa-saṅgamam
priya-prasthāpitaṁ dūtaṁ
kalpayitvedam abravīt
Synonyms
kācit — one (of the gopīs); madhu-karam — a honeybee; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; dhyāyantī — while meditating; kṛṣṇa-saṅgamam — on Her association with Kṛṣṇa; priya — by Her beloved; prasthāpitam — sent; dūtam — a messenger; kalpayitvā — imagining it; idam — the following; abravīt — spoke.

Translation
One of the gopīs, while meditating on Her previous association with Kṛṣṇa, saw a honeybee before Her and imagined it to be a messenger sent by Her beloved. Thus She spoke as follows.

Text 12
गोप्युवाच
मधुप कितवबन्धो मा स्पृशाङ्‍‍घ्रिं सपत्न्‍या:
कुचविलुलितमालाकुङ्कुमश्मश्रुभिर्न: ।
वहतु मधुपतिस्तन्मानिनीनां प्रसादं
यदुसदसि विडम्ब्यं यस्य दूतस्त्वमीद‍ृक् ॥ १२ ॥
gopy uvāca
madhupa kitava-bandho mā spṛśaṅghriṁ sapatnyāḥ
kuca-vilulita-mālā-kuṅkuma-śmaśrubhir naḥ
vahatu madhu-patis tan-māninīnāṁ prasādaṁ
yadu-sadasi viḍambyaṁ yasya dūtas tvam īdṛk
Synonyms
gopī uvāca — the gopī said; madhupa — O bumblebee; kitava — of a cheater; bandho — O friend; mā spṛśa — please do not touch; aṅghrim — the feet; sapatnyāḥ — of the lover who is our rival; kuca — the breast; vilulita — fallen from; mālā — from the garland; kuṅkuma — with the red cosmetic; śmaśrubhiḥ — with the whiskers; naḥ — our; vahatu — let Him bring; madhu-patiḥ — the Lord of the Madhu dynasty; tat — His; māninīnām — to the women; prasādam — mercy or kindness; yadu-sadasi — in the royal assembly of the Yadus; viḍambyam — an object of ridicule or contempt; yasya — whose; dūtaḥ — messenger; tvam — you; īdṛk — such.

Translation
The gopī said: O honeybee, O friend of a cheater, don’t touch My feet with your whiskers, which are smeared with the kuṅkuma that rubbed onto Kṛṣṇa’s garland when it was crushed by the breasts of a rival lover! Let Kṛṣṇa satisfy the women of Mathurā. One who sends a messenger like you will certainly be ridiculed in the Yadus’ assembly.

Text 13
सकृदधरसुधां स्वां मोहिनीं पाययित्वा
सुमनस इव सद्यस्तत्यजेऽस्मान् भवाद‍ृक् ।
परिचरति कथं तत्पादपद्मं नु पद्मा
ह्यपि बत हृतचेता ह्युत्तम:श्लोकजल्पै: ॥ १३ ॥
sakṛd adhara-sudhāṁ svāṁ mohinīṁ pāyayitvā
sumanasa iva sadyas tatyaje ’smān bhavādṛk
paricarati kathaṁ tat-pāda-padmaṁ nu padmā
hy api bata hṛta-cetā hy uttamaḥ-śloka-jalpaiḥ
Synonyms
sakṛt — once; adhara — of the lips; sudhām — the nectar; svām — His own; mohinīm — bewildering; pāyayitvā — making drink; sumanasaḥ — flowers; iva — like; sadyaḥ — suddenly; tatyaje — He abandoned; asmān — us; bhavādṛk — like you; paricarati — serves; katham — why; tat — His; pāda-padmam — lotus feet; nu — I wonder; padmā — Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune; hi api — indeed, because; bata — alas; hṛta — taken away; cetāḥ — her mind; hi — certainly; uttamaḥ-śloka — of Kṛṣṇa; jalpaiḥ — by the false speech.

Translation
After making us drink the enchanting nectar of His lips only once, Kṛṣṇa suddenly abandoned us, just as you might quickly abandon some flowers. How is it, then, that Goddess Padmā willingly serves His lotus feet? Alas! The answer must certainly be that her mind has been stolen away by His deceitful words.

Text 14
किमिह बहु षडङ्‍‍घ्रे गायसि त्वं यदूना-
मधिपतिमगृहाणामग्रतो न: पुराणम् ।
विजयसखसखीनां गीयतां तत्प्रसङ्ग:
क्षपितकुचरुजस्ते कल्पयन्तीष्टमिष्टा: ॥ १४ ॥
kim iha bahu ṣaḍ-aṅghre gāyasi tvaṁ yadūnām
adhipatim agṛhāṇām agrato naḥ purāṇam
vijaya-sakha-sakhīnāṁ gīyatāṁ tat-prasaṅgaḥ
kṣapita-kuca-rujas te kalpayantīṣṭam iṣṭāḥ
Synonyms
kim — why; iha — here; bahu — much; ṣaṭ-aṅghre — O bee (six-footed one); gāyasi — are singing; tvam — you; yadūnām — of the Yadus; adhipatim — about the master; agṛhāṇām — who have no home; agrataḥ — in front of; naḥ — us; purāṇam — old; vijaya — of Arjuna; sakha — of the friend; sakhīnām — for the friends; gīyatām — should be sung; tat — of Him; prasaṅgaḥ — the topics; kṣapita — relieved; kuca — of whose breasts; rujaḥ — the pain; te — they; kalpayanti — will provide; iṣṭam — the charity you desire; iṣṭāḥ — His beloveds.

Translation
O bee, why do you sing here so much about the Lord of the Yadus, in front of us homeless people? These topics are old news to us. Better you sing about that friend of Arjuna in front of His new girlfriends, the burning desire in whose breasts He has now relieved. Those ladies will surely give you the charity you are begging.

Text 15
दिवि भुवि च रसायां का: स्‍त्रियस्तद्दुरापा:
कपटरुचिरहासभ्रूविजृम्भस्य या: स्यु: ।
चरणरज उपास्ते यस्य भूतिर्वयं का
अपि च कृपणपक्षे ह्युत्तम:श्लोकशब्द: ॥ १५ ॥
divi bhuvi ca rasāyāṁ kāḥ striyas tad-durāpāḥ
kapaṭa-rucira-hāsa-bhrū-vijṛmbhasya yāḥ syuḥ
caraṇa-raja upāste yasya bhūtir vayaṁ kā
api ca kṛpaṇa-pakṣe hy uttamaḥ-śloka-śabdaḥ
Synonyms
divi — in the heavenly region; bhuvi — on the earth; ca — and; rasāyām — in the subterranean sphere; kāḥ — what; striyaḥ — women; tat — by Him; durāpāḥ — unobtainable; kapaṭa — deceptive; rucira — charming; hāsa — with smiles; bhrū — of whose eyebrows; vijṛmbhasya — the arching; yāḥ — who; syuḥ — become; caraṇa — of the feet; rajaḥ — the dust; upāste — worships; yasya — whose; bhūtiḥ — the goddess of fortune, wife of Lord Nārāyaṇa; vayam — we; kā — who; api ca — nevertheless; kṛpaṇa-pakṣe — for those who are wretched; hi — indeed; uttamaḥ-śloka — the Supreme Lord, who is glorified by the most sublime prayers; śabdaḥ — the name.

Translation
In heaven, on earth or in the subterranean sphere, what women are unavailable to Him? He simply arches His eyebrows and smiles with deceptive charm, and they all become His. The supreme goddess herself worships the dust of His feet, so what is our position in comparison? But at least those who are wretched can chant His name, Uttamaḥśloka.

Text 16
विसृज शिरसि पादं वेद्‍म्यहं चाटुकारै-
रनुनयविदुषस्तेऽभ्येत्य दौत्यैर्मुकुन्दात् ।
स्वकृत इह विसृष्टापत्यपत्यन्यलोका
व्यसृजदकृतचेता: किं नु सन्धेयमस्मिन् ॥ १६ ॥
visṛja śirasi pādaṁ vedmy ahaṁ cātu-kārair
anunaya-viduṣas te ’bhyetya dautyair mukundāt
sva-kṛta iha viṣṛṣṭāpatya-paty-anya-lokā
vyasṛjad akṛta-cetāḥ kiṁ nu sandheyam asmin
Synonyms
visṛja — let go of; śirasi — on your head; pādam — My foot; vedmi — know; aham — I; cāṭu-kāraiḥ — with flattering words; anunaya — in the art of conciliation; viduṣaḥ — who are expert; te — of you; abhyetya — having learned; dautyaiḥ — by acting as a messenger; mukundāt — from Kṛṣṇa; sva — for His own; kṛte — sake; iha — in this life; visṛṣṭa — who have abandoned; apatya — children; patī — husbands; anya-lokāḥ — and everyone else; vyasṛjat — He abandoned; akṛta-cetāḥ — ungrateful; kim nu — why indeed; sandheyam — should I make reconciliation; asmin — with Him.

Translation
Keep your head off My feet! I know what you’re doing. You expertly learned diplomacy from Mukunda, and now you come as His messenger with flattering words. But He abandoned those who for His sake alone gave up their children, husbands and all other relations. He’s simply ungrateful. Why should I make up with Him now?

Text 17
मृगयुरिव कपीन्द्रं विव्यधे लुब्धधर्मा
स्‍त्रियमकृत विरूपां स्‍त्रीजित: कामयानाम् ।
बलिमपि बलिमत्त्वावेष्टयद् ध्वाङ्‍क्षवद्-
यस्तदलमसितसख्यैर्दुस्त्यजस्तत्कथार्थ: ॥ १७ ॥
mṛgayur iva kapīndraṁ vivyadhe lubdha-dharmā
striyam akṛta virūpāṁ strī-jitaḥ kāma-yānām
balim api balim attvāveṣṭayad dhvāṅkṣa-vad yas
tad alam asita-sakhyair dustyajas tat-kathārthaḥ
Synonyms
mṛgayuḥ — a hunter; iva — like; kapi — of the monkeys; indram — the king; vivyadhe — shot; lubdha-dharmā — behaving like a cruel hunter; striyam — a woman (namely, Śūrpaṇakhā); akṛta — made; virūpām — disfigured; strī — by a woman (Sītādevī); jitaḥ — conquered; kāmayānām — who was impelled by lusty desire; balim — King Bali; api — also; balim — his tribute; attvā — consuming; aveṣṭayat — bound up; dhvāṅkṣavat — just like a crow; yaḥ — who; tat — therefore; alam — enough; asita — with black Kṛṣṇa; sakhyaiḥ — of all kinds of friendship; dustyajaḥ — impossible to give up; tat — about Him; kathā — of the topics; arthaḥ — the elaboration.

Translation
Like a hunter, He cruelly shot the king of the monkeys with arrows. Because He was conquered by a woman, He disfigured another woman who came to Him with lusty desires. And even after consuming the gifts of Bali Mahārāja, He bound him up with ropes as if he were a crow. So let us give up all friendship with this dark-complexioned boy, even if we can’t give up talking about Him.

Text 18
यदनुचरितलीलाकर्णपीयूषविप्रुट्-
सकृददनविधूतद्वन्द्वधर्मा विनष्टा: ।
सपदि गृहकुटुम्बं दीनमुत्सृज्य दीना
बहव इह विहङ्गा भिक्षुचर्यां चरन्ति ॥ १८ ॥
yad-anucarita-līlā-karṇa-pīyūṣa-vipruṭ-
sakṛd-adana-vidhūta-dvandva-dharmā vinaṣṭāḥ
sapadi gṛha-kuṭumbaṁ dīnam utsṛjya dīnā
bahava iha vihaṅgā bhikṣu-caryāṁ caranti
Synonyms
yat — whose; anucarita — constantly performed activities; līlā — of such pastimes; karṇa — for the ears; pīyūṣa — of the nectar; vipruṭ — of a drop; sakṛt — just once; adana — by the partaking; vidhūta — removed entirely; dvandva — of duality; dharmāḥ — their propensities; vinaṣṭāḥ — ruined; sapadi — immediately; gṛha — their homes; kuṭumbam — and families; dīnam — wretched; utsṛjya — rejecting; dīnāḥ — becoming themselves wretched; bahavaḥ — many persons; iha — here (in Vṛndāvana); vihaṅgāḥ — (like) birds; bhikṣu — of begging; caryām — the livelihood; caranti — they pursue.

Translation
To hear about the pastimes that Kṛṣṇa regularly performs is nectar for the ears. For those who relish just a single drop of that nectar, even once, their dedication to material duality is ruined. Many such persons have suddenly given up their wretched homes and families and, themselves becoming wretched, traveled here to Vṛndāvana to wander about like birds, begging for their living.

Text 19
वयमृतमिव जिह्मव्याहृतं श्रद्दधाना:
कुलिकरुतमिवाज्ञा: कृष्णवध्वो हरिण्य: ।
दद‍ृशुरसकृदेतत्तन्नखस्पर्शतीव्र-
स्मररुज उपमन्त्रिन् भण्यतामन्यवार्ता ॥ १९ ॥
vayam ṛtam iva jihma-vyāhṛtaṁ śraddadhānāḥ
kulika-rutam ivājñāḥ kṛṣṇa-vadhvo hariṇyaḥ
dadṛśur asakṛd etat tan-nakha-sparśa-tīvra
smara-ruja upamantrin bhaṇyatām anya-vārtā
Synonyms
vayam — we; ṛtam — true; iva — as if; jihma — deceptive; vyāhṛtam — His speech; śraddadhānāḥ — trusting; kulika — of a hunter; rutam — the song; iva — as if; ajñāḥ — foolish; kṛṣṇa — of the black deer; vadhvaḥ — wives; hariṇyaḥ — the doe; dadṛśuḥ — experienced; asakṛt — repeatedly; etat — this; tat — His; nakha — of the fingernails; sparśa — by the touch; tīvra — sharp; smara — of lust; rujaḥ — the pain; upamantrin — O messenger; bhaṇyatām — please speak; anya — another; vārtā — topic.

Translation
Faithfully taking His deceitful words as true, we became just like the black deer’s foolish wives, who trust the cruel hunter’s song. Thus we repeatedly felt the sharp pain of lust caused by the touch of His nails. O messenger, please talk about something besides Kṛṣṇa.

Text 20
प्रियसख पुनरागा: प्रेयसा प्रेषित: किं
वरय किमनुरुन्धे माननीयोऽसि मेऽङ्ग ।
नयसि कथमिहास्मान् दुस्त्यजद्वन्द्वपार्श्वं
सततमुरसि सौम्य श्रीर्वधू: साकमास्ते ॥ २० ॥
priya-sakha punar āgāḥ preyasā preṣitaḥ kiṁ
varaya kim anurundhe mānanīyo ’si me ’ṅga
nayasi katham ihāsmān dustyaja-dvandva-pārśvaṁ
satatam urasi saumya śrīr vadhūḥ sākam āste
Synonyms
priya — of My beloved; sakha — O friend; punaḥ — once again; āgāḥ — you have come; preyasā — by My beloved; preṣitaḥ — sent; kim — whether; varaya — please choose; kim — what; anurundhe — do you wish; mānanīyaḥ — to be honored; asi — you are; me — by Me; aṅga — My dear one; nayasi — you are bringing; katham — why; iha — here; asmān — us; dustyaja — impossible to give up; dvandva — conjugal connection with whom; pārśvam — to the side; satatam — always; urasi — on the chest; saumya — O gentle one; śrīḥ — the goddess of fortune; vadhūḥ — His consort; sākam — together with Him; āste — is present.

Translation
O friend of My dear one, has My beloved sent you here again? I should honor you, friend, so please choose whatever boon you wish. But why have you come back here to take us to Him, whose conjugal love is so difficult to give up? After all, gentle bee, His consort is the goddess Śrī, and she is always with Him, staying upon His chest.

Text 21
अपि बत मधुपुर्यामार्यपुत्रोऽधुनास्ते
स्मरति स पितृगेहान् सौम्य बन्धूंश्च गोपान् ।
क्व‍‍चिदपि स कथा न: किङ्करीणां गृणीते
भुजमगुरुसुगन्धं मूर्ध्‍न्यधास्यत् कदा नु ॥ २१ ॥
api bata madhu-puryām ārya-putro ’dhunāste
smarati sa pitṛ-gehān saumya bandhūṁś ca gopān
kvacid api sa kathā naḥ kiṅkarīṇāṁ gṛṇīte
bhujam aguru-sugandhaṁ mūrdhny adhāsyat kadā nu
Synonyms
api — certainly; bata — regrettable; madhu-puryām — in the city of Mathurā; ārya-putraḥ — the son of Nanda Mahārāja; adhunā — now; āste — resides; smarati — remembers; saḥ — He; pitṛ-gehān — the household affairs of His father; saumya — O great soul (Uddhava); bandhūn — His friends; ca — and; gopān — the cowherd boys; kvacit — sometimes; api — or; saḥ — He; kathāḥ — talks; naḥ — of us; kiṅkarīṇām — of the maidservants; gṛṇīte — relates; bhujam — hand; aguru-su-gandham — having the fragrance of aguru; mūrdhni — on the head; adhāsyat — will keep; kadā — when; nu — maybe.

Translation
O Uddhava! It is indeed regrettable that Kṛṣṇa resides in Mathurā. Does He remember His father’s household affairs and His friends, the cowherd boys? O great soul! Does He ever talk about us, His maidservants? When will He lay on our heads His aguru-scented hand?

Text 22
श्रीशुक उवाच
अथोद्धवो निशम्यैवं कृष्णदर्शनलालसा: ।
सान्‍त्‍वयन् प्रियसन्देशैर्गोपीरिदमभाषत ॥ २२ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
athoddhavo niśamyaivaṁ
kṛṣṇa-darśana-lālasāḥ
sāntvayan priya-sandeśair
gopīr idam abhāṣata
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; atha — then; uddhavaḥ — Uddhava; niśamya — having heard; evam — thus; kṛṣṇa-darśana — after the sight of Kṛṣṇa; lālasāḥ — who were hankering; sāntvayan — pacifying; priya — of their beloved; sandeśaiḥ — with the messages; gopīḥ — to the cowherd girls; idam — this; abhāṣata — he said.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Having heard this, Uddhava then tried to pacify the gopīs, who were most eager to see Lord Kṛṣṇa. He thus began relating to them the message of their beloved.

Text 23
श्रीउद्धव उवाच
अहो यूयं स्म पूर्णार्था भवत्यो लोकपूजिता: ।
वासुदेवे भगवति यासामित्यर्पितं मन: ॥ २३ ॥
śrī-uddhava uvāca
aho yūyaṁ sma pūrṇārthā
bhavatyo loka-pūjitāḥ
vāsudeve bhagavati
yāsām ity arpitaṁ manaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-uddhavaḥ uvāca — Śrī Uddhava said; aho — indeed; yūyam — you; sma — surely; pūrṇa — fulfilled; arthāḥ — whose purposes; bhavatyaḥ — your good selves; loka — by all people; pūjitāḥ — worshiped; vāsudeve bhagavati — unto Lord Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yāsām — whose; iti — in this manner; arpitam — offered; manaḥ — the minds.

Translation
Śrī Uddhava said: Certainly you gopīs are all-successful and are universally worshiped because you have dedicated your minds in this way to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva.

Text 24
दानव्रततपोहोम जपस्वाध्यायसंयमै: ।
श्रेयोभिर्विविधैश्चान्यै: कृष्णे भक्तिर्हि साध्यते ॥ २४ ॥
dāna-vrata-tapo-homa
japa-svādhyāya-saṁyamaiḥ
śreyobhir vividhaiś cānyaiḥ
kṛṣṇe bhaktir hi sādhyate
Synonyms
dāna — by charity; vrata — strict vows; tapaḥ — austerities; homa — fire sacrifices; japa — private chanting of mantras; svādhyāya — study of Vedic texts; saṁyamaiḥ — and regulative principles; śreyobhiḥ — by auspicious practices; vividhaiḥ — various; ca — also; anyaiḥ — others; kṛṣṇe — to Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhaktiḥ — devotional service; hi — indeed; sādhyate — is realized.

Translation
Devotional service unto Lord Kṛṣṇa is attained by charity, strict vows, austerities and fire sacrifices, by japa, study of Vedic texts, observance of regulative principles and, indeed, by the performance of many other auspicious practices.

Text 25
भगवत्युत्तम:श्लोके भवतीभिरनुत्तमा ।
भक्ति: प्रवर्तिता दिष्‍ट्या मुनीनामपि दुर्लभा ॥ २५ ॥
bhagavaty uttamaḥ-śloke
bhavatībhir anuttamā
bhaktiḥ pravartitā diṣṭyā
munīnām api durlabhā
Synonyms
bhagavati — for the Supreme Lord; uttamaḥ-śloke — who is glorified in sublime poetry; bhavatībhiḥ — by your good selves; anuttamā — unexcelled; bhaktiḥ — devotion; pravartītā — established; diṣṭyā — (congratulations on your) good fortune; munīnām — for great sages; api — even; durlabhā — hard to obtain.

Translation
By your great fortune you have established an unexcelled standard of pure devotion for the Lord, Uttamaḥśloka — a standard even the sages can hardly attain.

Text 26
दिष्‍ट्या पुत्रान्पतीन्देहान् स्वजनान्भवनानि च ।
हित्वावृणीत यूयं यत् कृष्णाख्यं पुरुषं परम् ॥ २६ ॥
diṣṭyā putrān patīn dehān
sva-janān bhavanāni ca
hitvāvṛnīta yūyaṁ yat
kṛṣṇākhyaṁ puruṣaṁ param
Synonyms
diṣṭyā — by good fortune; putrān — sons; patīn — husbands; dehān — bodies; sva-janān — relatives; bhavanāni — homes; ca — and; hitvā — leaving; avṛṇīta — did choose; yūyam — you; yat — the fact that; kṛṣṇa-ākhyam — named Kṛṣṇa; puruṣam — the male personality; param — supreme.

Translation
By your great fortune you have left your sons, husbands, bodily comforts, relatives and homes in favor of the supreme male, who is known as Kṛṣṇa.

Text 27
सर्वात्मभावोऽधिकृतो भवतीनामधोक्षजे ।
विरहेण महाभागा महान्मेऽनुग्रह: कृत: ॥ २७ ॥
sarvātma-bhāvo ’dhikṛto
bhavatīnām adhokṣaje
viraheṇa mahā-bhāgā
mahān me ’nugrahaḥ kṛtaḥ
Synonyms
sarva-ātma — wholehearted; bhāvaḥ — love; adhikṛtaḥ — claimed by right; bhavatīnām — by you; adhokṣaje — for the transcendental Lord; viraheṇa — through this mood of separation; mahā-bhāgāḥ — O most glorious ones; mahān — great; me — to me; anugrahaḥ — mercy; kṛtaḥ — done.

Translation
You have rightfully claimed the privilege of unalloyed love for the transcendental Lord, O most glorious gopīs. Indeed, by exhibiting your love for Kṛṣṇa in separation from Him, you have shown me great mercy.

Text 28
श्रूयतां प्रियसन्देशो भवतीनां सुखावह: ।
यमादायागतो भद्रा अहं भर्तू रहस्कर: ॥ २८ ॥
śrūyatāṁ priya-sandeśo
bhavatīnāṁ sukhāvahaḥ
yam ādāyāgato bhadrā
ahaṁ bhartū rahas-karaḥ
Synonyms
śrūyatām — please hear; priya — of your beloved; sandeśaḥ — the message; bhavatīnām — for you; sukha — happiness; āvahaḥ — bringing; yam — which; ādāya — carrying; āgataḥ — have come; bhadrāḥ — good ladies; aham — I; bhartuḥ — of my master; rahaḥ — of confidential duties; karaḥ — the executor.

Translation
My good ladies, now please hear your beloved’s message, which I, the confidential servant of my master, have come here to bring you.

Text 29
श्रीभगवानुवाच
भवतीनां वियोगो मे न हि सर्वात्मना क्व‍‍चित् ।
यथा भूतानि भूतेषु खं वाय्वग्निर्जलं मही ।
तथाहं च मन:प्राणभूतेन्द्रियगुणाश्रय: ॥ २९ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
bhavatīnāṁ viyogo me
na hi sarvātmanā kvacit
yathā bhūtāni bhūteṣu
khaṁ vāyv-agnir jalaṁ mahī
tathāhaṁ ca manaḥ-prāṇa-
bhūtendriya-guṇāśrayaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Lord said; bhavatīnām — of you women; viyogaḥ — separation; me — from Me; na — is not; hi — indeed; sarva-ātmanā — from the Soul of all existence; kvacit — ever; yathā — as; bhūtāni — the physical elements; bhūteṣu — in all created beings; kham — the ether; vāyu-agniḥ — air and fire; jalam — water; mahī — earth; tathā — so; aham — I; ca — and; manaḥ — of the mind; prāṇa — vital air; bhūta — material elements; indriya — bodily senses; guṇa — and of the primal modes of nature; āśrayaḥ — present as their shelter.

Translation
The Supreme Lord said: You are never actually separated from Me, for I am the Soul of all creation. Just as the elements of nature — ether, air, fire, water and earth — are present in every created thing, so I am present within everyone’s mind, life air and senses, and also within the physical elements and the modes of material nature.

Text 30
आत्मन्येवात्मनात्मानं सृजे हन्म्यनुपालये ।
आत्ममायानुभावेन भूतेन्द्रियगुणात्मना ॥ ३० ॥
ātmany evātmanātmānaṁ
sṛje hanmy anupālaye
ātma-māyānubhāvena
bhūtendriya-guṇātmanā
Synonyms
ātmani — within Myself; eva — indeed; ātmanā — by Myself; ātmānam — Myself; sṛje — I create; hanmi — I destroy; anupālaye — I sustain; ātma — My own; māyā — of the mystic potency; anubhāvena — by the power; bhūta — the material elements; indriya — the senses; guṇa — and the modes of nature; ātmanā — comprising.

Translation
By Myself I create, sustain and withdraw Myself within Myself by the power of My personal energy, which comprises the material elements, the senses and the modes of nature.

Text 31
आत्मा ज्ञानमय: शुद्धो व्यतिरिक्तोऽगुणान्वय: ।
सुषुप्तिस्वप्नजाग्रद्भ‍िर्मायावृत्तिभिरीयते ॥ ३१ ॥
ātmā jñāna-mayaḥ śuddho
vyatirikto ’guṇānvayaḥ
suṣupti-svapna-jāgradbhir
māyā-vṛttibhir īyate
Synonyms
ātmā — the soul; jñāna-mayaḥ — comprising transcendental knowledge; śuddhaḥ — pure; vyatiriktaḥ — separate; aguṇa-anvayaḥ — uninvolved in the reactions of the material modes; suṣupti — in deep sleep; svapna — ordinary sleep; jāgradbhiḥ — and waking consciousness; māyā — of the material energy; vṛttibhiḥ — by the functions; īyate — is perceived.

Translation
Being composed of pure consciousness, or knowledge, the soul is distinct from everything material and is uninvolved in the entanglements of the modes of nature. We can perceive the soul through the three functions of material nature known as wakefulness, sleep and deep sleep.

Text 32
येनेन्द्रियार्थान् ध्यायेत मृषा स्वप्नवदुत्थित: ।
तन्निरुन्ध्यादिन्द्रियाणि विनिद्र: प्रत्यपद्यत ॥ ३२ ॥
yenendriyārthān dhyāyeta
mṛṣā svapna-vad utthitaḥ
tan nirundhyād indriyāṇi
vinidraḥ pratyapadyata
Synonyms
yena — by which (mind); indriya — of the senses; arthān — upon the objects; dhyāyeta — one meditates; mṛṣā — false; svapna-vat — like a dream; utthitaḥ — arisen from sleep; tat — that (mind); nirundhyāt — one should bring under control; indriyāṇi — the senses; vinidraḥ — not sleeping (alert); pratyapadyata — they obtain.

Translation
As a person just arisen from sleep may continue to meditate on a dream even though it is illusory, so by the agency of the mind one meditates on the sense objects, which the senses can then obtain. Therefore one should become fully alert and bring the mind under control.

Text 33
एतदन्त: समाम्नायो योग: साङ्ख्यं मनीषिणाम् ।
त्यागस्तपो दम: सत्यं समुद्रान्ता इवापगा: ॥ ३३ ॥
etad-antaḥ samāmnāyo
yogaḥ sāṅkhyaṁ manīṣiṇām
tyāgas tapo damaḥ satyaṁ
samudrāntā ivāpagāḥ
Synonyms
etat — having this; antaḥ — as its conclusion; samāmnāyaḥ — the entire Vedic literature; yogaḥ — the standard system of yoga; sāṅkhyam — the process of Sāṅkhya meditation, by which one learns to discriminate between spirit and matter; manīṣiṇām — of the intelligent; tyāgaḥ — renunciation; tapaḥ — austerity; damaḥ — sense control; satyam — and honesty; samudra-antāḥ — leading to the ocean; iva — as; āpa-gāḥ — rivers.

Translation
According to intelligent authorities, this is the ultimate conclusion of all the Vedas, as well as all practice of yoga, Sāṅkhya, renunciation, austerity, sense control and truthfulness, just as the sea is the ultimate destination of all rivers.

Text 34
यत्त्वहं भवतीनां वै दूरे वर्ते प्रियो द‍ृशाम् ।
मनस: सन्निकर्षार्थं मदनुध्यानकाम्यया ॥ ३४ ॥
yat tv ahaṁ bhavatīnāṁ vai
dūre varte priyo dṛśām
manasaḥ sannikarṣārthaṁ
mad-anudhyāna-kāmyayā
Synonyms
yat — the fact that; tu — however; aham — I; bhavatīnām — from your; vai — indeed; dūre — far away; varte — am situated; priyaḥ — who am dear; dṛśām — to the eyes; manasaḥ — of the mind; sannikarṣa — of the attraction; artham — for the sake; mat — upon Me; anudhyāna. — for your meditation; kāmyayā — out of My desire.

Translation
But the actual reason why I, the beloved object of your sight, have stayed far away from you is that I wanted to intensify your meditation upon Me and thus draw your minds closer to Me.

Text 35
यथा दूरचरे प्रेष्ठे मन आविश्य वर्तते ।
स्‍त्रीणां च न तथा चेत: सन्निकृष्टेऽक्षिगोचरे ॥ ३५ ॥
yathā dūra-care preṣṭhe
mana āviśya vartate
strīṇāṁ ca na tathā cetaḥ
sannikṛṣṭe ’kṣi-gocare
Synonyms
yathā — as; dūra-care — being situated far away; preṣṭhe — a lover; manaḥ — the minds; āviśya — becoming absorbed; vartate — remain; strīṇām — of women; ca — and; na — not; tathā — so; cetaḥ — their minds; sannikṛṣṭe — when he is near; akṣi-gocare — present before their eyes.

Translation
When her lover is far away, a woman thinks of him more than when he is present before her.

Text 36
मय्यावेश्य मन: कृत्‍स्‍नं विमुक्ताशेषवृत्ति यत् ।
अनुस्मरन्त्यो मां नित्यमचिरान्मामुपैष्यथ ॥ ३६ ॥
mayy āveśya manaḥ kṛtsnaṁ
vimuktāśeṣa-vṛtti yat
anusmarantyo māṁ nityam
acirān mām upaiṣyatha
Synonyms
mayi — in Me; āveśya — absorbing; manaḥ — your minds; kṛtsnam — entire; vimukta — having given up; aśeṣa — all; vṛtti — its (material) functions; yat — because; anusmarantyaḥ — remembering; mām — Me; nityam — constantly; acirāt — soon; mām — Me; upaiṣyatha — you will obtain.

Translation
Because your minds are totally absorbed in Me and free from all other engagement, you remember Me always, and so you will very soon have Me again in your presence.

Text 37
या मया क्रीडता रात्र्यां वनेऽस्मिन्व्रज आस्थिता: ।
अलब्धरासा: कल्याण्यो मापुर्मद्वीर्यचिन्तया ॥ ३७ ॥
yā mayā krīḍatā rātryāṁ
vane ’smin vraja āsthitāḥ
alabdha-rāsāḥ kalyāṇyo
māpur mad-vīrya-cintayā
Synonyms
yāḥ — which women; mayā — with Me; krīḍatā — who was sporting; rātryām — at night; vane — in the forest; asmin — this; vraje — in the village of Vraja; āsthitāḥ — remaining; alabdha — not experiencing; rāsāḥ — the rāsa dance; kalyāṇyaḥ — fortunate; mā — Me; āpuḥ — they achieved; mat-vīrya — upon My valorous pastimes; cintayā — by concentration.

Translation
Although some gopīs had to remain in the cowherd village and so could not join the rāsa dance to sport with Me at night in the forest, they were nonetheless fortunate. Indeed, they attained Me by thinking of My potent pastimes.

Text 38
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं प्रियतमादिष्टमाकर्ण्य व्रजयोषित: ।
ता ऊचुरुद्धवं प्रीतास्तत्सन्देशागतस्मृती: ॥ ३८ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ priyatamādiṣṭam
ākarṇya vraja-yoṣitaḥ
tā ūcur uddhavaṁ prītās
tat-sandeśāgata-smṛtīḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — in this fashion; priya-tama — given by their beloved (Kṛṣṇa); ādiṣṭam — the instructions; ākarṇya — hearing; vraja-yoṣitaḥ — the women of Vraja; tāḥ — they; ūcuḥ — said; uddhavam — to Uddhava; prītaḥ — pleased; tat — by that; sandeśa — message; āgata — having returned; smṛtīḥ — their memories.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: The women of Vraja were pleased to hear this message from their dearmost Kṛṣṇa. His words having revived their memory, they addressed Uddhava as follows.

Text 39
गोप्य ऊचु:
दिष्‍ट्याहितो हत: कंसो यदूनां सानुगोऽघकृत् ।
दिष्‍ट्याप्तैर्लब्धसर्वार्थै: कुशल्यास्तेऽच्युतोऽधुना ॥ ३९ ॥
gopya ūcuḥ
diṣṭyāhito hataḥ kaṁso
yadūnāṁ sānugo ’gha-kṛt
diṣṭyāptair labdha-sarvārthaiḥ
kuśaly āste ’cyuto ’dhunā
Synonyms
gopyaḥ ūcuḥ — the gopīs said; diṣṭyā — fortunately; ahitaḥ — the enemy; hataḥ — has been killed; kaṁsaḥ — King Kaṁsa; yadūnām — for the Yadus; sa-anugaḥ — together with his followers; agha — of suffering; kṛt — the cause; diṣṭyā — fortunately; āptaiḥ — with His well-wishers; labdha — who have attained; sarva — all; arthaiḥ — their desires; kuśalī — happily; āste — is living; acyutaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; adhunā — at present.

Translation
The gopīs said: It is very good that Kaṁsa, the enemy and persecutor of the Yadus, has now been killed, along with his followers. And it is also very good that Lord Acyuta is living happily in the company of His well-wishing friends and relatives, whose every desire is now fulfilled.

Text 40
कच्चिद् गदाग्रज: सौम्य करोति पुरयोषिताम् ।
प्रीतिं न: स्‍निग्धसव्रीडहासोदारेक्षणार्चित: ॥ ४० ॥
kaccid gadāgrajaḥ saumya
karoti pura-yoṣitām
prītiṁ naḥ snigdha-savrīḍa-
hāsodārekṣaṇārcitaḥ
Synonyms
kaccit — perhaps; gada-agrajaḥ — Kṛṣṇa, the elder brother of Gada; saumya — O gentle (Uddhava); karoti — is giving; pura — of the city; yoṣitām — for the women; prītim — loving happiness; naḥ — which belongs to us; snigdha — affectionate; sa-vrīḍa — and bashful; hāsa — with smiles; udāra — generous; īkṣaṇa — by their glances; arcitaḥ — worshiped.

Translation
Gentle Uddhava, is the elder brother of Gada now bestowing on the city women the pleasure that actually belongs to us? We suppose those ladies worship Him with generous glances full of affectionate, shy smiles.

Text 41
कथं रतिविशेषज्ञ: प्रियश्च पुरयोषिताम् ।
नानुबध्येत तद्वाक्यैर्विभ्रमैश्चानुभाजित: ॥ ४१ ॥
kathaṁ rati-viśeṣa-jñaḥ
priyaś ca pura-yoṣitām
nānubadhyeta tad-vākyair
vibhramaiś cānubhājitaḥ
Synonyms
katham — how; rati — of conjugal affairs; viśeṣa — in all the specific aspects; jñaḥ — the expert; priyaḥ — the darling; ca — and; pura-yoṣitām — of the city women; na anubadhyeta — will not become bound; tat — by their; vākyaiḥ — words; vibhramaiḥ — bewildering gestures; ca — and; anubhājitaḥ — constantly worshiped.

Translation
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is expert in all kinds of conjugal affairs and is the darling of the city women. How can He not become entangled, now that He’s constantly adored by their enchanting words and gestures?

Text 42
अपि स्मरति न: साधो गोविन्द: प्रस्तुते क्व‍‍चित् ।
गोष्ठिमध्ये पुरस्‍त्रीणां ग्राम्या: स्वैरकथान्तरे ॥ ४२ ॥
api smarati naḥ sādho
govindaḥ prastute kvacit
goṣṭhi-madhye pura-strīṇām
grāmyāḥ svaira-kathāntare
Synonyms
api — moreover; smarati — remembers; naḥ — us; sādho — O pious one; govindaḥ — Kṛṣṇa; prastute — brought up in discussions; kvacit — ever; goṣṭhi — the assembly; madhye — within; pura-strīṇām — of the city women; grāmyāḥ — village girls; svaira — free; kathā — conversation; antare — during.

Translation
O saintly one, does Govinda ever remember us during His conversations with the city women? Does He ever mention us village girls as He freely talks with them?

Text 43
ता: किं निशा: स्मरति यासु तदा प्रियाभि-
र्वृन्दावने कुमुदकुन्दशशाङ्करम्ये ।
रेमे क्व‍णच्चरणनूपुररासगोष्ठ्या-
मस्माभिरीडितमनोज्ञकथ: कदाचित् ॥ ४३ ॥
tāḥ kiṁ niśāḥ smarati yāsu tadā priyābhir
vṛndāvane kumuda-kunda-śaśāṅka-ramye
reme kvaṇac-caraṇa-nūpura-rāsa-goṣṭhyām
asmābhir īḍita-manojña-kathaḥ kadācit
Synonyms
tāḥ — those; kim — whether; niśāḥ — nights; smarati — He remembers; yāsu — in which; tadā — then; priyābhiḥ — with His beloved girlfriends; vṛndāvane — in the Vṛndāvana forest; kumuda — because of the lotuses; kunda — and jasmines; śaśāṅka — and because of the moon; ramye — attractive; reme — He enjoyed; kvaṇat — jingling; caraṇa-nūpura — (where) the ankle bells; rāsa-goṣṭhyām — in the party of the rāsa dance; asmābhiḥ — with us; īḍita — glorified; manojña — charming; kathaḥ — topics about whom; kadācit — ever.

Translation
Does He recall those nights in the Vṛndāvana forest, lovely with lotus, jasmine and the bright moon? As we glorified His charming pastimes, He enjoyed with us, His beloved girlfriends, in the circle of the rāsa dance, which resounded with the music of ankle bells.

Text 44
अप्येष्यतीह दाशार्हस्तप्ता: स्वकृतया शुचा ।
सञ्जीवयन् नु नो गात्रैर्यथेन्द्रो वनमम्बुदै: ॥ ४४ ॥
apy eṣyatīha dāśārhas
taptāḥ sva-kṛtayā śucā
sañjīvayan nu no gātrair
yathendro vanam ambudaiḥ
Synonyms
api — whether; eṣyati — He will come; iha — here; dāśārhaḥ — Kṛṣṇa, the descendant of Daśārha; taptāḥ — who are tormented; sva-kṛtayā — by His own doing; śucā — with sorrow; sañjīvayan — bringing back to life; nu — perhaps; naḥ — us; gātraiḥ — with (the touch of) His limbs; yathā — as; indraḥ — Lord Indra; vanam — a forest; ambudaiḥ — with clouds.

Translation
Will that descendant of Daśārha return here and by the touch of His limbs bring back to life those who are now burning with the grief He Himself has caused? Will He save us in that way, just as Lord Indra brings a forest back to life with his water-bearing clouds?

Text 45
कस्मात् कृष्ण इहायाति प्राप्तराज्यो हताहित: ।
नरेन्द्रकन्या उद्वाह्य प्रीत: सर्वसुहृद् वृत: ॥ ४५ ॥
kasmāt kṛṣṇa ihāyāti
prāpta-rājyo hatāhitaḥ
narendra-kanyā udvāhya
prītaḥ sarva-suhṛd-vṛtaḥ
Synonyms
kasmāt — why; kṛṣṇaḥ — Kṛṣṇa; iha — here; āyāti — will come; prāpta — having attained; rājyaḥ — a kingdom; hata — having killed; ahitaḥ — His enemies; nara-indra — of kings; kanyāḥ — the daughters; udvāhya — after marrying; prītaḥ — happy; sarva — by all; suhṛt — His well-wishers; vṛtaḥ — surrounded.

Translation
But why should Kṛṣṇa come here after winning a kingdom, killing His enemies and marrying the daughters of kings? He’s satisfied there, surrounded by all His friends and well-wishers.

Text 46
किमस्माभिर्वनौकोभिरन्याभिर्वा महात्मन: ।
श्रीपतेराप्तकामस्य क्रियेतार्थ: कृतात्मन: ॥ ४६ ॥
kim asmābhir vanaukobhir
anyābhir vā mahātmanaḥ
śrī-pater āpta-kāmasya
kriyetārthaḥ kṛtātmanaḥ
Synonyms
kim — what; asmābhiḥ — with us; vana — the forest; okobhiḥ — whose residence; anyābhiḥ — with other women; vā — or; mahā-ātmanaḥ — for the exalted personality (Kṛṣṇa); śrī — of the goddess of fortune; pateḥ — for the husband; āpta-kāmasya — whose desires are already completely fulfilled; kriyeta — is to be served; arthaḥ — purpose; kṛta-ātmanaḥ — for Him who is complete in Himself.

Translation
The great soul Kṛṣṇa is the Lord of the goddess of fortune, and He automatically achieves whatever He desires. How can we forest-dwellers or any other women fulfill His purposes when He is already fulfilled within Himself?

Text 47
परं सौख्यं हि नैराश्यं स्वैरिण्यप्याहपिङ्गला ।
तज्जानतीनां न: कृष्णे तथाप्याशा दुरत्यया ॥ ४७ ॥
paraṁ saukhyaṁ hi nairāśyaṁ
svairiṇy apy āha piṅgalā
taj jānatīnāṁ naḥ kṛṣṇe
tathāpy āśā duratyayā
Synonyms
param — the highest; saukhyam — happiness; hi — indeed; nairāśyam — indifference; svairiṇī — unchaste; api — although; āha — stated; piṅgalā — the prostitute Piṅgalā; tat — of that; jānatīnām — who are aware; naḥ — for us; kṛṣṇe — focused on Kṛṣṇa; tathā api — nevertheless; āsā — the hope; duratyayā — is impossible to transcend.

Translation
Indeed, the greatest happiness is to renounce all desires, as even the prostitute Piṅgalā has declared. Yet even though we know this, we cannot give up our hopes of attaining Kṛṣṇa.

Text 48
क उत्सहेत सन्त्यक्तुमुत्तम:श्लोकसंविदम् ।
अनिच्छतोऽपि यस्य श्रीरङ्गान्न च्यवते क्व‍‍चित् ॥ ४८ ॥
ka utsaheta santyaktum
uttamaḥśloka-saṁvidam
anicchato ’pi yasya śrīr
aṅgān na cyavate kvacit
Synonyms
kaḥ — who; utsaheta — can bear; santyaktum — to give up; uttamaḥśloka — with Lord Kṛṣṇa; saṁvidam — intimate talks; anicchataḥ — not wanted; api — even though; yasya — whose; śrīḥ — the supreme goddess of fortune; aṅgāt — the body; na cyavate — does not let go of; kvacit — ever.

Translation
Who can bear to give up intimate talks with Lord Uttamaḥśloka? Although He shows no interest in her, Goddess Śrī never moves from her place on His chest.

Text 49
सरिच्छैलवनोद्देशा गावो वेणुरवा इमे ।
सङ्कर्षणसहायेन कृष्णेनाचरिता: प्रभो ॥ ४९ ॥
saric-chaila-vanoddeśā
gāvo veṇu-ravā ime
saṅkarṣaṇa-sahāyena
kṛṣṇenācaritāḥ prabho
Synonyms
sarit — rivers; śaila — hills; vana-uddeśāḥ — and areas of the forest; gāvaḥ — cows; veṇu-ravāḥ — flute sounds; ime — all these; saṅkarṣaṇa — Lord Balarāma; sahāyena — whose companion; kṛṣṇena — by Kṛṣṇa; ācaritāḥ — utilized; prabho — O master (Uddhava).

Translation
Dear Uddhava Prabhu, when Kṛṣṇa was here in the company of Saṅkarṣaṇa, He enjoyed all these rivers, hills, forests, cows and flute sounds.

Text 50
पुन: पुन: स्मारयन्ति नन्दगोपसुतं बत ।
श्रीनिकेतैस्तत्पदकैर्विस्मर्तुं नैव शक्नुम: ॥ ५० ॥
punaḥ punaḥ smārayanti
nanda-gopa-sutaṁ bata
śrī-niketais tat-padakair
vismartuṁ naiva śaknumaḥ
Synonyms
punaḥ punaḥ — again and again; smārayanti — they remind; nanda-gopa-sutam — of the son of Nanda, the cowherd king; bata — certainly; śrī — divine; niketaiḥ — having markings; tat — His; padakaiḥ — because of the footprints; vismartum — to forget; na — not; eva — indeed; śaknumaḥ — are we able.

Translation
All these remind us constantly of Nanda’s son. Indeed, because we see Kṛṣṇa’s footprints, which are marked with divine symbols, we can never forget Him.

Text 51
गत्या ललितयोदारहासलीलावलोकनै: ।
माध्व्या गिरा हृतधिय: कथं तं विस्मरामहे ॥ ५१ ॥
gatyā lalitayodāra-
hāsa-līlāvalokanaiḥ
mādhvyā girā hṛta-dhiyaḥ
kathaṁ taṁ vismarāma he
Synonyms
gatyā — by His gait; lalitayā — charming; udāra — with generous; hāsa — smiles; līlā — playful; avalokanaiḥ — by His glances; mādhvyā — honeylike; girā — by His words; hṛta — stolen away; dhiyaḥ — whose hearts; katham — how; tam — Him; vismarāma — we can forget; he — O (Uddhava).

Translation
O Uddhava, how can we forget Him when our hearts have been stolen away by the charming way He walks, His generous smile and playful glances, and His honeylike words?

Text 52
हे नाथ हे रमानाथ व्रजनाथार्तिनाशन ।
मग्नमुद्धर गोविन्द गोकुलं वृजिनार्णवात् ॥ ५२ ॥
he nātha he ramā-nātha
vraja-nāthārti-nāśana
magnam uddhara govinda
gokulaṁ vṛjinārṇavāt
Synonyms
he nātha — O master; he ramā-nātha — O master of the goddess of fortune; vraja-nātha — O master of the cowherd village; ārti — of suffering; nāśana — O destroyer; magnam — submerged; uddhara — uplift; govinda — O Govinda; gokulam — Gokula; vṛjina — of distress; arṇavāt — from the ocean.

Translation
O master, O master of the goddess of fortune, O master of Vraja! O destroyer of all suffering, Govinda, please lift Your Gokula out of the ocean of distress in which it is drowning!

Text 53
श्रीशुक उवाच
ततस्ता: कृष्णसन्देशैर्व्यपेतविरहज्वरा: ।
उद्धवं पूजयां चक्रुर्ज्ञात्वात्मानमधोक्षजम् ॥ ५३ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
tatas tāḥ kṛṣṇa-sandeśair
vyapeta-viraha-jvarāḥ
uddhavaṁ pūjayāṁ cakrur
jñātvātmānam adhokṣajam
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tataḥ — then; tāḥ — they; kṛṣṇa-sandeśaiḥ — by the messages from Kṛṣṇa; vyapeta — removed; viraha — of their separation; jvarāḥ — the fever; uddhavam — Uddhava; pūjayām cakruḥ — worshiped; jñātvā — recognizing him; ātmānam — Himself; adhokṣajam — as the Supreme Lord.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Lord Kṛṣṇa’s messages having relieved their fever of separation, the gopīs then worshiped Uddhava, recognizing him as nondifferent from their Lord, Kṛṣṇa.

Text 54
उवास कतिचिन्मासान्गोपीनां विनुदन् शुच: ।
कृष्णलीलाकथां गायन् रमयामास गोकुलम् ॥ ५४ ॥
uvāsa katicin māsān
gopīnāṁ vinudan śucaḥ
kṛṣṇa-līlā-kathāṁ gāyan
ramayām āsa gokulam
Synonyms
uvāsa — he resided; katicit — for some; māsān — months; gopīnām — of the cowherd girls; vinudan — dispelling; śucaḥ — the unhappiness; kṛṣṇa-līlā — of the pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa; kathām — the topics; gāyan — singing; ramayām āsa — he gave joy; gokulam — to Gokula.

Translation
Uddhava remained there for several months, dispelling the gopīs’ sorrow by chanting the topics of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. Thus he brought joy to all the people of Gokula.

Text 55
यावन्त्यहानि नन्दस्य व्रजेऽवात्सीत् स उद्धव: ।
व्रजौकसां क्षणप्रायाण्यासन् कृष्णस्य वार्तया ॥ ५५ ॥
yāvanty ahāni nandasya
vraje ’vātsīt sa uddhavaḥ
vrajaukasāṁ kṣaṇa-prāyāṇy
āsan kṛṣṇasya vārtayā
Synonyms
yāvanti — for as many; ahāni — days; nandasya — of King Nanda; vraje — in the cowherd village; avātsīt — dwelled; saḥ — he; uddhavaḥ — Uddhava; vraja-okasām — for the residents of Vraja; kṣaṇa-prāyāṇi — passing like a moment; āsan — they were; kṛṣṇasya — about Kṛṣṇa; vārtayā — because of the discussions.

Translation
All the days that Uddhava dwelled in Nanda’s cowherd village seemed like a single moment to the residents of Vraja, for Uddhava was always discussing Kṛṣṇa.

Text 56
सरिद्वनगिरिद्रोणीर्वीक्षन् कुसुमितान् द्रुमान् ।
कृष्णं संस्मारयन् रेमे हरिदासो व्रजौकसाम् ॥ ५६ ॥
sarid-vana-giri-droṇīr
vīkṣan kusumitān drumān
kṛṣṇaṁ saṁsmārayan reme
hari-dāso vrajaukasām
Synonyms
sarit — the rivers; vana — forests; giri — mountains; droṇīḥ — and valleys; vīkṣan — seeing; kusumitān — flowering; drumān — the trees; kṛṣṇam — about Kṛṣṇa; saṁsmārayan — inspiring remembrance; reme — he took pleasure; hari-dāsaḥ — the servant of Lord Hari; vraja-okasām — for the residents of Vraja.

Translation
That servant of Lord Hari, seeing the rivers, forests, mountains, valleys and flowering trees of Vraja, enjoyed inspiring the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana by reminding them of Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 57
द‍ृष्ट्वैवमादि गोपीनां कृष्णावेशात्मविक्लवम् ।
उद्धव: परमप्रीतस्ता नमस्यन्निदं जगौ ॥ ५७ ॥
dṛṣṭvaivam-ādi gopīnāṁ
kṛṣṇāveśātma-viklavam
uddhavaḥ parama-prītas
tā namasyann idaṁ jagau
Synonyms
dṛṣṭvā — seeing; evam — such; ādi — and more; gopīnām — of the gopīs; kṛṣṇa-āveśa — their total absorption in thought of Kṛṣṇa; ātma — consisting of; viklavam — the mental agitation; uddhavaḥ — Uddhava; parama — supremely; prītaḥ — pleased; tāḥ — to them; namasyan — offering all respect; idam — this; jagau — sang.

Translation
Thus seeing how the gopīs were always disturbed because of their total absorption in Kṛṣṇa, Uddhava was supremely pleased. Desiring to offer them all respect, he sang as follows.

Text 58
एता: परं तनुभृतो भुवि गोपवध्वो
गोविन्द एव निखिलात्मनि रूढभावा: ।
वाञ्छन्ति यद् भवभियो मुनयो वयं च
किं ब्रह्मजन्मभिरनन्तकथारसस्य ॥ ५८ ॥
etāḥ paraṁ tanu-bhṛto bhuvi gopa-vadhvo
govinda eva nikhilātmani rūḍha-bhāvāḥ
vāñchanti yad bhava-bhiyo munayo vayaṁ ca
kiṁ brahma-janmabhir ananta-kathā-rasasya
Synonyms
etāḥ — these women; param — alone; tanu — their bodies; bhṛtaḥ — maintain successfully; bhuvi — on the earth; gopa-vadhvaḥ — the young cowherd women; govinde — for Lord Kṛṣṇa; eva — exclusively; nikhila — of all; ātmani — the Soul; rūḍha — perfected; bhāvāḥ — ecstatic loving attraction; vāñchanti — they desire; yat — which; bhava — material existence; bhiyaḥ — those who are afraid of; munayaḥ — sages; vayam — we; ca — also; kim — what use; brahma — as a brāhmaṇa or as Lord Brahmā; janmabhiḥ — with births; ananta — of the unlimited Lord; kathā — for the topics; rasasya — for one who has a taste.

Translation
[Uddhava sang:] Among all persons on earth, these cowherd women alone have actually perfected their embodied lives, for they have achieved the perfection of unalloyed love for Lord Govinda. Their pure love is hankered after by those who fear material existence, by great sages, and by ourselves as well. For one who has tasted the narrations of the infinite Lord, what is the use of taking birth as a high-class brāhmaṇa, or even as Lord Brahmā himself?

Text 59
क्व‍ेमा: स्‍त्रियो वनचरीर्व्यभिचारदुष्टा:
कृष्णे क्व‍ चैष परमात्मनि रूढभाव: ।
नन्वीश्वरोऽनुभजतोऽविदुषोऽपि साक्षा-
च्छ्रेयस्तनोत्यगदराज इवोपयुक्त: ॥ ५९ ॥
kvemāḥ striyo vana-carīr vyabhicāra-duṣṭāḥ
kṛṣṇe kva caiṣa paramātmani rūḍha-bhāvaḥ
nanv īśvaro ’nubhajato ’viduṣo ’pi sākṣāc
chreyas tanoty agada-rāja ivopayuktaḥ
Synonyms
kva — where, in comparison; imāḥ — these; striyaḥ — women; vana — in the forests; carīḥ — who wander; vyabhicāra — by improper behavior; duṣṭāḥ — contaminated; kṛṣṇe — for Kṛṣṇa; kva ca — and where; eṣaḥ — this; parama-ātmani — for the Supreme Soul; rūḍha-bhāvaḥ — stage of perfect love (known technically as mahā-bhāva); nanu — certainly; īśvaraḥ — the Personality of Godhead; anubhajataḥ — to one who constantly worships Him; aviduṣaḥ — not learned; api — even though; sākṣāt — directly; śreyaḥ — the highest good; tanoti — bestows; agada — of medicines; rājaḥ — the king (namely, the nectar which the demigods drink for long life); iva — as if; upayuktaḥ — taken.

Translation
How amazing it is that these simple women who wander about the forest, seemingly spoiled by improper behavior, have achieved the perfection of unalloyed love for Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Soul! Still, it is true that the Supreme Lord Himself awards His blessings even to an ignorant worshiper, just as the best medicine works even when taken by a person ignorant of its ingredients.

Text 60
नायं श्रियोऽङ्ग उ नितान्तरते: प्रसाद:
स्वर्योषितां नलिनगन्धरुचां कुतोऽन्या: ।
रासोत्सवेऽस्य भुजदण्डगृहीतकण्ठ-
लब्धाशिषां य उदगाद् व्रजवल्ल‍भीनाम् ॥ ६० ॥
nāyaṁ śriyo ’ṅga u nitānta-rateḥ prasādaḥ
svar-yoṣitāṁ nalina-gandha-rucāṁ kuto ’nyāḥ
rāsotsave ’sya bhuja-daṇḍa-gṛhīta-kaṇṭha-
labdhāśiṣāṁ ya udagād vraja-vallabhīnām
Synonyms
na — not; ayam — this; śriyaḥ — of the goddess of fortune; aṅge — on the chest; u — alas; nitānta-rateḥ — who is very intimately related; prasādaḥ — the favor; svaḥ — of the heavenly planets; yoṣitām — of women; nalina — of the lotus flower; gandha — having the aroma; rucām — and bodily luster; kutaḥ — much less; anyāḥ — others; rasa-utsave — in the festival of the rāsa dance; asya — of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; bhuja-daṇḍa — by the arms; gṛhīta — embraced; kaṇṭha — their necks; labdha-āśiṣām — who achieved such a blessing; yaḥ — which; udagāt — became manifest; vraja-vallabhīnām — of the beautiful gopīs, the transcendental girls of Vrajabhūmi.

Translation
When Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa was dancing with the gopīs in the rāsa-līlā, the gopīs were embraced by the arms of the Lord. This transcendental favor was never bestowed upon the goddess of fortune or other consorts in the spiritual world. Indeed, never was such a thing even imagined by the most beautiful girls in the heavenly planets, whose bodily luster and aroma resemble the lotus flower. And what to speak of worldly women who are very beautiful according to material estimation?

Text 61
आसामहो चरणरेणुजुषामहं स्यां
वृन्दावने किमपि गुल्मलतौषधीनाम् ।
या दुस्त्यजं स्वजनमार्यपथं च हित्वा
भेजुर्मुकुन्दपदवीं श्रुतिभिर्विमृग्याम् ॥ ६१ ॥
āsām aho caraṇa-reṇu-juṣām ahaṁ syāṁ
vṛndāvane kim api gulma-latauṣadhīnām
yā dustyajaṁ sva-janam ārya-pathaṁ ca hitvā
bhejur mukunda-padavīṁ śrutibhir vimṛgyām
Synonyms
āsam — of the gopīs; aho — oh; caraṇa-reṇu — the dust of the lotus feet; juṣām — devoted to; aham syām — let me become; vṛndāvane — in Vṛndāvana; kim api — any one; gulma-latā-oṣadhīnām — among bushes, creepers and herbs; yā — they who; dustyajam — very difficult to give up; sva-janam — family members; ārya-patham — the path of chastity; ca — and; hitvā — giving up; bhejuḥ — worshiped; mukunda-padavīm — the lotus feet of Mukunda, Kṛṣṇa; śrutibhiḥ — by the Vedas; vimṛgyām — to be searched for.

Translation
The gopīs of Vṛndāvana have given up the association of their husbands, sons and other family members, who are very difficult to give up, and they have forsaken the path of chastity to take shelter of the lotus feet of Mukunda, Kṛṣṇa, which one should search for by Vedic knowledge. Oh, let me be fortunate enough to be one of the bushes, creepers or herbs in Vṛndāvana, because the gopīs trample them and bless them with the dust of their lotus feet.

Text 62
या वै श्रियार्चितमजादिभिराप्तकामै-
र्योगेश्वरैरपि यदात्मनि रासगोष्ठ्याम् ।
कृष्णस्य तद् भगवत: चरणारविन्दं
न्यस्तं स्तनेषु विजहु: परिरभ्य तापम् ॥ ६२ ॥
yā vai śriyārcitam ajādibhir āpta-kāmair
yogeśvarair api yad ātmani rāsa-goṣṭhyām
kṛṣṇasya tad bhagavataḥ caraṇāravindaṁ
nyastaṁ staneṣu vijahuḥ parirabhya tāpam
Synonyms
yāḥ — who (the gopīs); vai — indeed; śriyā — by the goddess of fortune; arcitam — worshiped; aja — by unborn Brahmā; ādibhiḥ — and other demigods; āpta-kāmaiḥ — who have already realized all desires; yoga-īśvaraiḥ — masters of mystic power; api — even though; yat — which; ātmani — in the mind; rāsa — of the rāsa dance; goṣṭhyām — in the gathering; kṛṣṇasya — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; tat — those; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Lord; caraṇa-aravindam — the lotus feet; nyastam — placed; staneṣu — on their breasts; vijahuḥ — they gave up; parirabhya — by embracing; tāpam — their torment.

Translation
The goddess of fortune herself, along with Lord Brahmā and all the other demigods, who are masters of yogic perfection, can worship the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa only within her mind. But during the rāsa dance Lord Kṛṣṇa placed His feet upon these gopīs’ breasts, and by embracing those feet the gopīs gave up all distress.

Text 63
वन्दे नन्दव्रजस्‍त्रीणां पादरेणुमभीक्ष्णश: ।
यासां हरिकथोद्गीतं पुनाति भुवनत्रयम् ॥ ६३ ॥
vande nanda-vraja-strīṇāṁ
pāda-reṇum abhīkṣṇaśaḥ
yāsāṁ hari-kathodgītaṁ
punāti bhuvana-trayam
Synonyms
vande — I offer my respects; nanda-vraja — of the cowherd village of Nanda Mahārāja; strīṇām — of the women; pāda — of the feet; reṇum — to the dust; abhīkṣṇaśaḥ — perpetually; yāsām — whose; hari — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; kathā — about the topics; udgītam — loud chanting; punāti — purifies; bhuvana-trayam — the three worlds.

Translation
I repeatedly offer my respects to the dust from the feet of the women of Nanda Mahārāja’s cowherd village. When these gopīs loudly chant the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the vibration purifies the three worlds.

Text 64
श्रीशुक उवाच
अथ गोपीरनुज्ञाप्य यशोदां नन्दमेव च ।
गोपानामन्‍त्र्य दाशार्हो यास्यन्नारुरुहे रथम् ॥ ६४ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
atha gopīr anujñāpya
yaśodāṁ nandam eva ca
gopān āmantrya dāśārho
yāsyann āruruhe ratham
Synonyms
śṛī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; atha — then; gopīḥ — of the gopīs; anujñāpya — taking permission; yaśodām — of mother Yaśodā; nandam — King Nanda; eva ca — also; gopān — of the cowherds; āmantrya — taking leave; dāśārhaḥ — Uddhava, descendant of Daśārha; yāsyan — being about to leave; āruruhe — mounted; ratham — his chariot.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Uddhava, the descendant of Daśārha, then took permission to leave from the gopīs and from mother Yaśodā and Nanda Mahārāja. He bade farewell to all the cowherd men and, about to depart, mounted his chariot.

Text 65
तं निर्गतं समासाद्य नानोपायनपाणय: ।
नन्दादयोऽनुरागेण प्रावोचन्नश्रुलोचना: ॥ ६५ ॥
taṁ nirgataṁ samāsādya
nānopāyana-pāṇayaḥ
nandādayo ’nurāgeṇa
prāvocann aśru-locanāḥ
Synonyms
tam — him (Uddhava); nirgatam — gone out; samāsādya — approaching; nānā — various; upāyana — items for worship; pāṇayaḥ — in their hands; nanda-ādayaḥ — Nanda and the others; anurāgeṇa — with affection; prāvocan — spoke; aśru — with tears; locanāḥ — in their eyes.

Translation
As Uddhava was about to leave, Nanda and the others approached him bearing various items of worship. With tears in their eyes they addressed him as follows.

Text 66
मनसो वृत्तयो न: स्यु: कृष्णपादाम्बुजाश्रया: ।
वाचोऽभिधायिनीर्नाम्नां कायस्तत्प्रह्वणादिषु ॥ ६६ ॥
manaso vṛttayo naḥ syuḥ
kṛṣṇa pādāmbujāśrayāḥ
vāco ’bhidhāyinīr nāmnāṁ
kāyas tat-prahvaṇādiṣu
Synonyms
manasaḥ — of the minds; vṛttayaḥ — the functions; naḥ — our; syuḥ — may they be; kṛṣṇa — of Kṛṣṇa; pāda-ambuja — of the lotus feet; āśrayāḥ — taking shelter; vācaḥ — our words; abhidhāyinīḥ — expressing; nāmnām — His names; kāyaḥ — our bodies; tat — to Him; prahvaṇa-ādiṣu — (engaged) in bowing down and so forth.

Translation
[Nanda and the other cowherds said:] May our mental functions always take shelter of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, may our words always chant His names, and may our bodies always bow down to Him and serve Him.

Text 67
कर्मभिर्भ्राम्यमाणानां यत्र क्व‍ापीश्वरेच्छया ।
मङ्गलाचरितैर्दानै रतिर्न: कृष्ण ईश्वरे ॥ ६७ ॥
karmabhir bhrāmyamāṇānāṁ
yatra kvāpīśvarecchayā
maṅgalācaritair dānai
ratir naḥ kṛṣṇa īśvare
Synonyms
karmabhiḥ — by our fruitive actions; bhrāmyamāṇānām — who are made to wander; yatra kva api — wherever; īśvara — of the Supreme Lord; icchayā — by the desire; maṅgala — auspicious; ācaritaiḥ — because of works; dānaiḥ — because of charity; ratiḥ — attachment; naḥ — our; kṛṣṇe — for Kṛṣṇa; īśvare — the Lord.

Translation
Wherever we are made to wander about this world by the Supreme Lord’s will, in accordance with the reactions to our fruitive work, may our good works and charity always grant Us love for Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 68
एवं सभाजितो गोपै: कृष्णभक्त्या नराधिप ।
उद्धव: पुनरागच्छन्मथुरां कृष्णपालिताम् ॥ ६८ ॥
evaṁ sabhājito gopaiḥ
kṛṣṇa-bhaktyā narādhipa
uddhavaḥ punar āgacchan
mathurāṁ kṛṣṇa-pālitām
Synonyms
evam — thus; sabhājitaḥ — shown honor; gopaiḥ — by the cowherds; kṛṣṇa-bhaktyā — with devotion for Kṛṣṇa; nara-adhipa — O ruler of men (Parīkṣit); uddhavaḥ — Uddhava; punaḥ — again; āgacchat — returned; mathurām — to Mathurā; kṛṣṇa-pālitām — which was being protected by Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] O ruler of men, thus honored by the cowherd men with expressions of devotion for Lord Kṛṣṇa, Uddhava went back to the city of Mathurā, which was under Kṛṣṇa’s protection.

Text 69
कृष्णाय प्रणिपत्याह भक्त्युद्रेकं व्रजौकसाम् ।
वसुदेवाय रामाय राज्ञे चोपायनान्यदात् ॥ ६९ ॥
kṛṣṇāya praṇipatyāha
bhakty-udrekaṁ vrajaukasām
vasudevāya rāmāya
rājñe copāyanāny adāt
Synonyms
kṛṣṇāya — to Lord Kṛṣṇa; praṇipatya — after falling down to pay homage; āha — he told; bhakti — of pure devotion; udrekam — the abundance; vraja-okasām — of the residents of Vraja; vasudevāya — to Vasudeva; rāmāya — to Lord Balarāma; rājñe — to the King (Ugrasena); ca — and; upāyanāni — the items received in tribute; adāt — he gave.

Translation
After falling down to pay his homage, Uddhava described to Lord Kṛṣṇa the immense devotion of the residents of Vraja. Uddhava also described it to Vasudeva, Lord Balarāma and King Ugrasena and presented to them the gifts of tribute he had brought with him.