Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
अथ विज्ञाय भगवान् सर्वात्मा सर्वदर्शन: ।
सैरन्ध्र‍या: कामतप्ताया: प्रियमिच्छन् गृहं ययौ ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
atha vijñāya bhagavān
sarvātmā sarva-darśanaḥ
sairandhryāḥ kāma-taptāyāḥ
priyam icchan gṛhaṁ yayau
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; atha — then; vijñāya — understanding; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; sarva — of all; ātmā — the Soul; sarva — of everything; darśanaḥ — the seer; sairandhryāḥ — of the serving girl, Trivakrā; kāma — by lust; taptāyāḥ — troubled; priyam — the satisfaction; icchan — wanting; gṛham — to her house; yayau — He went.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Next, after assimilating Uddhava’s report, Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the omniscient Soul of all that be, desired to satisfy the serving girl Trivakrā, who was troubled by lust. Thus He went to her house.

Text 2
महार्होपस्करैराढ्यं कामोपायोपबृंहितम् ।
मुक्तादामपताकाभिर्वितानशयनासनै: ।
धूपै: सुरभिभिर्दीपै: स्रग्गन्धैरपि मण्डितम् ॥ २ ॥
mahārhopaskarair āḍhyaṁ
kāmopāyopabṛṁhitam
muktā-dāma-patākābhir
vitāna-śayanāsanaiḥ
dhūpaiḥ surabhibhir dīpaiḥ
srag-gandhair api maṇḍitam
Synonyms
mahā-arha — expensive; upaskaraiḥ — with furnishings; āḍhyam — rich; kāma — of lust; upāya — with accoutrements; upabṛṁhitam — replete; muktā-dāma — with strings of pearls; patākābhiḥ — and banners; vitāna — with canopies; śayana — beds; āsanaiḥ — and seats; dhūpaiḥ — with incense; surabhibhiḥ — fragrant; dīpaiḥ — with oil lamps; srak — with flower garlands; gandhaiḥ — and aromatic sandalwood paste; api — also; maṇḍitam — decorated.

Translation
Trivakrā’s home was opulently appointed with expensive furnishings and replete with sensual accoutrements meant to inspire sexual desire. There were banners, rows of strung pearls, canopies, fine beds and sitting places, and also fragrant incense, oil lamps, flower garlands and aromatic sandalwood paste.

Text 3
गृहं तमायान्तमवेक्ष्य सासनात्
सद्य: समुत्थाय हि जातसम्भ्रमा ।
यथोपसङ्गम्य सखीभिरच्युतं
सभाजयामास सदासनादिभि: ॥ ३ ॥
gṛhaṁ tam āyāntam avekṣya sāsanāt
sadyaḥ samutthāya hi jāta-sambhramā
yathopasaṅgamya sakhībhir acyutaṁ
sabhājayām āsa sad-āsanādibhiḥ
Synonyms
gṛham — to her house; tam — Him; āyāntam — arrived; avekṣya — seeing; sā — she; āsanāt — from her seat; sadyaḥ — suddenly; samutthāya — rising; hi — indeed; jāta-sambhramā — being in a flurry; yathā — properly; upasaṇgamya — coming toward; sakhībhiḥ — with her female companions; acyutam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; sabhājayām āsa — respectfully greeted; sat-āsana — with an excellent seat; ādibhiḥ — and so on.

Translation
When Trivakrā saw Him arriving at her house, she at once rose from her seat in a flurry. Coming forward graciously with her girlfriends, she respectfully greeted Lord Acyuta by offering Him an excellent seat and other articles of worship.

Text 4
तथोद्धव: साधु तयाभिपूजितो
न्यषीददुर्व्यामभिमृश्य चासनम् ।
कृष्णोऽपि तूर्णं शयनं महाधनं
विवेश लोकाचरितान्यनुव्रत: ॥ ४ ॥
tathoddhavaḥ sādhutayābhipūjito
nyaṣīdad urvyām abhimṛśya cāsanam
kṛṣṇo ’pi tūrṇaṁ śayanaṁ mahā-dhanaṁ
viveśa lokācaritāny anuvrataḥ
Synonyms
tathā — also; uddhavaḥ — Uddhava; sādhutayā — as a saintly person; abhipūjitaḥ — worshiped; nyaṣīdat — sat; urvyām — on the ground; abhimṛśya — touching; ca — and; āsanam — the seat; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; api — and; tūrṇam — without delay; śayanam — a bed; mahā-dhanam — very rich; viveśa — lay upon; loka — of human society; ācaritāni — the modes of behavior; anuvrataḥ — imitating.

Translation
Uddhava also received a seat of honor, since he was a saintly person, but he simply touched it and sat on the floor. Then Lord Kṛṣṇa, imitating the manners of human society, quickly made Himself comfortable on an opulent bed.

Text 5
सा मज्जनालेपदुकूलभूषण-
स्रग्गन्धताम्बूलसुधासवादिभि: ।
प्रसाधितात्मोपससार माधवं
सव्रीडलीलोत्स्मितविभ्रमेक्षितै: ॥ ५ ॥
sā majjanālepa-dukūla-bhūṣaṇa
srag-gandha-tāmbūla-sudhāsavādibhiḥ
prasādhitātmopasasāra mādhavaṁ
sa-vrīḍa-līlotsmita-vibhramekṣitaiḥ
Synonyms
sā — she, Trivakrā; majjana — by bathing; ālepa — anointing; dukūla — dressing in fine garments; bhūṣaṇa — with ornaments; srak — garlands; gandha — perfume; tāmbūla — betel nut; sudhā-āsava — drinking fragrant liquor; ādibhiḥ — and so on; prasādhita — prepared; ātmā — her body; upasasāra — she approached; mādhavam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; sa-vrīḍa — shy; līlā — playful; utsmita — of her smiles; vibhrama — exhibiting the allurement; īkṣitaiḥ — with glances.

Translation
Trivakrā prepared herself by bathing, anointing her body, and dressing in fine garments, by putting on jewelry, garlands and perfume, and also by chewing betel nut, drinking fragrant liquor, and so on. She then approached Lord Mādhava with shy, playful smiles and coquettish glances.

Text 6
आहूय कान्तां नवसङ्गमह्रिया
विशङ्कितां कङ्कणभूषिते करे ।
प्रगृह्य शय्यामधिवेश्य रामया
रेमेऽनुलेपार्पणपुण्यलेशया ॥ ६ ॥
āhūya kāntāṁ nava-saṅgama-hriyā
viśaṅkitāṁ kaṅkaṇa-bhūṣite kare
pragṛhya śayyām adhiveśya rāmayā
reme ’nulepārpaṇa-puṇya-leśayā
Synonyms
āhūya — calling forward; kāntām — His beloved; nava — new; saṅgama — of contact; hriyā — with shyness; viśaṅkitām — fearful; kaṅkaṇa — with bangles; bhūṣite — ornamented; kare — her two hands; pragṛhya — taking hold of; śayyām — on the bed; adhiveśya — placing her; rāmayā — with the beautiful girl; reme — He enjoyed; anulepa — of ointment; arpaṇa — the offering; puṇya — of piety; leśayā — whose single trace.

Translation
Calling forward His beloved, who was anxious and shy at the prospect of this new contact, the Lord pulled her by her bangled hands onto the bed. Thus He enjoyed with that beautiful girl, whose only trace of piety was her having offered ointment to the Lord.

Text 7
सानङ्गतप्तकुचयोरुरसस्तथाक्ष्णो-
र्जिघ्रन्त्यनन्तचरणेन रुजो मृजन्ती ।
दोर्भ्यां स्तनान्तरगतं परिरभ्य कान्त-
मानन्दमूर्तिमजहादतिदीर्घतापम् ॥ ७ ॥
sānaṅga-tapta-kucayor urasas tathākṣṇor
jighranty ananta-caraṇena rujo mṛjantī
dorbhyāṁ stanāntara-gataṁ parirabhya kāntam
ānanda-mūrtim ajahād ati-dīrgha-tāpam
Synonyms
sa — she; anaṅga — by Cupid; tapta — made to burn; kucayoḥ — of her breasts; urasaḥ — of her chest; tathā — and; akṣṇoḥ — of her eyes; jighrantī — smelling; ananta — of Kṛṣṇa, the unlimited Supreme Lord; caraṇena — by the feet; rujaḥ — the pain; mṛjantī — wiping away; dorbhyām — with her arms; stana — her breasts; antara-gatam — between; parirabhya — embracing; kāntam — her lover; ānanda — of all ecstasy; mūrtim — the personal manifestation; ajahāt — she gave up; ati — extremely; dīrgha — long-standing; tāpam — her distress.

Translation
Simply by smelling the fragrance of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, Trivakrā cleansed away the burning lust Cupid had aroused in her breasts, chest and eyes. With her two arms she embraced between her breasts her lover, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the personification of bliss, and thus she gave up her long-standing distress.

Text 8
सैवं कैवल्यनाथं तं प्राप्य दुष्प्राप्यमीश्वरम् ।
अङ्गरागार्पणेनाहो दुर्भगेदमयाचत ॥ ८ ॥
saivaṁ kaivalya-nāthaṁ taṁ
prāpya duṣprāpyam īśvaram
aṅga-rāgārpaṇenāho
durbhagedam ayācata
Synonyms
sa — she; evam — thus; kaivalya — of liberation; nātham — the controller; tam — Him; prāpya — obtaining; duṣprāpyam — unobtainable; īśvaram — the Supreme Lord; aṅga-rāga — body ointment; arpaṇena — by offering; aho — oh; durbhagā — unfortunate; idam — this; ayācata — she begged.

Translation
Having thus gotten the hard-to-get Supreme Lord by the simple act of offering Him body ointment, unfortunate Trivakrā submitted to that Lord of freedom the following request.

Text 9
सहोष्यतामिह प्रेष्ठ दिनानि कतिचिन्मया ।
रमस्व नोत्सहे त्यक्तुं सङ्गं तेऽम्बुरुहेक्षण ॥ ९ ॥
sahoṣyatām iha preṣṭha
dināni katicin mayā
ramasva notsahe tyaktuṁ
saṅgaṁ te ’mburuhekṣaṇa
Synonyms
saha — together; uṣyatām — please stay; iha — here; preṣṭha — O beloved; dināni — days; katicit — some; mayā — with me; ramasva — please take pleasure; na utsahe — I cannot tolerate; tyaktum — giving up; saṅgam — association; te — Your; amburuha-īkṣaṇa — O lotus-eyed one.

Translation
[Trivakrā said:] O beloved, please stay here with me for a few days more and enjoy. I cannot bear to give up Your association, O lotus-eyed one!

Text 10
तस्यै कामवरं दत्त्वा मानयित्वा च मानद: ।
सहोद्धवेन सर्वेश: स्वधामागमद् ऋद्धिमत् ॥ १० ॥
tasyai kāma-varaṁ dattvā
mānayitvā ca māna-daḥ
sahoddhavena sarveśaḥ
sva-dhāmāgamad ṛddhimat
Synonyms
tasyai — to her; kāma — of material desire; varam — her benediction; dattvā — granting; mānayitvā — showing her respect; ca — and; māna-daḥ — He who gives respect to others; saha uddhavena — together with Uddhava; sarva-īśaḥ — the Lord of all beings; sva — to His own; dhāma — residence; agamat — went; ṛddhi-mat — supremely opulent.

Translation
Promising her the fulfillment of this lusty desire, considerate Kṛṣṇa, Lord of all beings, paid Trivakrā His respects and then returned with Uddhava to His own supremely opulent residence.

Text 11
दुराराध्यं समाराध्य विष्णुं सर्वेश्वरेश्वरम् ।
यो वृणीते मनोग्राह्यमसत्त्वात् कुमनीष्यसौ ॥ ११ ॥
durārdhyaṁ samārādhya
viṣṇuṁ sarveśvareśvaram
yo vṛṇīte mano-grāhyam
asattvāt kumanīṣy asau
Synonyms
durārādhyam — rarely worshiped; samārādhya — fully worshiping; viṣṇum — Lord Viṣṇu; sarva — of all; īśvara — controllers; īśvaram — the supreme controller; yaḥ — who; vṛṇīte — chooses as a benediction; manaḥ — to the mind; grāhyam — that which is accessible, namely sense gratification; asattvāt — because of its insignificance; kumanīṣī — unintelligent; asau — that person.

Translation
Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Lord of all lords, is ordinarily difficult to approach. One who has properly worshiped Him and then chooses the benediction of mundane sense gratification is certainly of poor intelligence, for he is satisfied with an insignificant result.

Text 12
अक्रूरभवनं कृष्ण: सहरामोद्धव: प्रभु: ।
किञ्चिच्चिकीर्षयन् प्रागादक्रूरप्रीयकाम्यया ॥ १२ ॥
akrūra-bhavanaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ
saha-rāmoddhavaḥ prabhuḥ
kiñcic cikīrṣayan prāgād
akrūra-priya-kāmyayā
Synonyms
akrūra-bhavanam — the home of Akrūra; kṛṣṇaḥ — Kṛṣṇa; saha — with; rāma-uddhavaḥ — Lord Balarāma and Uddhava; prabhuḥ — the Supreme Lord; kiñcit — something; cikīrṣayan — wanting to have done; prāgāt — went; akrūra — of Akrūra; priya — the satisfaction; kāmyayā — desiring.

Translation
Then Lord Kṛṣṇa, wanting to have some things done, went to Akrūra’s house with Balarāma and Uddhava. The Lord also desired to please Akrūra.

Texts 13-14
स तान्नरवरश्रेष्ठानाराद् वीक्ष्य स्वबान्धवान् ।
प्रत्युत्थाय प्रमुदित: परिष्वज्याभिनन्द्य च ॥ १३ ॥
ननाम कृष्णं रामं च स तैरप्यभिवादित: ।
पूजयामास विधिवत् कृतासनपरिग्रहान् ॥ १४ ॥
sa tān nara-vara-śreṣṭhān
ārād vīkṣya sva-bāndhavān
pratyutthāya pramuditaḥ
pariṣvajyābhinandya ca
nanāma kṛṣṇaṁ rāmaṁ ca
sa tair apy abhivāditaḥ
pūjayām āsa vidhi-vat
kṛtāsana-parigrahān
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Akrūra); tān — them (Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma and Uddhava); nara-vara — of illustrious personalities; śreṣṭhān — the greatest; ārāt — from a distance; vīkṣya — seeing; sva — his (Akrūra’s); bāndhavān — relatives; pratyutthāya — rising up; pramuditaḥ — joyful; pariṣvajya — embracing; abhinandya — greeting; ca — and; nanāma — bowed down; kṛṣṇam rāmam ca — to Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Balarāma; saḥ — he; taiḥ — by Them; api — and; abhivāditaḥ — greeted; pūjayām āsa — he worshiped; vidhi-vat — according to scriptural injunctions; kṛta — who had done; āsana — of seats; parigrahān — acceptance.

Translation
Akrūra stood up in great joy when he saw them, his own relatives and the greatest of exalted personalities, coming from a distance. After embracing them and greeting them, Akrūra bowed down to Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and was greeted by Them in return. Then, when his guests had taken their seats, he worshiped them in accordance with scriptural rules.

Texts 15-16
पादावनेजनीरापो धारयन् शिरसा नृप ।
अर्हणेनाम्बरैर्दिव्यैर्गन्धस्रग्भूषणोत्तमै: ॥ १५ ॥
अर्चित्वा शिरसानम्य पादावङ्कगतौ मृजन् ।
प्रश्रयावनतोऽक्रूर: कृष्णरामावभाषत ॥ १६ ॥
pādāvanejanīr āpo
dhārayan śirasā nṛpa
arhaṇenāmbarair divyair
gandha-srag-bhūṣaṇottamaiḥ
arcitvā śirasānamya
pādāv aṅka-gatau mṛjan
praśrayāvanato ’krūraḥ
kṛṣṇa-rāmāv abhāṣata
Synonyms
pāda — Their feet; avanejanīḥ — used for bathing; ā — all over; āpaḥ — the water; dhārayan — putting; śirasā — on his head; nṛpa — O King (Parīkṣit); arhaṇena — with gifts; ambaraiḥ — clothing; divyaiḥ — celestial; gandha — fragrant sandalwood paste; srak — flower garlands; bhūṣaṇa — and ornaments; uttamaiḥ — excellent; arcitvā — worshiping; śirasā — with his head; ānamya — bowing down; pādau — (Lord Kṛṣṇa’s) feet; aṅka — on his lap; gatau — placed; mṛjan — massaging; praśraya — with humility; avanataḥ — his head lowered; akrūraḥ — Akrūra; kṛṣṇa-rāmau — to Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma; abhāṣata — spoke.

Translation
O King, Akrūra bathed the feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Balarāma and then poured the bath water on his head. He presented Them with gifts of fine clothing, aromatic sandalwood paste, flower garlands and excellent jewelry. After thus worshiping the two Lords, he bowed his head to the floor. He then began to massage Lord Kṛṣṇa’s feet, placing them on his lap, and with his head bowed in humility he addressed Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma as follows.

Text 17
दिष्‍ट्या पापो हत: कंस: सानुगो वामिदं कुलम् ।
भवद्भ‍य‍ामुद्‍धृतं कृच्छ्राद् दुरन्ताच्च समेधितम् ॥ १७ ॥
diṣṭyā pāpo hataḥ kaṁsaḥ
sānugo vām idaṁ kulam
bhavadbhyām uddhṛtaṁ kṛcchrād
durantāc ca samedhitam
Synonyms
diṣṭyā — by good fortune; pāpaḥ — sinful; hataḥ — killed; kaṁsaḥ — Kaṁsa; sa-anugaḥ — together with his brothers and other followers; vām — of Yours; idam — this; kulam — dynasty; bhavadbhyām — by You two; uddhṛtam — delivered; kṛcchrāt — from difficulty; durantāt — endless; ca — and; samedhitam — made prosperous.

Translation
[Akrūra said:] It is our good fortune that You two Lords have killed the evil Kaṁsa and his followers, thus delivering Your dynasty from endless suffering and causing it to flourish.

Text 18
युवां प्रधानपुरुषौ जगद्धेतू जगन्मयौ ।
भवद्भ‍य‍ां न विना किञ्चित्परमस्ति न चापरम् ॥ १८ ॥
yuvāṁ pradhāna-puruṣau
jagad-dhetū jagan-mayau
bhavadbhyāṁ na vinā kiñcit
param asti na cāparam
Synonyms
yuvām — You two; pradhāna-puruṣau — the original persons; jagat — of the universe; hetū — the causes; jagat-mayau — identical with the universe; bhavadbhyām — than You; na — not; vinā — apart from; kiñcit — anything; param — cause; asti — there is; na ca — nor; aparam — product.

Translation
You both are the original Supreme Person, the cause of the universe and its very substance. Not the slightest subtle cause or manifest product of creation exists apart from You.

Text 19
आत्मसृष्टमिदं विश्वमन्वाविश्य स्वशक्तिभि: ।
ईयते बहुधा ब्रह्मन् श्रुतप्रत्यक्षगोचरम् ॥ १९ ॥
ātma-sṛṣṭam idaṁ viśvam
anvāviśya sva-śaktibhiḥ
īyate bahudhā brahman
śruta-pratyakṣa-gocaram
Synonyms
ātma-sṛṣṭam — created by You; idam — this; viśvam — universe; anvāviśya — subsequently entering; sva — with Your own; śaktibhiḥ — energies; īyate — You are perceived; bahudhā — manifold; brahman — O Supreme; śruta — by hearing from scripture; pratyakṣa — and by direct perception; gocaram — knowable.

Translation
O Supreme Absolute Truth, with Your personal energies You create this universe and then enter into it. Thus one can perceive You in many different forms by hearing from authorities and by direct experience.

Text 20
यथा हि भूतेषु चराचरेषु
मह्यादयो योनिषु भान्ति नाना ।
एवं भवान् केवल आत्मयोनि-
ष्वात्मात्मतन्त्रो बहुधा विभाति ॥ २० ॥
yathā hi bhūteṣu carācareṣu
mahy-ādayo yoniṣu bhānti nānā
evaṁ bhavān kevala ātma-yoniṣv
ātmātma-tantro bahudhā vibhāti
Synonyms
yathā — as; hi — indeed; bhūteṣu — among manifested beings; cara — mobile; acareṣu — and immobile; mahī-ādayaḥ — earth and so on (the primary elements of creation); yoniṣu — in species; bhānti — manifest; nānā — variously; evam — so; bhavān — You; kevalaḥ — one alone; ātma — Yourself; yoniṣu — in those whose source; ātmā — the Supreme Soul; ātma-tantraḥ — self-reliant; bahudhā — manifold; vibhāti — appear.

Translation
Just as the primary elements — earth and so on — manifest themselves in abundant variety among all the species of mobile and immobile life, so You, the one independent Supreme Soul, appear to be manifold among the variegated objects of Your creation.

Text 21
सृजस्यथो लुम्पसि पासि विश्वं
रजस्तम:सत्त्वगुणै: स्वशक्तिभि: ।
न बध्यसे तद्गुणकर्मभिर्वा
ज्ञानात्मनस्ते क्व‍ च बन्धहेतु: ॥ २१ ॥
sṛjasy atho lumpasi pāsi viśvaṁ
rajas-tamaḥ-sattva-guṇaiḥ sva-śaktibhiḥ
na badhyase tad-guṇa-karmabhir vā
jñānātmanas te kva ca bandha-hetuḥ
Synonyms
sṛjasi — You create; atha u — and then; lumpasi — You destroy; pāsi — You protect; viśvam — the universe; rajaḥ — known as passion; tamaḥ — ignorance; sattva — and goodness; guṇaiḥ — by the modes; sva-śaktibhiḥ — Your personal potencies; na badhyase — You are not bound; tat — of this world; guṇa — by the modes; karmabhiḥ — by the material activities; vā — or; jñāna-ātmanaḥ — who are knowledge itself; te — for You; kva ca — where at all; bandha — of bondage; hetuḥ — cause.

Translation
You create, destroy and also maintain this universe with Your personal energies — the modes of passion, ignorance and goodness — yet You are never entangled by these modes or the activities they generate. Since You are the original source of all knowledge, what could ever cause You to be bound by illusion?

Text 22
देहाद्युपाधेरनिरूपितत्वाद्
भवो न साक्षान्न भिदात्मन: स्यात् ।
अतो न बन्धस्तव नैव मोक्ष:
स्यातां निकामस्त्वयि नोऽविवेक: ॥ २२ ॥
dehādy-upādher anirūpitatvād
bhavo na sākṣān na bhidātmanaḥ syāt
ato na bandhas tava naiva mokṣaḥ
syātām nikāmas tvayi no ’vivekaḥ
Synonyms
deha — of the body; ādi — and so on; upādheḥ — as material, designative coverings; anirūpitatvāt — because of not being determined; bhavaḥ — birth; na — not; sākṣāt — literal; na — nor; bhidā — duality; ātmanaḥ — for the Supreme Soul; syāt — exists; ataḥ — therefore; na — no; bandhaḥ — bondage; tava — Your; na eva — nor, in fact; mokṣaḥ — liberation; syātām — if they occur; nikāmaḥ — by Your sweet will; tvayi — concerning You; naḥ — our; avivekaḥ — erroneous discrimination.

Translation
Since it has never been demonstrated that You are covered by material, bodily designations, it must be concluded that for You there is neither birth in a literal sense nor any duality. Therefore You never undergo bondage or liberation, and if You appear to, it is only because of Your desire that we see You in that way, or simply because of our lack of discrimination.

Text 23
त्वयोदितोऽयं जगतो हिताय
यदा यदा वेदपथ: पुराण: ।
बाध्येत पाषण्डपथैरसद्भ‍ि-
स्तदा भवान् सत्त्वगुणं बिभर्ति ॥ २३ ॥
tvayodito ’yaṁ jagato hitāya
yadā yadā veda-pathaḥ purāṇaḥ
bādhyeta pāṣaṇḍa-pathair asadbhis
tadā bhavān sattva-guṇaṁ bibharti
Synonyms
tvayā — by You; uditaḥ — enunciated; ayam — this; jagataḥ — of the universe; hitāya — for the benefit; yadā yadā — whenever; veda — of the Vedic scriptures; pathaḥ — the path (of religiousness); purāṇaḥ — ancient; bādhyeta — is obstructed; pāṣaṇḍa — of atheism; pathaiḥ — by those who follow the path; asadbhiḥ — wicked persons; tadā — at that time; bhavān — You; sattva-guṇam — the pure mode of goodness; bibharti — assume.

Translation
You originally enunciated the ancient religious path of the Vedas for the benefit of the whole universe. Whenever that path becomes obstructed by wicked persons following the path of atheism, You assume one of Your incarnations, which are all in the transcendental mode of goodness.

Text 24
स त्वं प्रभोऽद्य वसुदेवगृहेऽवतीर्ण:
स्वांशेन भारमपनेतुमिहासि भूमे: ।
अक्षौहिणीशतवधेन सुरेतरांश-
राज्ञाममुष्य च कुलस्य यशो वितन्वन् ॥ २४ ॥
sa tvam prabho ’dya vasudeva-gṛhe ’vatīrṇaḥ
svāṁśena bhāram apanetum ihāsi bhūmeḥ
akṣauhiṇī-śata-vadhena suretarāṁśa-
rājñām amuṣya ca kulasya yaśo vitanvan
Synonyms
saḥ — He; tvam — You; prabho — O master; adya — now; vasudeva-gṛhe — in the home of Vasudeva; avatīrṇaḥ — have descended; sva — with Your own; aṁśena — direct expansion (Lord Balarāma); bharam — the burden; apanetum — to remove; iha — here; asi — You are; bhūmeḥ — of the earth; akṣauhiṇī — of the armies; śata — hundreds; vadhena — by killing; sura-itara — of the opponents of the demigods; aṁśa — who are expansions; rājñām — of the kings; amuṣya — of this; ca — and; kulasya — dynasty (of the descendants of Yadu); yaśaḥ — the fame; vitanvan — spreading.

Translation
You are that very same Supreme Person, my Lord, and You have now appeared in the home of Vasudeva with Your plenary portion. You have done this to relieve the earth’s burden by killing hundreds of armies led by kings who are expansions of the demigods’ enemies, and also to spread the fame of our dynasty.

Text 25
अद्येश नो वसतय: खलु भूरिभागा
य: सर्वदेवपितृभूतनृदेवमूर्ति: ।
यत्पादशौचसलिलं त्रिजगत् पुनाति
स त्वं जगद्गुरुरधोक्षज या: प्रविष्ट: ॥ २५ ॥
adyeśa no vasatayaḥ khalu bhūri-bhāgā
yaḥ sarva-deva-pitṛ-bhūta-nṛ-deva-mūrtiḥ
yat-pāda-śauca-salilaṁ tri-jagat punāti
sa tvaṁ jagad-gurur adhokṣaja yāḥ praviṣṭaḥ
Synonyms
adya — today; īśa — O Lord; naḥ — our; vasatayaḥ — residence; khalu — indeed; bhūri — extremely; bhāgāḥ — fortunate; yaḥ — who; sarva-deva — the Supreme Lord; pitṛ — the forefathers; bhūta — all living creatures; nṛ — human beings; deva — and the demigods; mūrtiḥ — who embody; yat — whose; pāda — feet; śauca — which has washed; salilam — the water (of the river Ganges); tri-jagat — the three worlds; punāti — purifies; saḥ — He; tvam — You; jagat — of the universe; guruḥ — the spiritual master; adhokṣaja — O You who are beyond the purview of the material senses; yāḥ — which; praviṣṭaḥ — having entered.

Translation
Today, O Lord, my home has become most fortunate because You have entered it. As the Supreme Truth, You embody the forefathers, ordinary creatures, human beings and demigods, and the water that has washed Your feet purifies the three worlds. Indeed, O transcendent one, You are the spiritual master of the universe.

Text 26
क: पण्डितस्त्वदपरं शरणं समीयाद्
भक्तप्रियाद‍ृतगिर: सुहृद: कृतज्ञात् ।
सर्वान् ददाति सुहृदो भजतोऽभिकामा-
नात्मानमप्युपचयापचयौ न यस्य ॥ २६ ॥
kaḥ paṇḍitas tvad aparaṁ śaraṇaṁ samīyād
bhakta-priyād ṛta-giraḥ suhṛdaḥ kṛta-jñāt
sarvān dadāti suhṛdo bhajato ’bhikāmān
ātmānam apy upacayāpacayau na yasya
Synonyms
kaḥ — what; paṇḍitaḥ — scholar; tvat — other than You; aparam — to another; śaraṇam — for shelter; samīyāt — would go; bhakta — to Your devotees; priyāt — affectionate; ṛta — always true; giraḥ — whose words; suhṛdaḥ — the well-wisher; kṛta-jñāt — grateful; sarvān — all; dadāti — You give; suhṛdaḥ — to Your well-wishing devotees; bhajataḥ — who are engaged in worshiping You; abhikāmān — desires; ātmānam — Yourself; api — even; upacaya — increase; apacayau — or diminution; na — never; yasya — whose.

Translation
What learned person would approach anyone but You for shelter, when You are the affectionate, grateful and truthful well-wisher of Your devotees? To those who worship You in sincere friendship You reward everything they desire, even Your own self, yet You never increase or diminish.

Text 27
दिष्‍ट्या जनार्दन भवानिह न: प्रतीतो
योगेश्वरैरपि दुरापगति: सुरेशै: ।
छिन्ध्याशु न: सुतकलत्रधनाप्तगेह-
देहादिमोहरशनां भवदीयमायाम् ॥ २७ ॥
diṣṭyā janārdana bhavān iha naḥ pratīto
yogeśvarair api durāpa-gatiḥ sureśaiḥ
chindhy āśu naḥ suta-kalatra-dhanāpta-geha-
dehādi-moha-raśanāṁ bhavadīya-māyām
Synonyms
diṣṭyā — by fortune; janārdana — O Kṛṣṇa; bhavān — You; iha — here; naḥ — by us; pratītaḥ — perceivable; yoga-īśvaraiḥ — by the masters of mystic yoga; api — even; durāpa-gatiḥ — a goal hard to achieve; sura-īśaiḥ — and by the rulers of the demigods; chindhi — please cut; āśu — quickly; naḥ — our; suta — for children; kalatra — wife; dhana — wealth; āpta — worthy friends; geha — home; deha — body; ādi — and so on; moha — of delusion; raśanām — the ropes; bhavadīya — Your own; māyām — illusory material energy.

Translation
It is by our great fortune, Janārdana, that You are now visible to us, for even the masters of yoga and the foremost demigods can achieve this goal only with great difficulty. Please quickly cut the ropes of our illusory attachment for children, wife, wealth, influential friends, home and body. All such attachment is simply the effect of Your illusory material energy.

Text 28
इत्यर्चित: संस्तुतश्च भक्तेन भगवान् हरि: ।
अक्रूरं सस्मितं प्राह गीर्भि: सम्मोहयन्निव ॥ २८ ॥
ity arcitaḥ saṁstutaś ca
bhaktena bhagavān hariḥ
akrūraṁ sa-smitaṁ prāha
gīrbhiḥ sammohayann iva
Synonyms
iti — thus; arcitaḥ — worshiped; saṁstutaḥ — profusely glorified; ca — and; bhaktena — by His devotee; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; hariḥ — Kṛṣṇa; akrūram — to Akrūra; sa-smitam — smiling; prāha — He spoke; gīrbhiḥ — with His words; sammohayan — completely enchanting; iva — almost.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Thus worshiped and fully glorified by His devotee, the Supreme Lord Hari smilingly addressed Akrūra, completely charming him with His words.

Text 29
श्रीभगवानुवाच
त्वं नो गुरु: पितृव्यश्च श्लाघ्यो बन्धुश्च नित्यदा ।
वयं तु रक्ष्या: पोष्याश्च अनुकम्प्या: प्रजा हि व: ॥ २९ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
tvaṁ no guruḥ pitṛvyaś ca
ślāghyo bandhuś ca nityadā
vayaṁ tu rakṣyāḥ poṣyāś ca
anukampyāḥ prajā hi vaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; tvam — you; naḥ — Our; guruḥ — spiritual master; pitṛvyaḥ — paternal uncle; ca — and; ślāghyaḥ — praiseworthy; bandhuḥ — friend; ca — and; nityadā — always; vayam — We; tu — on the other hand; rakṣyāḥ — to be protected; poṣyāḥ — to be maintained; ca — and; anukampyāḥ — to be shown compassion; prajāḥ — dependents; hi — indeed; vaḥ — your.

Translation
The Supreme Lord said: You are Our spiritual master, paternal uncle and praiseworthy friend, and We are like your sons, always dependent on your protection, sustenance and compassion.

Text 30
भवद्विधा महाभागा निषेव्या अर्हसत्तमा: ।
श्रेयस्कामैर्नृभिर्नित्यं देवा: स्वार्था न साधव: ॥ ३० ॥
bhavad-vidhā mahā-bhāgā
niṣevyā arha-sattamāḥ
śreyas-kāmair nṛbhir nityaṁ
devāḥ svārthā na sādhavaḥ
Synonyms
bhavat-vidhāḥ — like your good self; mahā-bhāgāḥ — most eminent; niṣevyāḥ — worthy of being served; arha — of those who are worshipable; sat-tamāḥ — the most saintly; śreyaḥ — the highest good; kāmaiḥ — who desire; nṛbhiḥ — by men; nityam — always; devaḥ — the demigods; sva-arthāḥ — concerned with their personal interest; na — not so; sādhavaḥ — saintly devotees.

Translation
Exalted souls like you are the true objects of service and the most worshipable authorities for those who desire the highest good in life. Demigods are generally concerned with their own interests, but saintly devotees never are.

Text 31
न ह्यम्मयानि तीर्थानि न देवा मृच्छिलामया: ।
ते पुनन्त्युरुकालेन दर्शनादेव साधव: ॥ ३१ ॥
na hy am-mayāni tīrthāni
na devā mṛc-chilā-mayāḥ
te punanty uru-kālena
darśanād eva sādhavaḥ
Synonyms
na — not; hi — indeed; ap-mayāni — made of water; tīrthāni — holy places; na — such is not the case; devāḥ — deities; mṛt — of earth; śilā — and stone; mayāḥ — made; te — they; punanti — purify; uru-kālena — after a long time; darśanāt — by being seen; eva — only; sādhavaḥ — saints.

Translation
No one can deny that there are holy places with sacred rivers, or that the demigods appear in deity forms made of earth and stone. But these purify the soul only after a long time, whereas saintly persons purify just by being seen.

Text 32
स भवान् सुहृदां वै न: श्रेयान् श्रेयश्चिकीर्षया ।
जिज्ञासार्थं पाण्डवानां गच्छस्व त्वं गजाह्वयम् ॥ ३२ ॥
sa bhavān suhṛdāṁ vai naḥ
śreyān śreyaś-cikīrṣayā
jijñāsārthaṁ pāṇḍavānāṁ
gacchasva tvaṁ gajāhvayam
Synonyms
saḥ — that person; bhavān — you; suhṛdām — of the well-wishers; vai — certainly; naḥ — Our; śreyān — the very best; śreyaḥ — for their welfare; cikīrṣayā — wishing to arrange; jijñāsā — of inquiry; artham — for the sake; pāṇḍavānām — about the sons of Pāṇdu; gacchasva — please go; tvam — you; gaja-āhvayam — to Gajāhvaya (Hastināpura, the capital of the Kuru dynasty).

Translation
You are indeed the best of Our friends, so please go to Hastināpura and, as the well-wisher of the Pāṇḍavas, find out how they are doing.

Text 33
पितर्युपरते बाला: सह मात्रा सुदु:खिता: ।
आनीता: स्वपुरं राज्ञा वसन्त इति शुश्रुम ॥ ३३ ॥
pitary uparate bālāḥ
saha mātrā su-duḥkhitāḥ
ānītāḥ sva-puraṁ rājñā
vasanta iti śuśruma
Synonyms
pitari — their father; uparate — when he passed away; bālāḥ — young boys; saha — together with; mātrā — their mother; su — very; duḥkhitāḥ — distressed; ānītāḥ — brought; sva — to his own; puram — capital city; rājñā — by the King; vasante — they are residing; iti — thus; śuśruma — We have heard.

Translation
We have heard that when their father passed away, the young Pāṇḍavas were brought with their anguished mother to the capital city by King Dhṛtarāṣṭra, and that they are now living there.

Text 34
तेषु राजाम्बिकापुत्रो भ्रातृपुत्रेषु दीनधी: ।
समो न वर्तते नूनं दुष्पुत्रवशगोऽन्धद‍ृक् ॥ ३४ ॥
teṣu rājāmbikā-putro
bhrātṛ-putreṣu dīna-dhīḥ
samo na vartate nūnaṁ
duṣputra-vaśa-go ’ndha-dṛk
Synonyms
teṣu — toward them; rājā — the King (Dhṛtarāṣṭra); ambikā — of Ambikā; putraḥ — the son; bhrātṛ — of his brother; putreṣu — toward the sons; dīna-dhīḥ — whose mind is wretched; samaḥ — equally disposed; na vartate — is not; nūnam — surely; duḥ — wicked; putra — of his sons; vaśa-gaḥ — under the control; andha — blinded; dṛk — whose vision.

Translation
Indeed, weak-minded Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the son of Ambikā, has come under the control of his wicked sons, and therefore that blind King is not treating his brother’s sons fairly.

Text 35
गच्छ जानीहि तद् वृत्तमधुना साध्वसाधु वा ।
विज्ञाय तद् विधास्यामो यथा शं सुहृदां भवेत् ॥ ३५ ॥
gaccha jānīhi tad-vṛttam
adhunā sādhv asādhu vā
vijñāya tad vidhāsyāmo
yathā śaṁ suhṛdāṁ bhavet
Synonyms
gaccha — go; jānīhi — learn; tat — his (Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s); vṛttam — activity; adhunā — at present; sādhu — good; asādhu — evil; vā — or; vijñāya — knowing; tat — that; vidhāsyāmaḥ — We will arrange; yathā — so that; śam — the benefit; suhṛdām — of Our dear ones; bhavet — will be.

Translation
Go and see whether Dhṛtarāṣṭra is acting properly or not. When We find out, We will make the necessary arrangements to help Our dear friends.

Text 36
इत्यक्रूरं समादिश्य भगवान् हरिरीश्वर: ।
सङ्कर्षणोद्धवाभ्यां वै तत: स्वभवनं ययौ ॥ ३६ ॥
ity akrūraṁ samādiśya
bhagavān harir īśvaraḥ
saṅkarṣaṇoddhavābhyāṁ vai
tataḥ sva-bhavanaṁ yayau
Synonyms
iti — with these words; akrūram — Akrūra; samādiśya — fully instructing; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; hariḥ īśvaraḥ — Lord Hari; saṅkarṣaṇa — with Lord Balarāma; uddhavābhyām — and Uddhava; vai — indeed; tataḥ — then; sva — to His own; bhavanam — residence; yayau — went.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Thus fully instructing Akrūra, the Supreme Personality of Godhead Hari then returned to His residence, accompanied by Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa and Uddhava.