Texts 1-2
श्रीशुक उवाच
नन्दस्त्वात्मज उत्पन्ने जाताह्लादो महामना: ।
आहूय विप्रान् वेदज्ञान्‍स्‍नात: शुचिरलङ्कृत: ॥ १ ॥
वाचयित्वा स्वस्त्ययनं जातकर्मात्मजस्य वै ।
कारयामास विधिवत् पितृदेवार्चनं तथा ॥ २ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
nandas tv ātmaja utpanne
jātāhlādo mahā-manāḥ
āhūya viprān veda-jñān
snātaḥ śucir alaṅkṛtaḥ
vācayitvā svastyayanaṁ
jāta-karmātmajasya vai
kārayām āsa vidhivat
pitṛ-devārcanaṁ tathā
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; nandaḥ — Mahārāja Nanda; tu — indeed; ātmaje — his son; utpanne — having been born; jāta — overwhelmed; āhlādaḥ — in great jubilation; mahā-manāḥ — who was great minded; āhūya — invited; viprān — the brāhmaṇas; veda-jñān — who were fully conversant in Vedic knowledge; snātaḥ — taking a full bath; śuciḥ — purifying himself; alaṅkṛtaḥ — being dressed very nicely with ornaments and fresh garments; vācayitvā — after causing to be recited; svasti-ayanam — Vedic mantras (by the brāhmaṇas); jāta-karma — the festival for the birth of the child; ātmajasya — of his own son; vai — indeed; kārayām āsa — caused to be performed; vidhi-vat — according to the Vedic regulations; pitṛ-deva-arcanam — the worship of the forefathers and the demigods; tathā — as well as.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Nanda Mahārāja was naturally very magnanimous, and when Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared as his son, he was overwhelmed by jubilation. Therefore, after bathing and purifying himself and dressing himself properly, he invited brāhmaṇas who knew how to recite Vedic mantras. After having these qualified brāhmaṇas recite auspicious Vedic hymns, he arranged to have the Vedic birth ceremony celebrated for his newborn child according to the rules and regulations, and he also arranged for worship of the demigods and forefathers.

Text 3
धेनूनां नियुते प्रादाद् विप्रेभ्य: समलङ्कृते ।
तिलाद्रीन्सप्त रत्नौघशातकौम्भाम्बरावृतान् ॥ ३ ॥
dhenūnāṁ niyute prādād
viprebhyaḥ samalaṅkṛte
tilādrīn sapta ratnaugha-
śātakaumbhāmbarāvṛtān
Synonyms
dhenūnām — of milk-giving cows; niyute — two million; prādāt — gave in charity; viprebhyaḥ — unto the brāhmaṇas; samalaṅkṛte — completely decorated; tila-adrīn — hills of grain; sapta — seven; ratna-ogha-śāta-kaumbha-ambara-āvṛtān — covered with jewels and cloth embroidered with gold.

Translation
Nanda Mahārāja gave two million cows, completely decorated with cloth and jewels, in charity to the brāhmaṇas. He also gave them seven hills of grain, covered with jewels and with cloth decorated with golden embroidery.

Text 4
कालेन स्‍नानशौचाभ्यां संस्कारैस्तपसेज्यया ।
शुध्यन्ति दानै: सन्तुष्टय‍ा द्रव्याण्यात्मात्मविद्यया ॥ ४ ॥
kālena snāna-śaucābhyāṁ
saṁskārais tapasejyayā
śudhyanti dānaiḥ santuṣṭyā
dravyāṇy ātmātma-vidyayā
Synonyms
kālena — by due course of time (the land and other material things become purified); snāna-śaucābhyām — by bathing (the body becomes purified) and by cleansing (unclean things become purified); saṁskāraiḥ — by purificatory processes (birth becomes purified); tapasā — by austerity (the senses become purified); ijyayā — by worship (the brāhmaṇas become purified); śudhyanti — become purified; dānaiḥ — by charity (wealth becomes purified); santuṣṭyā — by satisfaction (the mind becomes purified); dravyāṇi — all material possessions, such as cows, land and gold; ātmā — the soul (becomes purified); ātma-vidyayā — by self-realization.

Translation
O King, by the passing of time, land and other material possessions are purified; by bathing, the body is purified; and by being cleansed, unclean things are purified. By purificatory ceremonies, birth is purified; by austerity, the senses are purified; and by worship and charity offered to the brāhmaṇas, material possessions are purified. By satisfaction, the mind is purified; and by self-realization, or Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the soul is purified.

Text 5
सौमङ्गल्यगिरो विप्रा: सूतमागधवन्दिन: ।
गायकाश्च जगुर्नेदुर्भेर्यो दुन्दुभयो मुहु: ॥ ५ ॥
saumaṅgalya-giro viprāḥ
sūta-māgadha-vandinaḥ
gāyakāś ca jagur nedur
bheryo dundubhayo muhuḥ
Synonyms
saumaṅgalya-giraḥ — whose chanting of mantras and hymns purified the environment by their vibration; viprāḥ — the brāhmaṇas; sūta — experts in reciting all the histories; māgadha — experts in reciting the histories of special royal families; vandinaḥ — general professional reciters; gāyakāḥ — singers; ca — as well as; jaguḥ — chanted; neduḥ — vibrated; bheryaḥ — a kind of musical instrument; dundubhayaḥ — a kind of musical instrument; muhuḥ — constantly.

Translation
The brāhmaṇas recited auspicious Vedic hymns, which purified the environment by their vibration. The experts in reciting old histories like the Purāṇas, the experts in reciting the histories of royal families, and general reciters all chanted, while singers sang and many kinds of musical instruments, like bherīs and dundubhis, played in accompaniment.

Text 6
व्रज: सम्मृष्टसंसिक्तद्वाराजिरगृहान्तर: ।
चित्रध्वजपताकास्रक्‍चैलपल्लवतोरणै: ॥ ६ ॥
vrajaḥ sammṛṣṭa-saṁsikta-
dvārājira-gṛhāntaraḥ
citra-dhvaja-patākā-srak-
caila-pallava-toraṇaiḥ
Synonyms
vrajaḥ — the land occupied by Nanda Mahārāja; sammṛṣṭa — very nicely cleaned; saṁsikta — very nicely washed; dvāra — all the doors or entrances; ajira — courtyards; gṛha-antaraḥ — everything within the house; citra — variegated; dhvaja — of festoons; patākā — of flags; srak — of flower garlands; caila — of pieces of cloth; pallava — of the leaves of mango trees; toraṇaiḥ — (decorated) by gates in different places.

Translation
Vrajapura, the residence of Nanda Mahārāja, was fully decorated with varieties of festoons and flags, and in different places, gates were made with varieties of flower garlands, pieces of cloth, and mango leaves. The courtyards, the gates near the roads, and everything within the rooms of the houses were perfectly swept and washed with water.

Text 7
गावो वृषा वत्सतरा हरिद्रातैलरूषिता: ।
विचित्रधातुबर्हस्रग्वस्‍त्रकाञ्चनमालिन: ॥ ७ ॥
gāvo vṛṣā vatsatarā
haridrā-taila-rūṣitāḥ
vicitra-dhātu-barhasrag-
vastra-kāñcana-mālinaḥ
Synonyms
gāvaḥ — the cows; vṛṣāḥ — the bulls; vatsatarāḥ — the calves; haridrā — with a mixture of turmeric; taila — and oil; rūṣitāḥ — their entire bodies smeared; vicitra — decorated varieties of; dhātu — colored minerals; barha-srak — peacock-feather garlands; vastra — cloths; kāñcana — golden ornaments; mālinaḥ — being decorated with garlands.

Translation
The cows, the bulls and the calves were thoroughly smeared with a mixture of turmeric and oil, mixed with varieties of minerals. Their heads were bedecked with peacock feathers, and they were garlanded and covered with cloth and golden ornaments.

Text 8
महार्हवस्त्राभरणकञ्चुकोष्णीषभूषिता: ।
गोपा: समाययू राजन् नानोपायनपाणय: ॥ ८ ॥
mahārha-vastrābharaṇa-
kañcukoṣṇīṣa-bhūṣitāḥ
gopāḥ samāyayū rājan
nānopāyana-pāṇayaḥ
Synonyms
mahā-arha — extremely valuable; vastra-ābharaṇa — with garments and ornaments; kañcuka — by a particular type of garment used in Vṛndāvana; uṣṇīṣa — with turbans; bhūṣitāḥ — being nicely dressed; gopāḥ — all the cowherd men; samāyayuḥ — came there; rājan — O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); nānā — various; upāyana — presentations; pāṇayaḥ — holding in their hands.

Translation
O King Parīkṣit, the cowherd men dressed very opulently with valuable ornaments and garments such as coats and turbans. Decorated in this way and carrying various presentations in their hands, they approached the house of Nanda Mahārāja.

Text 9
गोप्यश्चाकर्ण्य मुदिता यशोदाया: सुतोद्भ‍वम् ।
आत्मानं भूषयांचक्रुर्वस्त्राकल्पाञ्जनादिभि: ॥ ९ ॥
gopyaś cākarṇya muditā
yaśodāyāḥ sutodbhavam
ātmānaṁ bhūṣayāṁ cakrur
vastrākalpāñjanādibhiḥ
Synonyms
gopyaḥ — the feminine community, the wives of the cowherd men; ca — also; ākarṇya — after hearing; muditāḥ — became very glad; yaśodāyāḥ — of mother Yaśodā; suta-udbhavam — the birth of a male child; ātmānam — personally; bhūṣayām cakruḥ — dressed very nicely to attend the festival; vastra-ākalpa-añjana-ādibhiḥ — with proper dress, ornaments, black ointment, and so on.

Translation
The gopī wives of the cowherd men were very pleased to hear that mother Yaśodā had given birth to a son, and they began to decorate themselves very nicely with proper dresses, ornaments, black ointment for the eyes, and so on.

Text 10
नवकुङ्कुमकिञ्जल्कमुखपङ्कजभूतय: ।
बलिभिस्त्वरितं जग्मु: पृथुश्रोण्यश्चलत्कुचा: ॥ १० ॥
nava-kuṅkuma-kiñjalka-
mukha-paṅkaja-bhūtayaḥ
balibhis tvaritaṁ jagmuḥ
pṛthu-śroṇyaś calat-kucāḥ
Synonyms
nava-kuṅkuma-kiñjalka — with saffron and newly grown kuṅkuma flower; mukha-paṅkaja-bhūtayaḥ — exhibiting an extraordinary beauty in their lotuslike faces; balibhiḥ — with presentations in their hands; tvaritam — very quickly; jagmuḥ — went (to the house of mother Yaśodā); pṛthu-śroṇyaḥ — bearing full hips, fulfilling womanly beauty; calat-kucāḥ — their developed breasts were moving.

Translation
Their lotuslike faces extraordinarily beautiful, being decorated with saffron and newly grown kuṅkuma, the wives of the cowherd men hurried to the house of mother Yaśodā with presentations in their hands. Because of natural beauty, the wives had full hips and full breasts, which moved as they hurried along.

Text 11
गोप्य: सुमृष्टमणिकुण्डलनिष्ककण्ठ्य-
श्चित्राम्बरा: पथि शिखाच्युतमाल्यवर्षा: ।
नन्दालयं सवलया व्रजतीर्विरेजु-
र्व्यालोलकुण्डलपयोधरहारशोभा: ॥ ११ ॥
gopyaḥ sumṛṣṭa-maṇi-kuṇḍala-niṣka-kaṇṭhyaś
citrāmbarāḥ pathi śikhā-cyuta-mālya-varṣāḥ
nandālayaṁ sa-valayā vrajatīr virejur
vyālola-kuṇḍala-payodhara-hāra-śobhāḥ
Synonyms
gopyaḥ — the gopīs; su-mṛṣṭa — very dazzling; maṇi — made of jewels; kuṇḍala — wearing earrings; niṣka-kaṇṭhyaḥ — and having little keys and lockets hanging from their necks; citra-ambarāḥ — dressed with varieties of colored embroidery; pathi — on their way to Yaśodāmayī’s house; śikhā-cyuta — fell from their hair; mālya-varṣāḥ — a shower of flower garlands; nanda-ālayam — to the house of Mahārāja Nanda; sa-valayāḥ — with bangles on their hands; vrajatīḥ — while going (in that costume); virejuḥ — they looked very, very beautiful; vyālola — moving; kuṇḍala — with earrings; payodhara — with breasts; hāra — with flower garlands; śobhāḥ — who appeared so beautiful.

Translation
In the ears of the gopīs were brilliantly polished jeweled earrings, and from their necks hung metal lockets. Their hands were decorated with bangles, their dresses were of varied colors, and from their hair, flowers fell onto the street like showers. Thus while going to the house of Mahārāja Nanda, the gopīs, their earrings, breasts and garlands moving, were brilliantly beautiful.

Text 12
ता आशिष: प्रयुञ्जानाश्चिरं पाहीति बालके ।
हरिद्राचूर्णतैलाद्भ‍ि: सिञ्चन्त्योऽजनमुज्जगु: ॥ १२ ॥
tā āśiṣaḥ prayuñjānāś
ciraṁ pāhīti bālake
haridrā-cūrṇa-tailādbhiḥ
siñcantyo ’janam ujjaguḥ
Synonyms
tāḥ — all the women, the wives and daughters of the cowherd men; āśiṣaḥ — blessings; prayuñjānāḥ — offering; ciram — for a long time; pāhi — may You become the King of Vraja and maintain all its inhabitants; iti — thus; bālake — unto the newborn child; haridrā-cūrṇa — powder of turmeric; taila-adbhiḥ — mixed with oil; siñcantyaḥ — sprinkling; ajanam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is unborn; ujjaguḥ — offered prayers.

Translation
Offering blessings to the newborn child, Kṛṣṇa, the wives and daughters of the cowherd men said, “May You become the King of Vraja and long maintain all its inhabitants.” They sprinkled a mixture of turmeric powder, oil and water upon the birthless Supreme Lord and offered their prayers.

Text 13
अवाद्यन्त विचित्राणि वादित्राणि महोत्सवे ।
कृष्णे विश्वेश्वरेऽनन्ते नन्दस्य व्रजमागते ॥ १३ ॥
avādyanta vicitrāṇi
vāditrāṇi mahotsave
kṛṣṇe viśveśvare ’nante
nandasya vrajam āgate
Synonyms
avādyanta — vibrated in celebration of Vasudeva’s son; vicitrāṇi — various; vāditrāṇi — musical instruments; mahā-utsave — in the great festival; kṛṣṇe — when Lord Kṛṣṇa; viśva-īśvare — the master of the entire cosmic manifestation; anante — unlimitedly; nandasya — of Mahārāja Nanda; vrajam — at the pasturing place; āgate — had so arrived.

Translation
Now that the all-pervading, unlimited Lord Kṛṣṇa, the master of the cosmic manifestation, had arrived within the estate of Mahārāja Nanda, various types of musical instruments resounded to celebrate the great festival.

Text 14
गोपा: परस्परं हृष्टा दधिक्षीरघृताम्बुभि: ।
आसिञ्चन्तो विलिम्पन्तो नवनीतैश्च चिक्षिपु: ॥ १४ ॥
gopāḥ parasparaṁ hṛṣṭā
dadhi-kṣīra-ghṛtāmbubhiḥ
āsiñcanto vilimpanto
navanītaiś ca cikṣipuḥ
Synonyms
gopāḥ — the cowherd men; parasparam — on one another; hṛṣṭāḥ — being so pleased; dadhi — with curd; kṣīra — with condensed milk; ghṛta-ambubhiḥ — with water mixed with butter; āsiñcantaḥ — sprinkling; vilimpantaḥ — smearing; navanītaiḥ ca — and with butter; cikṣipuḥ — they threw on one another.

Translation
In gladness, the cowherd men enjoyed the great festival by splashing one another’s bodies with a mixture of curd, condensed milk, butter and water. They threw butter on one another and smeared it on one another’s bodies.

Texts 15-16
नन्दो महामनास्तेभ्यो वासोऽलङ्कारगोधनम् ।
सूतमागधवन्दिभ्यो येऽन्ये विद्योपजीविन: ॥ १५ ॥
तैस्तै: कामैरदीनात्मा यथोचितमपूजयत् ।
विष्णोराराधनार्थाय स्वपुत्रस्योदयाय च ॥ १६ ॥
nando mahā-manās tebhyo
vāso ’laṅkāra-go-dhanam
sūta-māgadha-vandibhyo
ye ’nye vidyopajīvinaḥ
tais taiḥ kāmair adīnātmā
yathocitam apūjayat
viṣṇor ārādhanārthāya
sva-putrasyodayāya ca
Synonyms
nandaḥ — Mahārāja Nanda; mahā-manāḥ — who among the cowherd men was the greatest of all upright persons; tebhyaḥ — unto the cowherd men; vāsaḥ — clothing; alaṅkāra — ornaments; go-dhanam — and cows; sūta-māgadha-vandibhyaḥ — unto the sūtas (the professional reciters of the old histories), the māgadhas (the professional reciters of the histories of royal dynasties) and the vandīs (general singers of prayers); ye anye — as well as others; vidyā-upajīvinaḥ — who were continuing their livelihood on the basis of educational qualifications; taiḥ taiḥ — with whatever; kāmaiḥ — improvements of desire; adīna-ātmā — Mahārāja Nanda, who was so magnanimous; yathā-ucitam — as was suitable; apūjayat — worshiped them or satisfied them; viṣṇoḥ ārādhana-arthāya — for the purpose of satisfying Lord Viṣṇu; sva-putrasya — of his own child; udayāya — for the improvement in all respects; ca — and.

Translation
The great-minded Mahārāja Nanda gave clothing, ornaments and cows in charity to the cowherd men in order to please Lord Viṣṇu, and thus he improved the condition of his own son in all respects. He distributed charity to the sūtas, the māgadhas, the vandīs, and men of all other professions, according to their educational qualifications, and satisfied everyone’s desires.

Text 17
रोहिणी च महाभागा नन्दगोपाभिनन्दिता ।
व्यचरद् दिव्यवासस्रक्कण्ठाभरणभूषिता ॥ १७ ॥
rohiṇī ca mahā-bhāgā
nanda-gopābhinanditā
vyacarad divya-vāsa-srak-
kaṇṭhābharaṇa-bhūṣitā
Synonyms
rohiṇī — Rohiṇī, the mother of Baladeva; ca — also; mahā-bhāgā — the most fortunate mother of Baladeva (greatly fortunate because of having the opportunity to raise Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma together); nanda-gopā-abhinanditā — being honored by Mahārāja Nanda and mother Yaśodā; vyacarat — was busy wandering here and there; divya — beautiful; vāsa — with a dress; srak — with a garland; kaṇṭha-ābharaṇa — and with an ornament covering the neck; bhūṣitā — decorated.

Translation
The most fortunate Rohiṇī, the mother of Baladeva, was honored by Nanda Mahārāja and Yaśodā, and thus she also dressed gorgeously and decorated herself with a necklace, a garland and other ornaments. She was busy wandering here and there to receive the women who were guests at the festival.

Text 18
तत आरभ्य नन्दस्य व्रज: सर्वसमृद्धिमान् ।
हरेर्निवासात्मगुणै रमाक्रीडमभून्नृप ॥ १८ ॥
tata ārabhya nandasya
vrajaḥ sarva-samṛddhimān
harer nivāsātma-guṇai
ramākrīḍam abhūn nṛpa
Synonyms
tataḥ ārabhya — beginning from that time; nandasya — of Mahārāja Nanda; vrajaḥ — Vrajabhūmi, the land for protecting and breeding cows; sarva-samṛddhimān — became opulent with all kinds of riches; hareḥ nivāsa — of the residence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ātma-guṇaiḥ — by the transcendental qualities; ramā-ākrīḍam — the place of pastimes for the goddess of fortune; abhūt — became; nṛpa — O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit).

Translation
O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the home of Nanda Mahārāja is eternally the abode of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and His transcendental qualities and is therefore always naturally endowed with the opulence of all wealth. Yet beginning from Lord Kṛṣṇa’s appearance there, it became the place for the pastimes of the goddess of fortune.

Text 19
गोपान् गोकुलरक्षायां निरूप्य मथुरां गत: ।
नन्द: कंसस्य वार्षिक्यं करं दातुं कुरूद्वह ॥ १९ ॥
gopān gokula-rakṣāyāṁ
nirūpya mathurāṁ gataḥ
nandaḥ kaṁsasya vārṣikyaṁ
karaṁ dātuṁ kurūdvaha
Synonyms
gopān — the cowherd men; gokula-rakṣāyām — in giving protection to the state of Gokula; nirūpya — after appointing; mathurām — to Mathurā; gataḥ — went; nandaḥ — Nanda Mahārāja; kaṁsasya — of Kaṁsa; vārṣikyam — yearly taxes; karam — the share of profit; dātum — to pay; kuru-udvaha — O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, best protector of the Kuru dynasty.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Thereafter, my dear King Parīkṣit, O best protector of the Kuru dynasty, Nanda Mahārāja appointed the local cowherd men to protect Gokula and then went to Mathurā to pay the yearly taxes to King Kaṁsa.

Text 20
वसुदेव उपश्रुत्य भ्रातरं नन्दमागतम् ।
ज्ञात्वा दत्तकरं राज्ञे ययौ तदवमोचनम् ॥ २० ॥
vasudeva upaśrutya
bhrātaraṁ nandam āgatam
jñātvā datta-karaṁ rājñe
yayau tad-avamocanam
Synonyms
vasudevaḥ — Vasudeva; upaśrutya — when he heard; bhrātaram — that his dear friend and brother; nandam — Nanda Mahārāja; āgatam — had come to Mathurā; jñātvā — when he learned; datta-karam — and had already paid the taxes; rājñe — unto the King; yayau — he went; tat-avamocanam — to the residential quarters of Nanda Mahārāja.

Translation
When Vasudeva heard that Nanda Mahārāja, his very dear friend and brother, had come to Mathurā and already paid the taxes to Kaṁsa, he went to Nanda Mahārāja’s residence.

Text 21
तं द‍ृष्ट्वा सहसोत्थाय देह: प्राणमिवागतम् ।
प्रीत: प्रियतमं दोर्भ्यां सस्वजे प्रेमविह्वल: ॥ २१ ॥
taṁ dṛṣṭvā sahasotthāya
dehaḥ prāṇam ivāgatam
prītaḥ priyatamaṁ dorbhyāṁ
sasvaje prema-vihvalaḥ
Synonyms
tam — him (Vasudeva); dṛṣṭvā — seeing; sahasā — suddenly; utthāya — getting up; dehaḥ — the same body; prāṇam — life; iva — as if; āgatam — had returned; prītaḥ — so pleased; priya-tamam — his dear friend and brother; dorbhyām — by his two arms; sasvaje — embraced; prema-vihvalaḥ — overwhelmed with love and affection.

Translation
When Nanda Mahārāja heard that Vasudeva had come, he was overwhelmed with love and affection, being as pleased as if his body had regained its life. Seeing Vasudeva suddenly present, he got up and embraced him with both arms.

Text 22
पूजित: सुखमासीन: पृष्ट्वानामयमाद‍ृत: ।
प्रसक्तधी: स्वात्मजयोरिदमाह विशाम्पते ॥ २२ ॥
pūjitaḥ sukham āsīnaḥ
pṛṣṭvānāmayam ādṛtaḥ
prasakta-dhīḥ svātmajayor
idam āha viśāmpate
Synonyms
pūjitaḥ — Vasudeva having been so dearly welcomed; sukham āsīnaḥ — having been given a place to sit comfortably; pṛṣṭvā — asking; anāmayam — all-auspicious inquiries; ādṛtaḥ — being honored and respectfully received; prasakta-dhīḥ — because of his being very much attached; sva-ātmajayoḥ — to his own two sons, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma; idam — the following; āha — inquired; viśām-pate — O Mahārāja Parīkṣit.

Translation
O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, having thus been received and welcomed by Nanda Mahārāja with honor, Vasudeva sat down very peacefully and inquired about his own two sons because of intense love for them.

Text 23
दिष्टय‍ा भ्रात: प्रवयस इदानीमप्रजस्य ते ।
प्रजाशाया निवृत्तस्य प्रजा यत् समपद्यत ॥ २३ ॥
diṣṭyā bhrātaḥ pravayasa
idānīm aprajasya te
prajāśāyā nivṛttasya
prajā yat samapadyata
Synonyms
diṣṭyā — it is by great fortune; bhrātaḥ — O my dear brother; pravayasaḥ — of you whose age is now quite advanced; idānīm — at the present moment; aprajasya — of one who did not have a son before; te — of you; prajā-āśāyāḥ nivṛttasya — of one who was almost hopeless of getting a son at this age; prajā — a son; yat — whatever; samapadyata — has been gotten by chance.

Translation
My dear brother Nanda Mahārāja, at an advanced age you had no son at all and were hopeless of having one. Therefore, that you now have a son is a sign of great fortune.

Text 24
दिष्टय‍ा संसारचक्रेऽस्मिन् वर्तमान: पुनर्भव: ।
उपलब्धो भवानद्य दुर्लभं प्रियदर्शनम् ॥ २४ ॥
diṣṭyā saṁsāra-cakre ’smin
vartamānaḥ punar-bhavaḥ
upalabdho bhavān adya
durlabhaṁ priya-darśanam
Synonyms
diṣṭyā — it is also by great fortune; saṁsāra-cakre asmin — in this world of birth and death; vartamānaḥ — although I was existing; punaḥ-bhavaḥ — my meeting with you is just like another birth; upalabdhaḥ — being obtained by me; bhavān — you; adya — today; durlabham — although it was never to happen; priya-darśanam — to see you again, my very dear friend and brother.

Translation
It is also by good fortune that I am seeing you. Having obtained this opportunity, I feel as if I have taken birth again. Even though one is present in this world, to meet with intimate friends and dear relatives in this material world is extremely difficult.

Text 25
नैकत्र प्रियसंवास: सुहृदां चित्रकर्मणाम् ।
ओघेन व्यूह्यमानानां प्लवानां स्रोतसो यथा ॥ २५ ॥
naikatra priya-saṁvāsaḥ
suhṛdāṁ citra-karmaṇām
oghena vyūhyamānānāṁ
plavānāṁ srotaso yathā
Synonyms
na — not; ekatra — in one place; priya-saṁvāsaḥ — living together with dear friends and relatives; suhṛdām — of friends; citra-karmaṇām — of all of us who have had varieties of reactions to our past karma; oghena — by the force; vyūhyamānānām — carried away; plavānām — of sticks and other objects floating in the water; srotasaḥ — of the waves; yathā — as.

Translation
Many planks and sticks, unable to stay together, are carried away by the force of a river’s waves. Similarly, although we are intimately related with friends and family members, we are unable to stay together because of our varied past deeds and the waves of time.

Text 26
कच्चित् पशव्यं निरुजं भूर्यम्बुतृणवीरुधम् ।
बृहद्वनं तदधुना यत्रास्से त्वं सुहृद्‌वृत: ॥ २६ ॥
kaccit paśavyaṁ nirujaṁ
bhūry-ambu-tṛṇa-vīrudham
bṛhad vanaṁ tad adhunā
yatrāsse tvaṁ suhṛd-vṛtaḥ
Synonyms
kaccit — whether; paśavyam — protection of the cows; nirujam — without difficulties or disease; bhūri — sufficient; ambu — water; tṛṇa — grass; vīrudham — plants; bṛhat vanam — the great forest; tat — all these arrangements are there; adhunā — now; yatra — where; āsse — are living; tvam — you; suhṛt-vṛtaḥ — surrounded by friends.

Translation
My dear friend Nanda Mahārāja, in the place where you are living with your friends, is the forest favorable for the animals, the cows? I hope there is no disease or inconvenience. The place must be full of water, grass and other plants.

Text 27
भ्रातर्मम सुत: कच्चिन्मात्रा सह भवद्‌व्रजे ।
तातं भवन्तं मन्वानो भवद्‌भ्यामुपलालित: ॥ २७ ॥
bhrātar mama sutaḥ kaccin
mātrā saha bhavad-vraje
tātaṁ bhavantaṁ manvāno
bhavadbhyām upalālitaḥ
Synonyms
bhrātaḥ — my dear brother; mama — my; sutaḥ — son (Baladeva, born of Rohiṇī); kaccit — whether; mātrā saha — with His mother, Rohiṇī; bhavat-vraje — in your house; tātam — as father; bhavantam — unto you; manvānaḥ — thinking; bhavadbhyām — by you and your wife, Yaśodā; upalālitaḥ — properly being raised.

Translation
My son Baladeva, being raised by you and your wife, Yaśodādevī, considers you His father and mother. Is He living very peacefully in your home with His real mother, Rohiṇī?

Text 28
पुंसस्त्रिवर्गो विहित: सुहृदो ह्यनुभावित: ।
न तेषु क्लिश्यमानेषु त्रिवर्गोऽर्थाय कल्पते ॥ २८ ॥
puṁsas tri-vargo vihitaḥ
suhṛdo hy anubhāvitaḥ
na teṣu kliśyamāneṣu
tri-vargo ’rthāya kalpate
Synonyms
puṁsaḥ — of a person; tri-vargaḥ — the three aims of life (religion, economic development and sense gratification); vihitaḥ — enjoined according to Vedic ritualistic ceremonies; suhṛdaḥ — toward relatives and friends; hi — indeed; anubhāvitaḥ — when they are properly in line; na — not; teṣu — in them; kliśyamāneṣu — if they are actually in any difficulty; tri-vargaḥ — these three aims of life; arthāya — for any purpose; kalpate — does become so.

Translation
When one’s friends and relatives are properly situated, one’s religion, economic development and sense gratification, as described in the Vedic literatures, are beneficial. Otherwise, if one’s friends and relatives are in distress, these three cannot offer any happiness.

Text 29
श्रीनन्द उवाच
अहो ते देवकीपुत्रा: कंसेन बहवो हता: ।
एकावशिष्टावरजा कन्या सापि दिवं गता ॥ २९ ॥
śrī-nanda uvāca
aho te devakī-putrāḥ
kaṁsena bahavo hatāḥ
ekāvaśiṣṭāvarajā
kanyā sāpi divaṁ gatā
Synonyms
śrī-nandaḥ uvāca — Nanda Mahārāja said; aho — alas; te — your; devakī-putrāḥ — all the sons of your wife Devakī; kaṁsena — by King Kaṁsa; bahavaḥ — many; hatāḥ — have been killed; ekā — one; avaśiṣṭā — remaining child; avarajā — the youngest of all; kanyā — a daughter also; sā api — she also; divam gatā — gone to the heavenly planets.

Translation
Nanda Mahārāja said: Alas, King Kaṁsa killed so many of your children, born of Devakī. And your one daughter, the youngest child of all, entered the heavenly planets.

Text 30
नूनं ह्यद‍ृष्टनिष्ठोऽयमद‍ृष्टपरमो जन: ।
अद‍ृष्टमात्मनस्तत्त्वं यो वेद न स मुह्यति ॥ ३० ॥
nūnaṁ hy adṛṣṭa-niṣṭho ’yam
adṛṣṭa-paramo janaḥ
adṛṣṭam ātmanas tattvaṁ
yo veda na sa muhyati
Synonyms
nūnam — certainly; hi — indeed; adṛṣṭa — unseen; niṣṭhaḥ ayam — something ends there; adṛṣṭa — the unseen destiny; paramaḥ — ultimate; janaḥ — every living entity within this material world; adṛṣṭam — that destiny; ātmanaḥ — of oneself; tattvam — ultimate truth; yaḥ — anyone who; veda — knows; na — not; saḥ — he; muhyati — becomes bewildered.

Translation
Every man is certainly controlled by destiny, which determines the results of one’s fruitive activities. In other words, one has a son or daughter because of unseen destiny, and when the son or daughter is no longer present, this also is due to unseen destiny. Destiny is the ultimate controller of everyone. One who knows this is never bewildered.

Text 31
श्रीवसुदेव उवाच
करो वै वार्षिको दत्तो राज्ञे द‍ृष्टा वयं च व: ।
नेह स्थेयं बहुतिथं सन्त्युत्पाताश्च गोकुले ॥ ३१ ॥
śrī-vasudeva uvāca
karo vai vārṣiko datto
rājñe dṛṣṭā vayaṁ ca vaḥ
neha stheyaṁ bahu-tithaṁ
santy utpātāś ca gokule
Synonyms
śrī-vasudevaḥ uvāca — Śrī Vasudeva replied; karaḥ — the taxes; vai — indeed; vārṣikaḥ — yearly; dattaḥ — have already been paid by you; rājñe — to the King; dṛṣṭāḥ — have been seen; vayam ca — both of us; vaḥ — of you; na — not; iha — in this place; stheyam — should be staying; bahu-titham — for many days; santi — may be; utpātāḥ ca — many disturbances; gokule — in your home, Gokula.

Translation
Vasudeva said to Nanda Mahārāja: Now, my dear brother, since you have paid the annual taxes to Kaṁsa and have also seen me, do not stay in this place for many days. It is better to return to Gokula, since I know that there may be some disturbances there.

Text 32
श्रीशुक उवाच
इति नन्दादयो गोपा: प्रोक्तास्ते शौरिणा ययु: ।
अनोभिरनडुद्युक्तैस्तमनुज्ञाप्य गोकुलम् ॥ ३२ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
iti nandādayo gopāḥ
proktās te śauriṇā yayuḥ
anobhir anaḍud-yuktais
tam anujñāpya gokulam
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti — thus; nanda-ādayaḥ — Nanda Mahārāja and his companions; gopāḥ — the cowherd men; proktāḥ — being advised; te — they; śauriṇā — by Vasudeva; yayuḥ — started from that place; anobhiḥ — by the bullock carts; anaḍut-yuktaiḥ — yoked with oxen; tam anujñāpya — taking permission from Vasudeva; gokulam — for Gokula.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: After Vasudeva advised Nanda Mahārāja in this way, Nanda Mahārāja and his associates, the cowherd men, took permission from Vasudeva, yoked their bulls to the bullock carts, and started riding for Gokula.