Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
अस्ति: प्राप्तिश्च कंसस्य महिष्यौ भरतर्षभ ।
मृते भर्तरि दु:खार्ते ईयतु: स्म पितुर्गृहान् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
astiḥ prāptiś ca kaṁsasya
mahiṣyau bharatarṣabha
mṛte bhartari duḥkhārte
īyatuḥ sma pitur gṛhān
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; astiḥ prāptiḥ ca — Asti and Prāpti; kaṁsasya — of Kaṁsa; mahiṣyau — the queens; bharata-ṛṣabha — O hero of the Bhāratas (Parīkṣit); mṛte — having been killed; bhartari — their husband; duḥkha — with unhappiness; ārte — distressed; īyatuḥ sma — they went; pituḥ — of their father; gṛhān — to the house.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When Kaṁsa was killed, O heroic descendant of Bharata, his two queens, Asti and Prāpti, went to their father’s house in great distress.

Text 2
पित्रे मगधराजाय जरासन्धाय दु:खिते ।
वेदयां चक्रतु: सर्वमात्मवैधव्यकारणम् ॥ २ ॥
pitre magadha-rājāya
jarāsandhāya duḥkhite
vedayāṁ cakratuḥ sarvam
ātma-vaidhavya-kāraṇam
Synonyms
pitre — to their father; magadha-rājāya — the King of Magadha; jarāsandhāya — named Jarāsandha; duḥkhite — unhappy; vedayām cakratuḥ — they related; sarvam — all; ātma — their own; vaidhavya — of widowhood; kāraṇam — the cause.

Translation
The sorrowful queens told their father, King Jarāsandha of Magadha, all about how they had become widows.

Text 3
स तदप्रियमाकर्ण्य शोकामर्षयुतो नृप ।
अयादवीं महीं कर्तुं चक्रे परममुद्यमम् ॥ ३ ॥
sa tad apriyam ākarṇya
śokāmarṣa-yuto nṛpa
ayādavīṁ mahīṁ kartuṁ
cakre paramam udyamam
Synonyms
saḥ — he, Jarāsandha; tat — that; apriyam — unpleasant news; ākarṇya — hearing; śoka — sorrow; amarṣa — and intolerant anger; yutaḥ — experiencing; nṛpa — O King; ayādavīm — devoid of Yādavas; mahīm — the earth; kartum — to make; cakre — he made; paramam — extreme; udyamam — endeavor.

Translation
Hearing this odious news, O King, Jarāsandha was filled with sorrow and anger, and he began the greatest possible endeavor to rid the earth of the Yādavas.

Text 4
अक्षौहिणीभिर्विंशत्या तिसृभिश्चापि संवृत: ।
यदुराजधानीं मथुरां न्यरुधत् सर्वतोदिशम् ॥ ४ ॥
akṣauhiṇībhir viṁśatyā
tisṛbhiś cāpi saṁvṛtaḥ
yadu-rājadhānīṁ mathurāṁ
nyarudhat sarvato diśam
Synonyms
akṣauhiṇībhiḥ — by akṣauhiṇī divisions (each consisting of 21,870 soldiers on elephants, 21,870 charioteers, 65,610 cavalrymen and 109,350 infantry soldiers); viṁśatyā — twenty; tisṛbhiḥ ca api — plus three; saṁvṛtaḥ — surrounded; yadu — of the dynasty of Yadu; rājadhānīm — the royal capital; mathurām — Mathurā; nyarudhat — he besieged; sarvataḥ diśam — on all sides.

Translation
With a force of twenty-three akṣauhiṇī divisions, he laid siege to the Yadu capital, Mathurā, on all sides.

Texts 5-6
निरीक्ष्य तद्ब‍लं कृष्ण उद्वेलमिव सागरम् ।
स्वपुरं तेन संरुद्धं स्वजनं च भयाकुलम् ॥ ५ ॥
चिन्तयामास भगवान् हरि: कारणमानुष: ।
तद्देशकालानुगुणं स्वावतारप्रयोजनम् ॥ ६ ॥
nirīkṣya tad-balaṁ kṛṣṇa
udvelam iva sāgaram
sva-puraṁ tena saṁruddhaṁ
sva-janaṁ ca bhayākulam
cintayām āsa bhagavān
hariḥ kāraṇa-mānuṣaḥ
tad-deśa-kālānuguṇaṁ
svāvatāra-prayojanam
Synonyms
nirīkṣya — observing; tat — of him (Jarāsandha); balam — the military force; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; udvelam — having overflowed its boundaries; iva — like; sāgaram — an ocean; sva — His own; puram — city, Mathurā; tena — by it; saṁruddham — besieged; sva-janam — His subjects; ca — and; bhaya — by fear; ākulam — disturbed; cintayām āsa — He thought; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hariḥ — Lord Hari; kāraṇa — the cause of everything; mānuṣaḥ — appearing as a human being; tat — for that; deśa — place; kāla — and time; anuguṇam — suitable; sva-avatāra — of His descent to this world; prayojanam — the purpose.

Translation
Although Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is the original cause of this world, when He descended to the earth He played the role of a human being. Thus when He saw Jarāsandha’s assembled army surrounding His city like a great ocean overflowing its shores, and when He saw how this army was striking fear into His subjects, the Lord considered what His suitable response should be according to the time, place and specific purpose of His current incarnation.

Texts 7-8
हनिष्यामि बलं ह्येतद्भ‍ुवि भारं समाहितम् ।
मागधेन समानीतं वश्यानां सर्वभूभुजाम् ॥ ७ ॥
अक्षौहिणीभि: सङ्ख्यातं भटाश्वरथकुञ्जरै: ।
मागधस्तु न हन्तव्यो भूय: कर्ता बलोद्यमम् ॥ ८ ॥
haniṣyāmi balaṁ hy etad
bhuvi bhāraṁ samāhitam
māgadhena samānītaṁ
vaśyānāṁ sarva-bhūbhujām
akṣauhiṇībhiḥ saṅkhyātaṁ
bhaṭāśva-ratha-kuñjaraiḥ
māgadhas tu na hantavyo
bhūyaḥ kartā balodyamam
Synonyms
haniṣyāmi — I will kill; balam — army; hi — certainly; etat — this; bhuvi — upon the earth; bhāram — a burden; samāhitam — collected; māgadhena — by the King of Magadha, Jarāsandha; samānītam — brought together; vaśyānām — subservient; sarva — all; bhū-bhujām — of the kings; akṣauhiṇībhiḥ — in akṣauhiṇīs; saṅkhyātam — counted; bhaṭa — (consisting) of foot soldiers; aśva — horses; ratha — chariots; kuñjaraiḥ — and elephants; māgadhaḥ — Jarāsandha; tu — however; na hantavyaḥ — should not be killed; bhūyaḥ — again; kartā — he will make; bala — (to collect) an army; udyamam — the endeavor.

Translation
[The Supreme Lord thought:] Since it is such a burden on the earth, I will destroy Jarāsandha’s army, consisting of akṣauhiṇīs of foot soldiers, horses, chariots and elephants, which the King of Magadha has assembled from all subservient kings and brought together here. But Jarāsandha himself should not be killed, since in the future he will certainly assemble another army.

Text 9
एतदर्थोऽवतारोऽयं भूभारहरणाय मे ।
संरक्षणाय साधूनां कृतोऽन्येषां वधाय च ॥ ९ ॥
etad-artho ’vatāro ’yaṁ
bhū-bhāra-haraṇāya me
saṁrakṣaṇāya sādhūnāṁ
kṛto ’nyeṣāṁ vadhāya ca
Synonyms
etat — for this; arthaḥ — purpose; avatāraḥ — descent; ayam — this; bhū — of the earth; bhāra — the burden; haraṇāya — for removing; me — by Me; saṁrakṣaṇāya — for the complete protection; sādhūnām — of the saintly; kṛtaḥ — done; anyeṣām — of others (the nonsaintly); vadhāya — for killing; ca — and.

Translation
This is the purpose of My present incarnation — to relieve the earth of its burden, protect the pious and kill the impious.

Text 10
अन्योऽपि धर्मरक्षायै देह: संभ्रियते मया ।
विरामायाप्यधर्मस्य काले प्रभवत: क्व‍‍चित् ॥ १० ॥
anyo ’pi dharma-rakṣāyai
dehaḥ saṁbhriyate mayā
virāmāyāpy adharmasya
kāle prabhavataḥ kvacit
Synonyms
anyaḥ — another; api — as well; dharma — of religion; rakṣāyai — for the protection; dehaḥ — body; saṁbhriyate — is assumed; mayā — by Me; virāmāya — for the stopping; api — also; adharmasya — of irreligion; kāle — in the course of time; prabhavataḥ — becoming prominent; kvacit — whenever.

Translation
I also assume other bodies to protect religion and to end irreligion whenever it flourishes in the course of time.

Text 11
एवं ध्यायति गोविन्द आकाशात् सूर्यवर्चसौ ।
रथावुपस्थितौ सद्य: ससूतौ सपरिच्छदौ ॥ ११ ॥
evaṁ dhyāyati govinda
ākāśāt sūrya-varcasau
rathāv upasthitau sadyaḥ
sa-sūtau sa-paricchadau
Synonyms
evam — in this manner; dhyāyati — while He was meditating; govinde — Lord Kṛṣṇa; ākāśāt — from the sky; sūrya — like the sun; varcasau — having effulgence; rathau — two chariots; upasthitau — appeared; sadyaḥ — suddenly; sa — with; sūtau — drivers; sa — with; paricchadau — equipment.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] As Lord Govinda was thinking in this way, two chariots as effulgent as the sun suddenly descended from the sky. They were complete with drivers and equipment.

Text 12
आयुधानि च दिव्यानि पुराणानि यद‍ृच्छया ।
द‍ृष्ट्वा तानि हृषीकेश: सङ्कर्षणमथाब्रवीत् ॥ १२ ॥
āyudhāni ca divyāni
purāṇāni yadṛcchayā
dṛṣṭvā tāni hṛṣīkeśaḥ
saṅkarṣaṇam athābravīt
Synonyms
āyudhāni — weapons; ca — and; divyāni — divine; purāṇāni — ancient; yadṛcchayā — automatically; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; tāni — them; hṛṣīkeśaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; saṅkarṣaṇam — to Lord Balarāma; atha — then; abravīt — He spoke.

Translation
The Lord’s eternal divine weapons also appeared before Him spontaneously. Seeing these, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Lord of the senses, addressed Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa.

Texts 13-14
पश्यार्य व्यसनं प्राप्तं यदूनां त्वावतां प्रभो ।
एष ते रथ आयातो दयितान्यायुधानि च ॥ १३ ॥
एतदर्थं हि नौ जन्म साधूनामीश शर्मकृत् ।
त्रयोविंशत्यनीकाख्यं भूमेर्भारमपाकुरु ॥ १४ ॥
paśyārya vyasanaṁ prāptaṁ
yadūnāṁ tvāvatāṁ prabho
eṣa te ratha āyāto
dayitāny āyudhāni ca
etad-arthaṁ hi nau janma
sādhūnām īśa śarma-kṛt
trayo-viṁśaty-anīkākhyaṁ
bhūmer bhāram apākuru
Synonyms
paśya — please see; ārya — respected one; vyasanam — the danger; prāptam — now present; yadūnām — for the Yadus; tvā — by You; avatām — who are protected; prabho — My dear master; eṣaḥ — this; te — Your; rathaḥ — chariot; āyātaḥ — has come; dayitāni — favorite; āyudhāni — weapons; ca — and; etat-artham — for this purpose; hi — indeed; nau — Our; janma — birth; sādhūnām — of the saintly devotees; īśa — O Lord; śarma — the benefit; kṛt — doing; trayaḥ-viṁśati — twenty-three; anīka — armies; ākhyam — in terms of; bhūmeḥ — of the earth; bhāram — burden; apākuru — please remove.

Translation
[The Supreme Lord said:] My respected elder brother, see this danger which has beset Your dependents, the Yadus! And see, dear master, how Your personal chariot and favorite weapons have come before You. The purpose for which We have taken birth, My Lord, is to secure the welfare of Our devotees. Please now remove from the earth the burden of these twenty-three armies.

Text 15
एवं सम्मन्‍त्र्य दाशार्हौ दंशितौ रथिनौ पुरात् ।
निर्जग्मतु: स्वायुधाढ्यौ बलेनाल्पीयसा वृतौ ॥ १५ ॥
evaṁ sammantrya dāśārhau
daṁśitau rathinau purāt
nirjagmatuḥ svāyudhāḍhyau
balenālpīyasā vṛtau
Synonyms
evam — thus; sammantrya — inviting Him; dāśārhau — the two descendants of Daśārha (Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma); daṁśitau — wearing armor; rathinau — riding Their chariots; purāt — from the city; nirjagmatuḥ — went out; sva — Their own; āyudha — with weapons; āḍhyau — resplendent; balena — by a force; alpīyasā — very small; vṛtau — accompanied.

Translation
After Lord Kṛṣṇa had thus invited His brother, the two Dāśārhas, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, wearing armor and displaying Their resplendent weapons, drove out of the city in Their chariots. Only a very small contingent of soldiers accompanied Them.

Text 16
शङ्खं दध्मौ विनिर्गत्य हरिर्दारुकसारथि: ।
ततोऽभूत् परसैन्यानां हृदि वित्रासवेपथु: ॥ १६ ॥
śaṅkhaṁ dadhmau vinirgatya
harir dāruka-sārathiḥ
tato ’bhūt para-sainyānāṁ
hṛdi vitrāsa-vepathuḥ
Synonyms
śaṅkham — His conchshell; dadhmau — blew; vinirgatya — upon going out; hariḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; dāruka-sārathiḥ — whose chariot driver was Dāruka; tataḥ — thereupon; abhūt — arose; para — of the enemy; sainyānām — among the soldiers; hṛdi — in their hearts; vitrāsa — in terror; vepathuḥ — trembling.

Translation
As Lord Kṛṣṇa came out of the city with Dāruka at the reins of His chariot, He blew His conchshell, and the enemy soldiers’ hearts began to tremble with fear.

Text 17
तावाह मागधो वीक्ष्य हे कृष्ण पुरुषाधम ।
न त्वया योद्धुमिच्छामि बालेनैकेन लज्जया ।
गुप्तेन हि त्वया मन्द न योत्स्ये याहि बन्धुहन् ॥ १७ ॥
tāv āha māgadho vīkṣya
he kṛṣṇa puruṣādhama
na tvayā yoddhum icchāmi
bālenaikena lajjayā
guptena hi tvayā manda
na yotsye yāhi bandhu-han
Synonyms
tau — to the two of Them; āha — said; māgadhaḥ — Jarāsandha; vīkṣya — watching; he kṛṣṇa — O Kṛṣṇa; puruṣa-adhama — lowest of men; na — not; tvayā — with You; yoddhum — to fight; icchāmi — do I want; bālena — with a boy; ekena — alone; lajjayā — shamefully; guptena — hidden; hi — indeed; tvayā — with You; manda — O fool; na yotsye — I will not fight; yāhi — go away; bandhu — of relatives; han — O killer.

Translation
Jarāsandha looked at the two of Them and said: O Kṛṣṇa, lowest of men! I do not wish to fight alone with You, since it would be a shame to fight with a mere boy. You fool who keep Yourself hidden, O murderer of Your relatives, go away! I will not fight with You.

Text 18
तव राम यदि श्रद्धा युध्यस्व धैर्यमुद्वह ।
हित्वा वा मच्छरैश्छिन्नं देहं स्वर्याहि मां जहि ॥ १८ ॥
tava rāma yadi śraddhā
yudhyasva dhairyam udvaha
hitvā vā mac-charaiś chinnaṁ
dehaṁ svar yāhi māṁ jahi
Synonyms
tava — Your; rāma — O Balarāma; yadi — if; śraddhā — confidence; yudhyasva — fight; dhairyam — courage; udvaha — take up; hitvā — leaving aside; vā — either; mat — my; śaraiḥ — by the arrows; chinnam — cut to pieces; deham — Your body; svaḥ — to heaven; yāhi — go; mām — (or else) me; jahi — kill.

Translation
You, Rāma, should gather Your courage and fight with me, if You think You can do it. You may either give up Your body when it is cut to pieces by my arrows, and thus attain to heaven, or else kill me.

Text 19
श्रीभगवानुवाच
न वै शूरा विकत्थन्ते दर्शयन्त्येव पौरुषम् ।
न गृह्णीमो वचो राजन्नातुरस्य मुमूर्षत: ॥ १९ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
na vai śūrā vikatthante
darśayanty eva pauruṣam
na gṛhṇīmo vaco rājann
āturasya mumūrṣataḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Lord said; na — do not; vai — indeed; śūrāḥ — heroes; vikatthante — boast vainly; darśayanti — they show; eva — simply; pauruṣam — their prowess; na gṛhṇīmaḥ — We do not accept; vacaḥ — the words; rājan — O King; āturasya — of one who is mentally agitated; mumūrṣataḥ — who is about to die.

Translation
The Supreme Lord said: Real heroes do not simply boast but rather show their prowess in action. We cannot take seriously the words of one who is full of anxiety and who wants to die.

Text 20
श्रीशुक उवाच
जरासुतस्तावभिसृत्य माधवौ
महाबलौघेन बलीयसावृणोत् ।
ससैन्ययानध्वजवाजिसारथी
सूर्यानलौ वायुरिवाभ्ररेणुभि: ॥ २० ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
jarā-sutas tāv abhisṛtya mādhavau
mahā-balaughena balīyasāvṛnot
sa-sainya-yāna-dhvaja-vāji-sārathī
sūryānalau vāyur ivābhra-reṇubhiḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; jarā-sutaḥ — the son of Jarā; tau — the two of Them; abhisṛtya — going up to; mādhavau — the descendants of Madhu; mahā — great; bala — of military prowess; oghena — with a flood; balīyasā — powerful; āvṛṇot — surrounded; sa — with; sainya — soldiers; yāna — chariots; dhvaja — flags; vāji — horses; sārathī — and charioteers; sūrya — the sun; analau — and a fire; vāyuḥ — the wind; iva — as; abhra — by clouds; reṇubhiḥ — and by particles of dust.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Just as the wind covers the sun with clouds or a fire with dust, the son of Jarā marched toward the two descendants of Madhu and with his huge assemblage of armies surrounded Them and Their soldiers, chariots, flags, horses and charioteers.

Text 21
सुपर्णतालध्वजचिह्नितौ रथा-
वलक्षयन्त्यो हरिरामयोर्मृधे ।
स्‍त्रिय: पुराट्टालकहर्म्यगोपुरं
समाश्रिता: सम्मुमुहु: शुचार्दिता: ॥ २१ ॥
suparṇa-tāla-dhvaja-cihitnau rathāv
alakṣayantyo hari-rāmayor mṛdhe
striyaḥ purāṭṭālaka-harmya-gopuraṁ
samāśritāḥ sammumuhuḥ śucārditaḥ
Synonyms
suparṇa — with (the symbol of) Garuḍa (the bird who carries Lord Viṣṇu); tāla — and the palm tree; dhvaja — by the banners; cihnitau — marked; rathau — the two chariots; alakṣayantyaḥ — not identifying; hari-rāmayoḥ — of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma; mṛdhe — in the battle; striyaḥ — women; pura — of the city; aṭṭālaka — in the watchtowers; harmya — palaces; gopuram — and in the gateways; samāśritāḥ — having taken positions; sammumuhuḥ — fainted; śucā — by grief; arditāḥ — tormented.

Translation
The women stood in the watchtowers, palaces and high gates of the city. When they could no longer see Kṛṣṇa’s and Balarāma’s chariots, identified by banners marked with the emblems of Garuḍa and a palm tree, they were struck with grief and fainted.

Text 22
हरि: परानीकपयोमुचां मुहु:
शिलीमुखात्युल्बणवर्षपीडितम् ।
स्वसैन्यमालोक्य सुरासुरार्चितं
व्यस्फूर्जयच्छार्ङ्गशरासनोत्तमम् ॥ २२ ॥
hariḥ parānīka-payomucāṁ muhuḥ
śilīmukhāty-ulbaṇa-varṣa-pīḍitam
sva-sainyam ālokya surāsurārcitaṁ
vyasphūrjayac chārṅga-śarāsanottamam
Synonyms
hariḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; para — of the enemy; anīka — of the armies; payaḥ-mucām — (which were like) clouds; muhuḥ — repeatedly; śilīmukha — of their arrows; ati — extremely; ulbaṇa — fearsome; varṣa — by the rain; pīḍitam — pained; sva — His own; sainyam — army; ālokya — seeing; sura — by demigods; asura — and demons; arcitam — worshiped; vyasphūrjayat — He twanged; śārṅga — known as Śārṅga; śara-asana — His bow; uttamam — most excellent.

Translation
Seeing His army tormented by the relentless and savage rain of arrows from the massive opposing forces gathered like clouds about Him, Lord Hari twanged His excellent bow, Śārṅga, which both gods and demons worship.

Text 23
गृह्णन् निशङ्गादथ सन्दधच्छरान्
विकृष्य मुञ्चन् शितबाणपूगान् ।
निघ्नन् रथान् कुञ्जरवाजिपत्तीन्
निरन्तरं यद्वदलातचक्रम् ॥ २३ ॥
gṛhṇan niśaṅgād atha sandadhac charān
vikṛṣya muñcan śita-bāṇa-pūgān
nighnan rathān kuñjara-vāji-pattīn
nirantaraṁ yadvad alāta-cakram
Synonyms
gṛhṇan — taking; niśaṅgāt — from His quiver; atha — then; sandadhat — fixing; śarān — arrows; vikṛṣya — pulling back; muñcan — releasing; śita — sharp; bāṇa — of arrows; pūgān — floods; nighnan — striking; rathān — chariots; kuñjara — elephants; vāji — horses; pattīn — and infantrymen; nirantaram — relentlessly; yadvat — just like; alāta-cakram — a burning torch whirled around to make a circle of fire.

Translation
Lord Kṛṣṇa took arrows from His quiver, fixed them on the bowstring, pulled back, and released endless torrents of sharp shafts, which struck the enemy’s chariots, elephants, horses and infantrymen. The Lord shooting His arrows resembled a blazing circle of fire.

Text 24
निर्भिन्नकुम्भा: करिणो निपेतु-
रनेकशोऽश्वा: शरवृक्णकन्धरा: ।
रथा हताश्वध्वजसूतनायका:
पदायतश्छिन्नभुजोरुकन्धरा: ॥ २४ ॥
nirbhinna-kumbhāḥ kariṇo nipetur
anekaśo ’śvāḥ śara-vṛkṇa-kandharāḥ
rathā hatāśva-dhvaja-sūta-nāyakāḥ
padāyataś chinna-bhujoru-kandharāḥ
Synonyms
nirbhinna — split; kumbhāḥ — the protuberances of their foreheads; kariṇaḥ — elephants; nipetuḥ — fell; anekaśaḥ — many at a time; aśvāḥ — horses; śara — by the arrows; vṛkṇa — severed; kandharāḥ — whose necks; rathāḥ — chariots; hata — struck; aśva — whose horses; dhvaja — flags; sūta — drivers; nāyakāḥ — and masters; padāyataḥ — foot soldiers; chinna — cut; bhuja — whose arms; ūru — thighs; kandharāḥ — and shoulders.

Translation
Elephants fell to the ground, their foreheads split open, cavalry horses fell with severed necks, chariots fell with their horses, flags, drivers and masters all shattered, and foot soldiers collapsed with severed arms, thighs and shoulders.

Texts 25-28
सञ्छिद्यमानद्विपदेभवाजिना-
मङ्गप्रसूता: शतशोऽसृगापगा: ।
भुजाहय: पूरुषशीर्षकच्छपा
हतद्विपद्वीपहयग्रहाकुला: ॥ २५ ॥
करोरुमीना नरकेशशैवला
धनुस्तरङ्गायुधगुल्मसङ्कुला: ।
अच्छूरिकावर्तभयानका महा-
मणिप्रवेकाभरणाश्मशर्करा: ॥ २६ ॥
प्रवर्तिता भीरुभयावहा मृधे
मनस्विनां हर्षकरी: परस्परम् ।
विनिघ्नतारीन् मुषलेन दुर्मदान्
सङ्कर्षणेनापरिमेयतेजसा ॥ २७ ॥
बलं तदङ्गार्णवदुर्गभैरवं
दुरन्तपारं मगधेन्द्रपालितम् ।
क्षयं प्रणीतं वसुदेवपुत्रयो-
र्विक्रीडितं तज्जगदीशयो: परम् ॥ २८ ॥
sañchidyamāna-dvipadebha-vājinām
aṅga-prasūtāḥ śataśo ’sṛg-āpagāḥ
bhujāhayaḥ pūruṣa-śīrṣa-kacchapā
hata-dvipa-dvīpa-haya grahākulāḥ
karoru-mīnā nara-keśa-śaivalā
dhanus-taraṅgāyudha-gulma-saṅkulāḥ
acchūrikāvarta-bhayānakā mahā-
maṇi-pravekābharaṇāśma-śarkarāḥ
pravartitā bhīru-bhayāvahā mṛdhe
manasvināṁ harṣa-karīḥ parasparam
vinighnatārīn muṣalena durmadān
saṅkarṣaṇenāparīmeya-tejasā
balaṁ tad aṅgārṇava-durga-bhairavaṁ
duranta-pāraṁ magadhendra-pālitam
kṣayaṁ praṇītaṁ vasudeva-putrayor
vikrīḍitaṁ taj jagad-īśayoḥ param
Synonyms
sañchidyamāna — being cut to pieces; dvi-pada — of the two-legged (humans); ibha — elephants; vājinām — and horses; aṅga — from the limbs; prasūtāḥ — flowing; śataśaḥ — by the hundreds; asṛk — of blood; āpa-gaḥ — rivers; bhuja — arms; ahayaḥ — as the snakes; pūruṣa — of men; śīrṣa — heads; kacchapāḥ — as the turtles; hata — dead; dvipa — with elephants; dvīpa — as islands; haya — and with horses; graha — as crocodiles; ākulāḥ — filled; kara — hands; ūru — and thighs; mīnaḥ — as the fish; nara — human; keśa — hair; śaivalāḥ — as the aquatic weeds; dhanuḥ — with bows; taraṅga — as the waves; āyudha — and with weapons; gulma — as the clumps of bushes; saṅkulāḥ — crowded; acchūrikā — chariot wheels; āvarta — as the whirlpools; bhayānakāḥ — fearful; mahā-maṇi — precious gems; praveka — excellent; ābharaṇa — and ornaments; aśma — as the stones; śarkarāḥ — and gravel; pravartitāḥ — issuing forth; bhīru — for the timid; bhaya-āvahāḥ — terrifying; mṛdhe — on the battlefield; manasvinām — for the intelligent; harṣa-karīḥ — inspiring joy; parasparam — from one to another; vinighnatā — who was striking down; arīn — His enemies; muṣalena — with His plow weapon; durmadān — who were furious; saṅkarṣaṇena — by Lord Balarāma; aparimeya — immeasurable; tejasā — whose potency; balam — military force; tat — that; aṅga — my dear (King Parīkṣit); arṇava — like the ocean; durga — unfathomable; bhairavam — and frightening; duranta — impossible to cross over; pāram — whose limit; magadha-indra — by the King of Magadha, Jarāsandha; pālitam — overseen; kṣayam — to destruction; praṇītam — led; vasudeva-putrayoḥ — for the sons of Vasudeva; vikrīḍitam — play; tat — that; jagat — of the universe; īśayoḥ — for the Lords; param — at most.

Translation
On the battlefield, hundreds of rivers of blood flowed from the limbs of the humans, elephants and horses who had been cut to pieces. In these rivers arms resembled snakes; human heads, turtles; dead elephants, islands; and dead horses, crocodiles. Hands and thighs appeared like fish, human hair like waterweeds, bows like waves, and various weapons like clumps of bushes. The rivers of blood teemed with all of these.

Text 29
स्थित्युद्भ‍वान्तं भुवनत्रयस्य य:
समीहितेऽनन्तगुण: स्वलीलया ।
न तस्य चित्रं परपक्षनिग्रह-
स्तथापि मर्त्यानुविधस्य वर्ण्यते ॥ २९ ॥
sthity-udbhavāntaṁ bhuvana-trayasya yaḥ
samīhite ’nanta-guṇaḥ sva-līlayā
na tasya citraṁ para-pakṣa-nigrahas
tathāpi martyānuvidhasya varṇyate
Synonyms
sthiti — the maintenance; udbhava — creation; antam — and annihilation; bhuvana-trayasya — of the three worlds; yaḥ — who; samīhite — effects; ananta — unlimited; guṇaḥ — whose transcendental qualities; sva-līlayā — as His own pastime; na — not; tasya — for Him; citram — wonderful; para — opposing; pakṣa — of the party; nigrahaḥ — the subduing; tathā api — nevertheless; martya — human beings; anuvidhasya — who is imitating; varṇyate — it is described.

Translation
For Him who orchestrates the creation, maintenance and destruction of the three worlds and who possesses unlimited spiritual qualities, it is hardly amazing that He subdues an opposing party. Still, when the Lord does so, imitating human behavior, sages glorify His acts.

Text 30
जग्राह विरथं रामो जरासन्धं महाबलम् ।
हतानीकावशिष्टासुं सिंह: सिंहमिवौजसा ॥ ३० ॥
jagrāha virathaṁ rāmo
jarāsandhaṁ mahā-balam
hatānīkāvaśiṣṭāsuṁ
siṁhaḥ siṁham ivaujasā
Synonyms
jagrāha — He seized; viratham — who was deprived of his chariot; rāmaḥ — Lord Balarāma; jarāsandham — Jarāsandha; mahā — very; balam — strong; hata — killed; anīka — whose army; avaśiṣṭa — remaining; asum — whose breath; siṁhaḥ — a lion; siṁham — another lion; iva — as; ojasā — forcibly.

Translation
Jarāsandha, with his chariot lost and all his soldiers dead, was left with only his breath. At that point Lord Balarāma forcibly seized the powerful warrior, just as one lion takes hold of another.

Text 31
बध्यमानं हतारातिं पाशैर्वारुणमानुषै: ।
वारयामास गोविन्दस्तेन कार्यचिकीर्षया ॥ ३१ ॥
badhyamānaṁ hatārātiṁ
pāśair vāruṇa-mānuṣaiḥ
vārayām āsa govindas
tena kārya-cikīrṣayā
Synonyms
badhyamānam — in the process of being tied up; hata — who had killed; arātim — his enemies; pāśaiḥ — with ropes; vāruṇa — those of the demigod Varuna; mānuṣaiḥ — and those of ordinary humans; vārayām āsa — checked Him; govindaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; tena — by him (Jarāsandha); kārya — some need; cikīrṣayā — desiring to fulfill.

Translation
With the divine noose of Varuṇa and other, mortal ropes, Balarāma began tying up Jarāsandha, who had killed so many foes. But Lord Govinda still had a purpose to fulfill through Jarāsandha, and thus He asked Balarāma to stop.

Texts 32-33
स मुक्तो लोकनाथाभ्यां व्रीडितो वीरसम्मत: ।
तपसे कृतसङ्कल्पो वारित: पथि राजभि: ॥ ३२ ॥
वाक्यै: पवित्रार्थपदैर्नयनै: प्राकृतैरपि ।
स्वकर्मबन्धप्राप्तोऽयं यदुभिस्ते पराभव: ॥ ३३ ॥
sā mukto loka-nāthābhyāṁ
vrīḍito vīra-sammataḥ
tapase kṛta-saṅkalpo
vāritaḥ pathi rājabhiḥ
vākyaiḥ pavitrārtha-padair
nayanaiḥ prākṛtair api
sva-karma-bandha-prāpto ’yaṁ
yadubhis te parābhavaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he, Jarāsandha; muktaḥ — freed; loka-nāthābhyām — by the two Lords of the universe; vrīḍitaḥ — ashamed; vīra — by heroes; sammataḥ — honored; tapase — to perform austerities; kṛta-saṅkalpaḥ — having made up his mind; vāritaḥ — was stopped; pathi — on the road; rājabhiḥ — by kings; vākyaiḥ — with statements; pavitra — purifying; artha — having meanings; padaiḥ — with words; nayanaiḥ — with reasoning; prākṛtaiḥ — mundane; api — also; sva — own; karma-bandha — due to the unavoidable reactions of past work; prāptaḥ — obtained; ayam — this; yadubhiḥ — by the Yadus; te — your; parābhavaḥ — defeat.

Translation
Jarāsandha, whom fighters had highly honored, was ashamed after being released by the two Lords of the universe, and thus he decided to undergo penances. On the road, however, several kings convinced him with both spiritual wisdom and mundane arguments that he should give up his idea of self-abnegation. They told him, “Your defeat by the Yadus was simply the unavoidable reaction of your past karma.”

Text 34
हतेषु सर्वानीकेषु नृपो बार्हद्रथस्तदा ।
उपेक्षितो भगवता मगधान् दुर्मना ययौ ॥ ३४ ॥
hateṣu sarvānīkeṣu
nṛpo bārhadrathas tadā
upekṣito bhagavatā
magadhān durmanā yayau
Synonyms
hateṣu — having been killed; sarva — all; anīkeṣu — the soldiers of his armies; nṛpaḥ — the king; bārhadrathaḥ — Jarāsandha, the son of Bṛhadratha; tadā — then; upekṣitah — neglected; bhagavatā — by the Supreme Lord; magadhān — to the Magadha kingdom; durmanāḥ — depressed; yayau — he went.

Translation
All of his armies having been killed, and himself neglected by the Personality of Godhead, King Jarāsandha, son of Bṛhadratha, then sadly returned to the kingdom of the Magadhas.

Texts 35-36
मुकुन्दोऽप्यक्षतबलो निस्तीर्णारिबलार्णव: ।
विकीर्यमाण: कुसुमैस्‍त्रीदशैरनुमोदित: ॥ ३५ ॥
माथुरैरुपसङ्गम्य विज्वरैर्मुदितात्मभि: ।
उपगीयमानविजय: सूतमागधवन्दिभि: ॥ ३६ ॥
mukundo ’py akṣata-balo
nistīrṇāri-balārṇavaḥ
vikīryamāṇaḥ kusumais
trīdaśair anumoditaḥ
māthurair upasaṅgamya
vijvarair muditātmabhiḥ
upagīyamāna-vijayaḥ
sūta-māgadha-vandibhiḥ
Synonyms
mukundaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; api — and; akṣata — unbroken; balaḥ — His military force; nistīrṇa — having crossed over; ari — of His enemy; bala — of the armies; arṇavaḥ — the ocean; vikīryamāṇaḥ — having scattered upon Him; kusumaiḥ — flowers; tridaśaiḥ — by the demigods; anumoditaḥ — congratulated; māthuraiḥ — by the people of Mathurā; upasaṅgamya — being met; vijvaraiḥ — who were relieved of their fever; mudita-ātmabhiḥ — who felt great joy; upagīyamāna — being sung about; vijayaḥ — His victory; sūta — by Purāṇic bards; māgadha — panegyrists; vandibhiḥ — and heralds.

Translation
Lord Mukunda had crossed the ocean of His enemy’s armies with His own military force completely intact. He received congratulations from the denizens of heaven, who showered Him with flowers. The people of Mathurā, relieved of their feverish anxiety and filled with joy, came out to meet Him as professional bards, heralds and panegyrists sang in praise of His victory.

Texts 37-38
शङ्खदुन्दुभयो नेदुर्भेरीतूर्याण्यनेकश: ।
वीणावेणुमृदङ्गानि पुरं प्रविशति प्रभौ ॥ ३७ ॥
सिक्तमार्गां हृष्टजनां पताकाभिरभ्यलङ्कृताम् ।
निर्घुष्टां ब्रह्मघोषेण कौतुकाबद्धतोरणाम् ॥ ३८ ॥
śaṅkha-dundubhayo nedur
bherī-tūryāṇy anekaśaḥ
vīṇā-veṇu-mṛdaṅgāni
puraṁ praviśati prabhau
sikta-mārgāṁ hṛṣṭa-janāṁ
patākābhir abhyalaṅkṛtām
nirghuṣṭāṁ brahma-ghoṣeṇa
kautukābaddha-toraṇām
Synonyms
śaṅkha — conchshells; dundubhayaḥ — and kettledrums; neduḥ — sounded; bherī — drums; tūryāṇi — and horns; anekaśaḥ — many at once; vīṇā-veṇu-mṛdaṅgāni — vīṇās, flutes and mṛdaṅga drums; puram — the city (Mathurā); praviśati — as He entered; prabhau — the Lord; sikta — sprinkled with water; mārgām — its boulevards; hṛṣṭa — joyful; janām — its citizens; patākābhiḥ — with banners; abhyalaṅkṛtām — abundantly decorated; nirghuṣṭām — resounding; brahma — of the Vedas; ghoṣeṇa — with chanting; kautuka — festive; ābaddha — ornaments; toraṇām — on its gateways.

Translation
As the Lord entered His city, conchshells and kettledrums sounded, and many drums, horns, vīṇās, flutes and mṛdaṅgas played in concert. The boulevards were sprinkled with water, there were banners everywhere, and the gateways were decorated for the celebration. The citizens were elated, and the city resounded with the chanting of Vedic hymns.

Text 39
निचीयमानो नारीभिर्माल्यदध्यक्षताङ्कुरै: ।
निरीक्ष्यमाण: सस्‍नेहं प्रीत्युत्कलितलोचनै: ॥ ३९ ॥
nicīyamāno nārībhir
mālya-dadhy-akṣatāṅkuraiḥ
nirīkṣyamāṇaḥ sa-snehaṁ
prīty-utkalita-locanaiḥ
Synonyms
nicīyamānaḥ — having scattered upon Him; nārībhiḥ — by the women; mālya — flower garlands; dadhi — yogurt; akṣata — parched rice; aṅkuraiḥ — and sprouts; nirīkṣyamāṇaḥ — being looked on; sa-sneham — affectionately; prīti — out of love; utkalita — opened wide; locanaiḥ — with eyes.

Translation
As the women of the city affectionately looked at the Lord, their eyes wide open with love, they scattered flower garlands, yogurt, parched rice and newly grown sprouts upon Him.

Text 40
आयोधनगतं वित्तमनन्तं वीरभूषणम् ।
यदुराजाय तत् सर्वमाहृतं प्रादिशत्प्रभु: ॥ ४० ॥
āyodhana-gataṁ vittam
anantaṁ vīra-bhūṣaṇam
yadu-rājāya tat sarvam
āhṛtaṁ prādiśat prabhuḥ
Synonyms
āyodhana-gatam — fallen on the battlefield; vittam — the valuables; anantam — countless; vīra — of the heroes; bhūṣaṇam — the ornaments; yadu-rājāya — to the King of the Yadus, Ugrasena; tat — that; sarvam — all; āhṛtam — which was brought; prādiśat — presented; prabhuḥ — the Lord.

Translation
Lord Kṛṣṇa then presented to the Yadu king all the wealth that had fallen on the battlefield — namely, the countless ornaments of the dead warriors.

Text 41
एवं सप्तदशकृत्वस्तावत्यक्षौहिणीबल: ।
युयुधे मागधो राजा यदुभि: कृष्णपालितै: ॥ ४१ ॥
evaṁ saptadaśa-kṛtvas
tāvaty akṣauhiṇī-balaḥ
yuyudhe māgadho rājā
yadubhiḥ kṛṣṇa-pālitaiḥ
Synonyms
evam — in this way; sapta-daśa — seventeen; kṛtvaḥ — times; tāvati — even thus (being defeated); akṣauhiṇī — consisting of entire divisions; balaḥ — his military strength; yuyudhe — fought; māgadhaḥ rājā — the King of Magadha; yadubhiḥ — with the Yadus; kṛṣṇa-pālitaiḥ — protected by Kṛṣṇa.

Translation
Seventeen times the King of Magadha met defeat in this very way. And yet throughout these defeats he fought on with his akṣauhiṇī divisions against the forces of the Yadu dynasty who were protected by Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Text 42
अक्षिण्वंस्तद्ब‍लं सर्वं वृष्णय: कृष्णतेजसा ।
हतेषु स्वेष्वनीकेषु त्यक्तोऽगादरिभिर्नृप: ॥ ४२ ॥
akṣiṇvaṁs tad-balaṁ sarvaṁ
vṛṣṇayaḥ kṛṣṇa-tejasā
hateṣu sveṣv anīkeṣu
tyakto ’gād aribhir nṛpaḥ
Synonyms
akṣiṇvan — they destroyed; tat — his; balam — force; sarvam — entire; vṛṣṇayaḥ — the Vṛṣṇis; kṛṣṇa-tejasā — by the power of Lord Kṛṣṇa; hateṣu — when they were dead; sveṣu — his; anīkeṣu — soldiers; tyaktaḥ — abandoned; agāt — went away; aribhiḥ — by his enemies; nṛpaḥ — the King, Jarāsandha.

Translation
By the power of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Vṛṣṇis would invariably annihilate all of Jarāsandha’s forces, and when all his soldiers had been killed, the King, released by his enemies, would again go away.

Text 43
अष्टादशमसङ्ग्राम आगामिनि तदन्तरा ।
नारदप्रेषितो वीरो यवन: प्रत्यद‍ृश्यत ॥ ४३ ॥
aṣṭādaśama saṅgrāma
āgāmini tad-antarā
nārada-preṣito vīro
yavanaḥ pratyadṛśyata
Synonyms
aṣṭā-daśama — the eighteenth; saṅgrāme — battle; āgāmini — being about to happen; tat-antarā — at that instant; nārada — by the sage Nārada; preṣitaḥ — sent; vīraḥ — a fighter; yavanaḥ — a barbarian (named Kālayavana); pratyadṛśyata — appeared.

Translation
Just as the eighteenth battle was about to take place, a barbarian warrior named Kālayavana, sent by Nārada, appeared on the battlefield.

Text 44
रुरोध मथुरामेत्य तिसृभिर्म्‍लेच्छकोटिभि: ।
नृलोके चाप्रतिद्वन्द्वो वृष्णीन्श्रुत्वात्मसम्मितान् ॥ ४४ ॥
rurodha mathurām etya
tisṛbhir mleccha-koṭibhiḥ
nṛ-loke cāpratidvandvo
vṛṣṇīn śrutvātma-sammitān
Synonyms
rurodha — he besieged; mathurām — Mathurā; etya — arriving there; tisṛbhiḥ — times three; mleccha — with barbarians; koṭibhiḥ — ten million; nṛ-loke — among mankind; ca — and; apratidvandvaḥ — having no suitable rival; vṛṣṇīn — the Vṛṣṇis; śrutvā — hearing; ātma — to himself; sammitān — comparable.

Translation
Arriving at Mathurā, this Yavana laid siege to the city with thirty million barbarian soldiers. He had never found a human rival worth fighting, but he had heard that the Vṛṣṇis were his equals.

Text 45
तं द‍ृष्ट्वाचिन्तयत् कृष्ण: सङ्कर्षणसहायवान् ।
अहो यदूनां वृजिनं प्राप्तं ह्युभयतो महत् ॥ ४५ ॥
taṁ dṛṣṭvācintayat kṛṣṇaḥ
saṅkarṣaṇa sahāyavān
aho yadūnāṁ vṛjinaṁ
prāptaṁ hy ubhayato mahat
Synonyms
tam — him; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; acintayat — thought; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; saṅkarṣaṇa — by Lord Balarāma; sahāya-van — assisted; aho — ah; yadūnām — for the Yadus; vṛjinam — a problem; prāptam — arrived; hi — indeed; ubhayataḥ — from both sides (from Kālayavana and also from Jarāsandha); mahat — great.

Translation
When Lord Kṛṣṇa and Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa saw Kālayavana, Kṛṣṇa thought about the situation and said, “Ah, a great danger now threatens the Yadus from two sides.

Text 46
यवनोऽयं निरुन्धेऽस्मानद्य तावन्महाबल: ।
मागधोऽप्यद्य वा श्वो वा परश्वो वागमिष्यति ॥ ४६ ॥
yavano ’yaṁ nirundhe ’smān
adya tāvan mahā-balaḥ
māgadho ’py adya vā śvo vā
paraśvo vāgamiṣyati
Synonyms
yavanaḥ — foreign barbarian; ayam — this; nirundhe — is opposing; asmān — us; adya — today; tāvat — as much; mahā-balaḥ — greatly powerful; māgadhaḥ — Jarāsandha; api — also; adya — today; vā — or; śvaḥ — tomorrow; vā — or; para-śvaḥ — the day after tomorrow; vā — or; āgamiṣyati — will come.

Translation
“This Yavana is besieging us already, and the mighty King of Magadha will soon arrive here, if not today then tomorrow or the next day.

Text 47
आवयो: युध्यतोरस्य यद्यागन्ता जरासुत: ।
बन्धून् हनिष्यत्यथवा नेष्यते स्वपुरं बली ॥ ४७ ॥
āvayoḥ yudhyator asya
yady āgantā jarā-sutaḥ
bandhūn haniṣyaty atha vā
neṣyate sva-puraṁ balī
Synonyms
āvayoḥ — the two of Us; yudhyatoḥ — while fighting; asya — with him (Kālayavana); yadi — if; āgantā — comes; jarā-sutaḥ — the son of Jarā; bandhūn — Our relatives; haniṣyati — he will kill; atha vā — or else; neṣyate — he will take; sva — to his own; puram — city; balī — strong.

Translation
“If powerful Jarāsandha comes while We two are busy fighting Kālayavana, Jarāsandha may kill Our relatives or else take them away to his capital.

Text 48
तस्मादद्य विधास्यामो दुर्गं द्विपददुर्गमम् ।
तत्र ज्ञातीन् समाधाय यवनं घातयामहे ॥ ४८ ॥
tasmād adya vidhāsyāmo
durgaṁ dvipada-durgamam
tatra jñātīn samādhāya
yavanaṁ ghātayāmahe
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; adya — today; vidhāsyāmaḥ — We will construct; durgam — a fortress; dvipada — to humans; durgamam — insurmountable; tatra — there; jñātīn — Our family members; samādhāya — settling; yavanam — the barbarian; ghātayāmahe — We will kill.

Translation
“Therefore We will immediately construct a fortress that no human force can penetrate. Let Us settle our family members there and then kill the barbarian king.”

Text 49
इति सम्मन्‍त्र्य भगवान् दुर्गं द्वादशयोजनम् ।
अन्त:समुद्रे नगरं कृत्‍स्‍नाद्भ‍ुतमचीकरत् ॥ ४९ ॥
iti sammantrya bhagavān
durgaṁ dvādaśa-yojanam
antaḥ-samudre nagaraṁ
kṛtsnādbhutam acīkarat
Synonyms
iti — thus; sammantrya — consulting; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; durgam — a fortress; dvādaśa-yojanam — twelve yojanas (about one hundred miles); antaḥ — within; samudre — the sea; nagaram — a city; kṛtsna — with everything; adbhutam — wonderful; acīkarat — He had made.

Translation
After thus discussing the matter with Balarāma, the Supreme Personality of Godhead had a fortress twelve yojanas in circumference built within the sea. Inside that fort He had a city built containing all kinds of wonderful things.

Texts 50-53
द‍ृश्यते यत्र हि त्वाष्ट्रं विज्ञानं शिल्पनैपुणम् ।
रथ्याचत्वरवीथीभिर्यथावास्तु विनिर्मितम् ॥ ५० ॥
सुरद्रुमलतोद्यानविचित्रोपवनान्वितम् ।
हेमश‍ृङ्गैर्दिविस्पृग्भि: स्फटिकाट्टालगोपुरै: ॥ ५१ ॥
राजतारकुटै: कोष्ठैर्हेमकुम्भैरलङ्कृतै: ।
रत्नकूतैर्गृहैर्हेमैर्महामारकत स्थलै: ॥ ५२ ॥
वास्तोष्पतीनां च गृहैर्वल्ल‍भीभिश्च निर्मितम् ।
चातुर्वर्ण्यजनाकीर्णं यदुदेवगृहोल्ल‍सत् ॥ ५३ ॥
dṛśyate yatra hi tvāṣṭraṁ
vijñānaṁ śilpa-naipuṇam
rathyā-catvara-vīthībhir
yathā-vāstu vinirmitam
sura-druma-latodyāna-
vicitropavanānvitam
hema-śṛṅgair divi-spṛgbhiḥ
sphaṭikāṭṭāla-gopuraiḥ
rājatārakuṭaiḥ koṣṭhair
hema-kumbhair alaṅkṛtaiḥ
ratna-kūtair gṛhair hemair
mahā-mārakata-sthalaiḥ
vāstoṣpatīnāṁ ca gṛhair
vallabhībhiś ca nirmitam
cātur-varṇya-janākīrṇaṁ
yadu-deva-gṛhollasat
Synonyms
dṛśyate — was seen; yatra — wherein; hi — indeed; tvāṣṭram — of Tvaṣṭā (Viśvakarmā), the architect of the demigods; vijñānam — the scientific knowledge; śilpa — in architecture; naipuṇam — the expertise; rathyā — with main avenues; catvara — courtyards; vīthībhiḥ — and commercial roads; yathā-vāstu — on ample plots of land; vinirmitam — constructed; sura — of the demigods; druma — having trees; latā — and creepers; udyāna — gardens; vicitra — splendid; upavana — and parks; anvitam — containing; hema — gold; śṛṅgaiḥ — having peaks; divi — the sky; spṛgbhiḥ — touching; sphaṭikā — of crystal quartz; aṭṭāla — having upper levels; gopuraiḥ — with gateways; rājata — of silver; ārakuṭaiḥ — and brass; koṣṭhaiḥ — with treasury buildings, warehouses and stables; hema — gold; kumbhaiḥ — by pots; alaṅkṛtaiḥ — decorated; ratna — jeweled; kūtaiḥ — having peaks; gṛhaiḥ — with houses; hemaiḥ — of gold; mahā-mārakata — with precious emeralds; sthalaiḥ — having floors; vāstoḥ — of the households; patīnām — belonging to the presiding deities; ca — and; gṛhaiḥ — with temples; vallabhībhiḥ — with watchtowers; ca — and; nirmitam — constructed; cātuḥ-varṇya — of the four occupational orders; jana — with people; ākīrṇam — filled; yadu-deva — of the Lord of the Yadus, Śrī Kṛṣṇa; gṛha — by the residences; ullasat — beautified.

Translation
In the construction of that city could be seen the full scientific knowledge and architectural skill of Viśvakarmā. There were wide avenues, commercial roads and courtyards laid out on ample plots of land; there were splendid parks, and also gardens stocked with trees and creepers from the heavenly planets. The gateway towers were topped with golden turrets touching the sky, and their upper levels were fashioned of crystal quartz. The gold-covered houses were adorned in front with golden pots and on top with jeweled roofs, and their floors were inlaid with precious emeralds. Beside the houses stood treasury buildings, warehouses, and stables for fine horses, all built of silver and brass. Each residence had a watchtower, and also a temple for its household deity. Filled with citizens of all four social orders, the city was especially beautified by the palaces of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the Yadus.

Text 54
सुधर्मां पारिजातं च महेन्द्र: प्राहिणोद्धरे: ।
यत्र चावस्थितो मर्त्यो मर्त्यधर्मैर्न युज्यते ॥ ५४ ॥
sudharmāṁ pārijātaṁ ca
mahendraḥ prāhiṇod dhareḥ
yatra cāvasthito martyo
martya-dharmair na yujyate
Synonyms
sudharmām — the Sudharmā assembly hall; pārijātam — the pārijāta tree; ca — and; mahā-indraḥ — Lord Indra, King of heaven; prāhiṇot — delivered; hareḥ — to Lord Kṛṣṇa; yatra — in which (Sudharmā); ca — and; avasthitaḥ — situated; martyaḥ — a mortal; martya-dharmaiḥ — by the laws of mortality; na yujyate — is not affected.

Translation
Lord Indra brought Śrī Kṛṣṇa the Sudharmā assembly hall, standing within which a mortal man is not subject to the laws of mortality. Indra also gave the pārijāta tree.

Text 55
श्यामैकवर्णान् वरुणो हयान् शुक्लान्मनोजवान् ।
अष्टौ निधिपति: कोशान् लोकपालो निजोदयान् ॥ ५५ ॥
śyāmaika-varṇān varuṇo
hayān śuklān mano-javān
aṣṭau nidhi-patiḥ kośān
loka-pālo nijodayān
Synonyms
śyāma — dark blue; eka — exclusively; varṇān — colored; varuṇaḥ — Varuṇa, ruler of the oceans; hayān — horses; śuklān — white; manaḥ — (as the) mind; javān — swift; aṣṭau — eight; nidhi-patiḥ — the treasurer of the demigods, Kuvera; kośān — treasures; loka-pālaḥ — the rulers of various planets; nija — their own; udayān — opulences.

Translation
Lord Varuṇa offered horses as swift as the mind, some of which were pure dark-blue, others white. The treasurer of the demigods, Kuvera, gave his eight mystic treasures, and the rulers of various planets each presented their own opulences.

Text 56
यद् यद् भगवता दत्तमाधिपत्यं स्वसिद्धये ।
सर्वं प्रत्यर्पयामासुर्हरौ भूमिगते नृप ॥ ५६ ॥
yad yad bhagavatā dattam
ādhipatyaṁ sva-siddhaye
sarvaṁ pratyarpayām āsur
harau bhūmi-gate nṛpa
Synonyms
yat yat — whatever; bhagavatā — by the Supreme Lord; dattam — given; ādhipatyam — delegated power of control; sva — their own; siddhaye — for facilitating the exercise of authority; sarvam — all; pratyarpayām āsuḥ — they offered back; harau — to Kṛṣṇa; bhūmi — to the earth; gate — come; nṛpa — O King (Parīkṣit).

Translation
The Supreme Lord having come to the earth, O King, these demigods now offered Him whatever powers of control He had previously delegated to them for the exercise of their particular authority.

Text 57
तत्र योगप्रभावेन नीत्वा सर्वजनं हरि: ।
प्रजापालेन रामेण कृष्ण: समनुमन्त्रित: ।
निर्जगाम पुरद्वारात् पद्ममाली निरायुध: ॥ ५७ ॥
tatra yoga-prabhāvena
nītvā sarva-janaṁ hariḥ
prajā-pālena rāmeṇa
kṛṣṇaḥ samanumantritaḥ
nirjagāma pura-dvārāt
padma-mālī nirāyudhaḥ
Synonyms
tatra — there; yoga — of His mystic potency; prabhāvena — by the power; nītvā — bringing; sarva — all; janam — His subjects; hariḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; prajā — of the citizens; pālena — by the protector; rāmeṇa — Lord Balarāma; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; samanumantritaḥ — advised; nirjagāma — went out; pura — of the city; dvārāt — by the gate; padma — of lotus flowers; mālī — wearing a garland; nirāyudhaḥ — without weapons.

Translation
After transporting all His subjects to the new city by the power of His mystic Yoga-māyā, Lord Kṛṣṇa consulted with Lord Balarāma, who had remained in Mathurā to protect it. Then, wearing a garland of lotuses but bearing no weapons, Lord Kṛṣṇa went out of Mathurā by its main gate.