Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
इति सर्वे सुसंरब्धा वाहानारुह्य दंशिता: ।
स्वै: स्वैर्बलै: परिक्रान्ता अन्वीयुर्धृतकार्मुका: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
iti sarve su-saṁrabdhā
vāhān āruhya daṁśitāḥ
svaiḥ svair balaiḥ parikrāntā
anvīyur dhṛta-kārmukāḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti — thus (speaking); sarve — all of them; su-saṁrabdhāḥ — greatly angered; vāhān — their conveyances; āruhya — mounting; daṁśitāḥ — wearing armor; svaiḥ svaiḥ — each by his own; balaiḥ — military force; parikrāntāḥ — surrounded; anvīyuḥ — they followed; dhṛta — holding; kārmukāḥ — their bows.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Having thus spoken, all those infuriated kings donned their armor and mounted their conveyances. Each king, bow in hand, was surrounded by his own army as he went after Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 2
तानापतत आलोक्य यादवानीकयूथपा: ।
तस्थुस्तत्सम्मुखा राजन्विस्फूर्ज्य स्वधनूंषि ते ॥ २ ॥
tān āpatata ālokya
yādavānīka-yūthapāḥ
tasthus tat-sammukhā rājan
visphūrjya sva-dhanūṁṣi te
Synonyms
tān — them; āpatataḥ — in pursuit; ālokya — seeing; yādava-anīka — of the Yādava army; yūtha-paḥ — the officers; tasthuḥ — stood; tat — them; sammukhāḥ — directly facing; rājan — O King (Parīkṣit); visphūrjya — twanging; sva — their; dhanūṁṣi — bows; te — they.

Translation
The commanders of the Yādava army, seeing the enemy racing to attack, turned to face them and stood firm, O King, twanging their bows.

Text 3
अश्वपृष्ठे गजस्कन्धे रथोपस्थेऽस्‍त्र कोविदा: ।
मुमुचु: शरवर्षाणि मेघा अद्रिष्वपो यथा ॥ ३ ॥
aśva-pṛṣṭhe gaja-skandhe
rathopasthe ’stra kovidāḥ
mumucuḥ śara-varṣāṇi
meghā adriṣv apo yathā
Synonyms
aśva-pṛṣṭhe — on horseback; gaja — of elephants; skandhe — on the shoulders; ratha — of chariots; upasthe — on the seats; astra — of weapons; kovidāḥ — those expert in the use; mumucuḥ — released; śara — of arrows; varṣāṇi — rains; meghāḥ — clouds; adriṣu — upon mountains; apaḥ — water; yathā — as.

Translation
Mounted on the backs of horses, the shoulders of elephants and the seats of chariots, the enemy kings, expert with weapons, rained down arrows upon the Yadus like clouds pouring rain on mountains.

Text 4
पत्युर्बलं शरासारैश्छन्नं वीक्ष्य सुमध्यमा ।
सव्रीड्‍मैक्षत्तद्वक्त्रं भयविह्वललोचना ॥ ४ ॥
patyur balaṁ śarāsāraiś
channaṁ vīkṣya su-madhyamā
sa-vrīḍm aikṣat tad-vaktraṁ
bhaya-vihvala-locanā
Synonyms
patyuḥ — of her Lord; balam — the army; śara — of arrows; āsāraiḥ — by heavy rains; channam — covered; vīkṣya — seeing; su-madhyamā — slender-waisted (Rukmiṇī); sa-vrīḍam — shyly; aikṣat — looked; tat — His; vaktram — at the face; bhaya — with fear; vihvala — disturbed; locanā — whose eyes.

Translation
Slender-waisted Rukmiṇī, seeing her Lord’s army covered by torrents of arrows, shyly looked at His face with fear-stricken eyes.

Text 5
प्रहस्य भगवानाह मा स्म भैर्वामलोचने ।
विनङ्‍क्ष्यत्यधुनैवैतत्तावकै: शात्रवं बलम् ॥ ५ ॥
prahasya bhagavān āha
mā sma bhair vāma-locane
vinaṅkṣyaty adhunaivaitat
tāvakaiḥ śātravaṁ balam
Synonyms
prahasya — laughing; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; āha — said; mā sma bhaiḥ — do not be afraid; vāma-locane — O beautiful-eyed one; vinaṅkṣyati — will be destroyed; adhunā eva — just now; etat — this; tāvakaiḥ — by your (army); śātravam — of enemies; balam — force.

Translation
In response the Lord laughed and assured her, “Do not be afraid, beautiful-eyed one. This enemy force is about to be destroyed by your soldiers.”

Text 6
तेषां तद्विक्रमं वीरा गदसङ्कर्षणादय: ।
अमृष्यमाणा नाराचैर्जघ्नुर्हयगजान् रथान् ॥ ६ ॥
teṣāṁ tad-vikramaṁ vīrā
gada-saṅkarṣanādayaḥ
amṛṣyamāṇā nārācair
jaghnur haya-gajān rathān
Synonyms
teṣām — by them (the opposing kings); tat — that; vikramam — show of prowess; vīrāḥ — the heroes; gada — Gada, the younger brother of Lord Kṛṣṇa; saṅkarṣaṇa — Lord Balarāma; ādayaḥ — and others; amṛṣyamāṇāḥ — not tolerating; nārācaiḥ — with arrows made of iron; jaghnuḥ — they struck; haya — horses; gajān — elephants; rathān — and chariots.

Translation
The heroes of the Lord’s army, headed by Gada and Saṅkarṣaṇa, could not tolerate the aggression of the opposing kings. Thus with iron arrows they began to strike down the enemy’s horses, elephants and chariots.

Text 7
पेतु: शिरांसि रथिनामश्विनां गजिनां भुवि ।
सकुण्डलकिरीटानि सोष्णीषाणि च कोटिश: ॥ ७ ॥
petuḥ śirāṁsi rathinām
aśvināṁ gajināṁ bhuvi
sa-kuṇḍala-kirīṭāni
soṣṇīṣāṇi ca koṭiśaḥ
Synonyms
petuḥ — fell; śirāṁsi — the heads; rathinām — of those riding on chariots; aśvinām — of those riding horses; gajinām — of those riding elephants; bhuvi — to the ground; sa — with; kuṇḍala — earrings; kirīṭāni — and helmets; sa — with; uṣṇīṣāṇi — turbans; ca — and; koṭiśaḥ — by the millions.

Translation
The heads of soldiers fighting on chariots, horses and elephants fell to the ground by the millions; some heads wore earrings and helmets, others turbans.

Text 8
हस्ता: सासिगदेष्वासा: करभा ऊरवोऽङ्‍‍घ्रय: ।
अश्वाश्वतरनागोष्ट्रखरमर्त्यशिरांसि च ॥ ८ ॥
hastāḥ sāsi-gadeṣv-āsāḥ
karabhā ūravo ’ṅghrayaḥ
aśvāśvatara-nāgoṣṭra-
khara-martya-śirāṁsi ca
Synonyms
hastāḥ — hands; sa — with; asi — swords; gadā — clubs; iṣu-āsāḥ — bows; karabhāḥ — fingerless hands; ūravaḥ — thighs; aṅghrayaḥ — legs; aśva — of horses; aśvatara — donkeys; nāga — elephants; uṣṭra — camels; khara — wild asses; martya — and humans; śirāṁsi — heads; ca — also.

Translation
Lying all around were thighs, legs and fingerless hands, along with hands clutching swords, clubs and bows, and also the heads of horses, donkeys, elephants, camels, wild asses and humans.

Text 9
हन्यमानबलानीका वृष्णिभिर्जयकाङ्‍‍क्षिभि: ।
राजानो विमुखा जग्मुर्जरासन्धपुर:सरा: ॥ ९ ॥
hanyamāna-balānīkā
vṛṣṇibhir jaya-kāṅkṣibhiḥ
rājāno vimukhā jagmur
jarāsandha-puraḥ-sarāḥ
Synonyms
hanyamāna — being killed; bala-anīkāḥ — whose armies; vṛṣṇibhiḥ — by the Vṛṣṇis; jaya — for victory; kāṅkṣibhiḥ — who were eager; rājānaḥ — the kings; vimukhāḥ — discouraged; jagmuḥ — left; jarāsandha-puraḥ-sarāḥ — headed by Jarāsandha.

Translation
Seeing their armies being struck down by the Vṛṣṇis, who were eager for victory, the kings headed by Jarāsandha were discouraged and left the battlefield.

Text 10
शिशुपालं समभ्येत्य हृतदारमिवातुरम् ।
नष्टत्विषं गतोत्साहं शुष्यद्वदनमब्रुवन् ॥ १० ॥
śiśupālaṁ samabhyetya
hṛta-dāram ivāturam
naṣṭa-tviṣaṁ gatotsāhaṁ
śuṣyad-vadanam abruvan
Synonyms
śiśupālam — Śiśupāla; samabhyetya — approaching; hṛta — stolen; dāram — whose wife; iva — as if; āturam — perturbed; naṣṭa — lost; tviṣam — whose color; gata — gone; utsāham — whose enthusiasm; śuṣyat — dried up; vadanam — whose face; abruvan — they addressed.

Translation
The kings approached Śiśupāla, who was disturbed like a man who has lost his wife. His complexion was drained of color, his enthusiasm was gone, and his face appeared dried up. The kings spoke to him as follows.

Text 11
भो भो: पुरुषशार्दूल दौर्मनस्यमिदं त्यज ।
न प्रियाप्रिययो राजन् निष्ठा देहिषु द‍ृश्यते ॥ ११ ॥
bho bhoḥ puruṣa-śārdūla
daurmanasyam idaṁ tyaja
na priyāpriyayo rājan
niṣṭhā dehiṣu dṛśyate
Synonyms
bhoḥ bhoḥ — O sir; puruṣa — among men; śārdūla — O tiger; daurmana-syam — depressed state of mind; idam — this; tyaja — give up; na — no; priya — of the desirable; apriyayoḥ — or the undesirable; rājan — O King; niṣṭhā — permanence; dehiṣu — among embodied beings; dṛśyate — is seen.

Translation
[Jarāsandha said:] Listen, Śiśupāla, O tiger among men, give up your depression. After all, embodied beings’ happiness and unhappiness is never seen to be permanent, O King.

Text 12
यथा दारुमयी योषित् नृत्यते कुहकेच्छया ।
एवमीश्वरतन्त्रोऽयमीहते सुखदु:खयो: ॥ १२ ॥
yathā dāru-mayī yoṣit
nṛtyate kuhakecchayā
evam īśvara-tantro ’yam
īhate sukha-duḥkhayoḥ
Synonyms
yathā — as; dāru-mayī — made of wood; yoṣit — a woman; nṛtyate — dances; kuhaka — of the showman; icchayā — by the desire; evam — in the same way; īśvara — of the Supreme Lord; tantraḥ — under the control; ayam — this world; īhate — endeavors; sukha — in joy; duḥkhayoḥ — and misery.

Translation
Just as a puppet in the form of a woman dances by the desire of the puppeteer, so this world, controlled by the Supreme Lord, struggles in both happiness and misery.

Text 13
शौरे: सप्तदशाहं वै संयुगानि पराजित: ।
त्रयोविंशतिभि: सैन्यैर्जिग्ये एकमहं परम् ॥ १३ ॥
śaureḥ sapta-daśāhaṁ vai
saṁyugāni parājitaḥ
trayo-viṁśatibhiḥ sainyair
jigye ekam ahaṁ param
Synonyms
śaureḥ — with Kṛṣṇa; sapta-daśa — seventeen; aham — I; vai — indeed; saṁyugāni — battles; parājitaḥ — lost; trayaḥ-viṁśatibhiḥ — twenty-three; sainyaiḥ — with armies; jigye — won; ekam — one; aham — I; param — only.

Translation
In battle with Kṛṣṇa I and my twenty-three armies lost seventeen times; only once did I defeat Him.

Text 14
तथाप्यहं न शोचामि न प्रहृष्यामि कर्हिचित् ।
कालेन दैवयुक्तेन जानन् विद्रावितं जगत् ॥ १४ ॥
tathāpy ahaṁ na śocāmi
na prahṛṣyāmi karhicit
kālena daiva-yuktena
jānan vidrāvitaṁ jagat
Synonyms
tathā api — nonetheless; aham — I; na śocāmi — do not lament; na prahṛṣyāmi — do not rejoice; karhicit — ever; kālena — by time; daiva — with fate; yuktena — conjoined; jānan — knowing; vidrāvitam — driven; jagat — the world.

Translation
But still I never lament or rejoice, because I know this world is driven by time and fate.

Text 15
अधुनापि वयं सर्वे वीरयूथपयूथपा: ।
पराजिता: फल्गुतन्त्रैर्यदुभि: कृष्णपालितै: ॥ १५ ॥
adhunāpi vayaṁ sarve
vīra-yūthapa-yūthapāḥ
parājitāḥ phalgu-tantrair
yadubhiḥ kṛṣṇa-pālitaiḥ
Synonyms
adhunā — now; api — even; vayam — we; sarve — all; vīra — of heroes; yūtha-pa — of the leaders; yūtha-pāḥ — the leaders; parājitāḥ — defeated; phalgu — meager; tantraiḥ — whose entourage; yadubhiḥ — by the Yadus; kṛṣṇa-pālitaiḥ — protected by Kṛṣṇa.

Translation
And now all of us, great commanders of military leaders, have been defeated by the Yadus and their small entourage, who are protected by Kṛṣṇa.

Text 16
रिपवो जिग्युरधुना काल आत्मानुसारिणि ।
तदा वयं विजेष्यामो यदा काल: प्रदक्षिण: ॥ १६ ॥
ripavo jigyur adhunā
kāla ātmānusāriṇi
tadā vayaṁ vijeṣyāmo
yadā kālaḥ pradakṣiṇaḥ
Synonyms
ripavaḥ — our enemies; jigyuḥ — have conquered; adhunā — now; kāle — the time; ātma — them; anusārīṇi — favoring; tadā — then; vayam — we; vijeṣyāmaḥ — shall conquer; yadā — when; kālaḥ — time; pradakṣiṇaḥ — turned toward us.

Translation
Now our enemies have conquered because time favors them, but in the future, when time is auspicious for us, we shall conquer.

Text 17
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं प्रबोधितो मित्रैश्चैद्योऽगात् सानुग: पुरम् ।
हतशेषा: पुनस्तेऽपि ययु: स्वं स्वं पुरं नृपा: ॥ १७ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ prabodhito mitraiś
caidyo ’gāt sānugaḥ puram
hata-śeṣāḥ punas te ’pi
yayuḥ svaṁ svaṁ puraṁ nṛpāḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — thus; prabodhitaḥ — persuaded; mitraiḥ — by his friends; caidyaḥ — Śiśupāla; agāt — went; sa-anugaḥ — with his followers; puram — to his city; hata — from the killed; śeṣāḥ — who remained; punaḥ — again; te — they; api — also; yayuḥ — went; svam svam — each to his own; puram — city; nṛpāḥ — kings.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus persuaded by his friends, Śiśupāla took his followers and went back to his capital. The surviving warriors also returned to their respective cities.

Text 18
रुक्‍मी तु राक्षसोद्वाहं कृष्णद्विडसहन् स्वसु: ।
पृष्ठतोऽन्वगमत् कृष्णमक्षौहिण्या वृतो बली ॥ १८ ॥
rukmī tu rākṣasodvāhaṁ
kṛṣṇa-dviḍ asahan svasuḥ
pṛṣṭhato ’nvagamat kṛṣṇam
akṣauhiṇyā vṛto balī
Synonyms
rukmī — Rukmī; tu — however; rākṣasa — in the style of demons; udvāham — the marriage; kṛṣṇa-dviṭ — the hater of Kṛṣṇa; asahan — unable to bear; svasuḥ — of his sister; pṛṣṭhataḥ — from behind; anvagamat — he followed; kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; akṣauhiṇyā — by an entire akṣauhiṇī division; vṛtaḥ — surrounded; balī — powerful.

Translation
Powerful Rukmī, however, was especially envious of Kṛṣṇa. He could not bear the fact that Kṛṣṇa had carried off his sister to marry her in the Rākṣasa style. Thus he pursued the Lord with an entire military division.

Texts 19-20
रुक्‍म्यमर्षी सुसंरब्ध: श‍ृण्वतां सर्वभूभुजाम् ।
प्रतिजज्ञे महाबाहुर्दंशित: सशरासन: ॥ १९ ॥
अहत्वा समरे कृष्णमप्रत्यूह्य च रुक्‍मिणीम् ।
कुण्डिनं न प्रवेक्ष्यामि सत्यमेतद् ब्रवीमि व: ॥ २० ॥
rukmy amarṣī su-saṁrabdhaḥ
śṛṇvatāṁ sarva-bhūbhujām
pratijajñe mahā-bāhur
daṁśitaḥ sa-śarāsanaḥ
ahatvā samare kṛṣṇam
apratyūhya ca rukmiṇīm
kuṇḍinaṁ na pravekṣyāmi
satyam etad bravīmi vaḥ
Synonyms
rukmī — Rukmī; amarṣī — intolerant; su-saṁrabdhaḥ — extremely angry; śṛṇvatām — while they listened; sarva — all; bhū-bhujām — the kings; pratijajñe — he swore; mahā-bāhuḥ — mighty-armed; daṁśitaḥ — wearing his armor; sa-śarāsanaḥ — with his bow; ahatvā — without killing; samare — in battle; kṛṣṇam — Kṛṣṇa; apratyūhya — without bringing back; ca — and; rukmiṇīm — Rukmiṇī; kuṇḍinam — the city of Kuṇḍina; na pravekṣyāmi — I shall not enter; satyam — in truth; etat — this; bravīmi — I say; vaḥ — to all of you.

Translation
Frustrated and enraged, mighty-armed Rukmī, dressed in armor and wielding his bow, had sworn before all the kings, “I shall not again enter Kuṇḍina if I do not kill Kṛṣṇa in battle and bring Rukmiṇī back with me. I swear this to you.”

Text 21
इत्युक्त्वा रथमारुह्य सारथिं प्राह सत्वर: ।
चोदयाश्वान् यत: कृष्ण: तस्य मे संयुगं भवेत् ॥ २१ ॥
ity uktvā ratham āruhya
sārathiṁ prāha satvaraḥ
codayāśvān yataḥ kṛṣṇaḥ
tasya me saṁyugaṁ bhavet
Synonyms
iti — thus; uktvā — speaking; ratham — on his chariot; āruhya — climbing; sārathim — to his driver; prāha — said; satvaraḥ — quickly; codaya — drive; aśvān — the horses; yataḥ — to where; kṛṣṇaḥ — Kṛṣṇa; tasya — His; me — with me; saṁyugam — fight; bhavet — must be.

Translation
Having said this, he had mounted his chariot and told his charioteer, “Drive the horses quickly to where Kṛṣṇa is. He and I must fight.

Text 22
अद्याहं निशितैर्बाणैर्गोपालस्य सुदुर्मते: ।
नेष्ये वीर्यमदं येन स्वसा मे प्रसभं हृता ॥ २२ ॥
adyāhaṁ niśitair bāṇair
gopālasya su-durmateḥ
neṣye vīrya-madaṁ yena
svasā me prasabhaṁ hṛtā
Synonyms
adya — today; aham — I; niśitaiḥ — sharp; bāṇaiḥ — with my arrows; gopālasya — of the cowherd; su-durmateḥ — whose mentality is most wicked; neṣye — I will remove; vīrya — in His power; madam — the intoxicated pride; yena — by which; svasā — sister; me — my; prasabham — violently; hṛtā — abducted.

Translation
“This wicked-minded cowherd boy, infatuated with His prowess, has violently abducted my sister. But today I will remove His pride with my sharp arrows.”

Text 23
विकत्थमान: कुमतिरीश्वरस्याप्रमाणवित् ।
रथेनैकेन गोविन्दं तिष्ठ तिष्ठेत्यथाह्वयत् ॥ २३ ॥
vikatthamānaḥ kumatir
īśvarasyāpramāṇa-vit
rathenaikena govindaṁ
tiṣṭha tiṣṭhety athāhvayat
Synonyms
vikatthamānaḥ — boasting; ku-matiḥ — foolish; īśvarasya — of the Supreme Lord; apramāṇa-vit — not knowing the dimensions; rathena ekena — with a single chariot; govindam — to Lord Kṛṣṇa; tiṣṭha tiṣṭha — stand and fight; iti — so saying; atha — then; āhvayat — he called.

Translation
Boasting thus, foolish Rukmī, ignorant of the true extent of the Supreme Lord’s power, approached Lord Govinda in his lone chariot and challenged Him, “Just stand and fight!”

Text 24
धनुर्विकृष्य सुद‍ृढं जघ्ने कृष्णं त्रिभि: शरै: ।
आह चात्र क्षणं तिष्ठ यदूनां कुलपांसन ॥ २४ ॥
dhanur vikṛṣya su-dṛḍhaṁ
jaghne kṛṣṇaṁ tribhiḥ śaraiḥ
āha cātra kṣaṇaṁ tiṣṭha
yadūnāṁ kula-pāṁsana
Synonyms
dhanuḥ — his bow; vikṛṣya — drawing; su — very; dṛḍham — firmly; jaghne — he struck; kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; tribhiḥ — with three; śaraiḥ — arrows; āha — he said; ca — and; atra — here; kṣaṇam — a moment; tiṣṭha — stand; yadūnām — of the Yadus; kula — of the dynasty; pāṁsana — O corrupter.

Translation
Rukmī drew his bow with great strength and struck Lord Kṛṣṇa with three arrows. Then he said, “Stand here for a moment, O defiler of the Yadu dynasty!

Text 25
यत्र यासि स्वसारं मे मुषित्वा ध्वाङ्‍क्षवद्धवि: ।
हरिष्येऽद्य मदं मन्द मायिन: कूटयोधिन: ॥ २५ ॥
yatra yāsi svasāraṁ me
muṣitvā dhvāṅkṣa-vad dhaviḥ
hariṣye ’dya madaṁ manda
māyinaḥ kūṭa-yodhinaḥ
Synonyms
yatra — wherever; yāsi — You go; svasāram — sister; me — my; muṣitvā — having stolen; dhvāṅkṣa-vat — like a crow; haviḥ — the sacrificial butter; hariṣye — I will remove; adya — today; madam — Your false pride; manda — You fool; māyinaḥ — of the deceiver; kūṭa — cheating; yodhinaḥ — of the fighter.

Translation
“Wherever You go, carrying off my sister like a crow stealing sacrificial butter, I will follow. This very day I shall relieve You of Your false pride, You fool, You deceiver, You cheater in battle!

Text 26
यावन्न मे हतो बाणै: शयीथा मुञ्च दारीकाम् ।
स्मयन् कृष्णो धनुश्छित्त्वा षड्‍‌भिर्विव्याध रुक्‍मिणम् ॥ २६ ॥
yāvan na me hato bāṇaiḥ
śayīthā muñca dārīkām
smayan kṛṣṇo dhanuś chittvā
ṣaḍbhir vivyādha rukmiṇam
Synonyms
yāvat — while; na — not; me — my; hataḥ — killed; bāṇaiḥ — by the arrows; śayīthaḥ — you lie down; muñca — release; dārīkām — the girl; smayan — smiling; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; dhanuḥ — his bow; chittvā — breaking; ṣaḍbhiḥ — with six (arrows); vivyādha — pierced; rukmiṇam — Rukmī.

Translation
“Release the girl before You are struck dead by my arrows and made to lie down!” In response to this, Lord Kṛṣṇa smiled, and with six arrows He struck Rukmī and broke his bow.

Text 27
अष्टभिश्चतुरो वाहान् द्वाभ्यां सूतं ध्वजं त्रिभि: ।
स चान्यद्धनुराधाय कृष्णं विव्याध पञ्चभि: ॥ २७ ॥
aṣṭabhiś caturo vāhān
dvābhyāṁ sūtaṁ dhvajaṁ tribhiḥ
sa cānyad dhanur ādhāya
kṛṣṇaṁ vivyādha pañcabhiḥ
Synonyms
aṣṭabhiḥ — with eight (arrows); caturaḥ — the four; vāhān — horses; dvābhyām — with two; sūtam — the chariot driver; dhvajam — the flagpole; tribhiḥ — with three; saḥ — he, Rukmī; ca — and; anyat — another; dhanuḥ — bow; ādhāya — taking up; kṛṣṇam — Kṛṣṇa; vivyādha — pierced; pañcabhiḥ — with five.

Translation
The Lord struck Rukmī’s four horses with eight arrows, his chariot driver with two, and the chariot’s flag with three. Rukmī grabbed another bow and struck Lord Kṛṣṇa with five arrows.

Text 28
तैस्ताडित: शरौघैस्तु चिच्छेद धनुरच्युत: ।
पुनरन्यदुपादत्त तदप्यच्छिनदव्यय: ॥ २८ ॥
tais tāditaḥ śaraughais tu
ciccheda dhanur acyutaḥ
punar anyad upādatta
tad apy acchinad avyayaḥ
Synonyms
taiḥ — by these; tāḍitaḥ — struck; śara — of arrows; oghaiḥ — floods; tu — although; ciccheda — broke; dhanuḥ — (Rukmī’s) bow; acyutaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; punaḥ — again; anyat — another; upādatta — he (Rukmī) picked up; tat — that; api — also; acchinat — broke; avyayaḥ — the infallible Lord.

Translation
Although hit by these many arrows, Lord Acyuta again broke Rukmī’s bow. Rukmī picked up yet another bow, but the infallible Lord broke that one to pieces as well.

Text 29
परिघं पट्टिशं शूलं चर्मासी शक्तितोमरौ ।
यद् यदायुधमादत्त तत्सर्वं सोऽच्छिनद्धरि: ॥ २९ ॥
parighaṁ paṭṭiśaṁ śūlaṁ
carmāsī śakti-tomarau
yad yad āyudham ādatta
tat sarvaṁ so ’cchinad dhariḥ
Synonyms
parigham — spiked iron bludgeon; paṭṭiśam — three-pointed spear; śūlam — lance; carma-asī — shield and sword; śakti — pike; tomarau — javelin; yat yat — whatever; āyudham — weapon; ādatta — he took up; tat sarvam — all of them; saḥ — He; acchinat — broke; hariḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Translation
Iron bludgeon, three-pointed spear, sword and shield, pike, javelin — whatever weapon Rukmī picked up, Lord Hari smashed it to bits.

Text 30
ततो रथादवप्लुत्य खड्‍गपाणिर्जिघांसया ।
कृष्णमभ्यद्रवत् क्रुद्ध: पतङ्ग इव पावकम् ॥ ३० ॥
tato rathād avaplutya
khaḍga-pāṇir jighāṁsayā
kṛṣṇam abhyadravat kruddhaḥ
pataṅga iva pāvakam
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; rathāt — from his chariot; avaplutya — leaping down; khaḍga — a sword; paṇiḥ — in his hand; jighāṁsayā — with the desire to kill; kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; abhyadravat — he ran toward; kruddhaḥ — furious; pataṅgaḥ — a bird; iva — as; pāvakam — the wind.

Translation
Then Rukmī leaped down from his chariot and, sword in hand, rushed furiously toward Kṛṣṇa to kill Him, like a bird flying into the wind.

Text 31
तस्य चापतत: खड्‍गं तिलशश्चर्म चेषुभि: ।
छित्त्वासिमाददे तिग्मं रुक्‍मिणं हन्तुमुद्यत: ॥ ३१ ॥
tasya cāpatataḥ khaḍgaṁ
tilaśaś carma ceṣubhiḥ
chittvāsim ādade tigmaṁ
rukmiṇaṁ hantum udyataḥ
Synonyms
tasya — of him; ca — and; āpatataḥ — who was attacking; khaḍgam — the sword; tilaśaḥ — into small pieces; carma — the shield; ca — and; iṣubhiḥ — with His arrows; chittvā — breaking; asim — His sword; ādade — He took; tigmam — sharp; rukmiṇam — Rukmī; hantum — to kill; udyataḥ — prepared.

Translation
As Rukmī attacked Him, the Lord shot arrows that broke Rukmī’s sword and shield into small pieces. Kṛṣṇa then took up His own sharp sword and prepared to kill Rukmī.

Text 32
द‍ृष्ट्वा भ्रातृवधोद्योगं रुक्‍मिणी भयविह्वला ।
पतित्वा पादयोर्भर्तुरुवाच करुणं सती ॥ ३२ ॥
dṛṣṭvā bhrātṛ-vadhodyogaṁ
rukmiṇī bhaya-vihvalā
patitvā pādayor bhartur
uvāca karuṇaṁ satī
Synonyms
dṛṣṭvā — seeing; bhrātṛ — her brother; vadha — to kill; udyogam — the attempt; rukmiṇī — Śrīmatī Rukmiṇī; bhaya — by fear; vihvalā — agitated; patitvā — falling; pādayoḥ — at the feet; bhartuḥ — of her husband; uvāca — spoke; karuṇam — pathetically; satī — saintly.

Translation
Seeing Lord Kṛṣṇa ready to kill her brother, saintly Rukmiṇī was filled with alarm. She fell at her husband’s feet and piteously spoke as follows.

Text 33
श्रीरुक्‍मिण्युवाच
योगेश्वराप्रमेयात्मन् देवदेव जगत्पते ।
हन्तुं नार्हसि कल्याण भ्रातरं मे महाभुज ॥ ३३ ॥
śrī-rukmiṇy uvāca
yogeśvarāprameyātman
deva-deva jagat-pate
hantuṁ nārhasi kalyāṇa
bhrātaraṁ me mahā-bhuja
Synonyms
śrī-rukmiṇī uvāca — Śrī Rukmiṇī said; yoga-īśvara — O controller of all mystic power; aprameya-ātman — O immeasurable one; deva-deva — O Lord of lords; jagat-pate — O master of the universe; hantum na arhasi — please do not kill; kalyāṇa — O all auspicious one; bhrātaram — brother; me — my; mahā-bhuja — O mighty-armed one.

Translation
Śrī Rukmiṇī said: O controller of all mystic power, immeasurable one, Lord of lords, master of the universe! O all auspicious and mighty-armed one, please do not kill my brother!

Text 34
श्रीशुक उवाच
तया परित्रासविकम्पिताङ्गया
शुचावशुष्यन्मुखरुद्धकण्ठया ।
कातर्यविस्रंसितहेममालया
गृहीतपाद: करुणो न्यवर्तत ॥ ३४ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
tayā paritrāsa-vikampitāṅgayā
śucāvaśuṣyan-mukha-ruddha-kaṇṭhayā
kātarya-visraṁsita-hema-mālayā
gṛhīta-pādaḥ karuṇo nyavartata
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tayā — by her; paritrāsa — in total fear; vikampita — trembling; aṅgayā — whose limbs; śucā — out of sorrow; avaśuṣyat — drying up; mukha — whose mouth; ruddha — and choked; kaṇṭhayā — whose throat; kātarya — in her agitation; visraṁsita — disheveled; hema — golden; mālayā — whose necklace; gṛhīta — held; pādaḥ — His feet; karuṇaḥ — compassionate; nyavartata — He desisted.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Rukmiṇī’s utter fear caused her limbs to tremble and her mouth to dry up, while her throat choked up out of sorrow. And in her agitation her golden necklace scattered. She grasped Kṛṣṇa’s feet, and the Lord, feeling compassionate, desisted.

Text 35
चैलेन बद्ध्वा तमसाधुकारीणं
सश्मश्रुकेशं प्रवपन् व्यरूपयत् ।
तावन्ममर्दु: परसैन्यमद्भ‍ुतं
यदुप्रवीरा नलिनीं यथा गजा: ॥ ३५ ॥
cailena baddhvā tam asādhu-kārīṇaṁ
sa-śmaśru-keśaṁ pravapan vyarūpayat
tāvan mamarduḥ para-sainyam adbhutaṁ
yadu-pravīrā nalinīṁ yathā gajāḥ
Synonyms
cailena — with a strip of cloth; baddhvā — tying up; tam — him; asādhu-kāriṇam — the evil-doer; sa-śmaśru-keśam — leaving some of his mustache and hair remaining; pravapan — by shaving him; vyarūpayat — made him disfigured; tāvat — by then; mamarduḥ — they had crushed; para — opposing; sainyam — the army; adbhutam — extraordinary; yadu-pravīrāḥ — the heroes of the Yadu dynasty; nalinīm — a lotus flower; yathā — as; gajāḥ — elephants.

Translation
Lord Kṛṣṇa tied up the evil-doer with a strip of cloth. He then proceeded to disfigure Rukmī by comically shaving him, leaving parts of his mustache and hair. By that time the Yadu heroes had crushed the extraordinary army of their opponents, just as elephants crush a lotus flower.

Text 36
कृष्णान्तिकमुपव्रज्य दद‍ृशुस्तत्र रुक्‍मिणम् ।
तथाभूतं हतप्रायं द‍ृष्ट्वा सङ्कर्षणो विभु: ।
विमुच्य बद्धं करुणो भगवान् कृष्णमब्रवीत् ॥ ३६ ॥
kṛṣṇāntikam upavrajya
dadṛśus tatra rukmiṇam
tathā-bhūtaṁ hata-prāyaṁ
dṛṣṭvā saṅkarṣaṇo vibhuḥ
vimucya baddhaṁ karuṇo
bhagavān kṛṣṇam abravīt
Synonyms
kṛṣṇa — of Kṛṣṇa; antikam — the proximity; upavrajya — approaching; dadṛśuḥ — they (the Yadu soldiers) saw; tatra — there; rukmiṇam — Rukmī; tathā-bhūtam — in such a condition; hata — dead; prāyam — practically; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; saṅkarṣaṇaḥ — Balarāma; vibhuḥ — the omnipotent; vimucya — releasing; baddham — the bound-up (Rukmī); karuṇaḥ — compassionate; bhagavān — the Lord; kṛṣṇam — to Kṛṣṇa; abravīt — said.

Translation
As the Yadus approached Lord Kṛṣṇa, they saw Rukmī in this sorry condition, practically dying of shame. When the all-powerful Lord Balarāma saw Rukmī, He compassionately released him and spoke the following to Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 37
असाध्विदं त्वया कृष्ण कृतमस्मज्जुगुप्सितम् ।
वपनं श्मश्रुकेशानां वैरूप्यं सुहृदो वध: ॥ ३७ ॥
asādhv idaṁ tvayā kṛṣṇa
kṛtam asmaj-jugupsitam
vapanaṁ śmaśru-keśānāṁ
vairūpyaṁ suhṛdo vadhaḥ
Synonyms
asādhu — improperly; idam — this; tvayā — by You; kṛṣṇa — O Kṛṣṇa; kṛtam — done; asmat — for Us; jugupsitam — terrible; vapanam — the shaving; śmaśru-keśānām — of his mustache and hair; vairūpyam — the disfigurement; suhṛdaḥ — of a family member; vadhaḥ — death.

Translation
[Lord Balarāma said:] My dear Kṛṣṇa, You have acted improperly! This deed will bring shame on Us, for to disfigure a close relative by shaving off his mustache and hair is as good as killing him.

Text 38
मैवास्मान् साध्व्यसूयेथा भ्रातुर्वैरूप्यचिन्तया ।
सुखदु:खदो न चान्योऽस्ति यत: स्वकृतभुक् पुमान् ॥ ३८ ॥
maivāsmān sādhvy asūyethā
bhrātur vairūpya-cintayā
sukha-duḥkha-do na cānyo ’sti
yataḥ sva-kṛta-bhuk pumān
Synonyms
mā — please do not; eva — indeed; asmān — toward Us; sādhvi — O saintly lady; asūyethāḥ — feel inimical; bhrātuḥ — of your brother; vairūpya — over the disfigurement; cintayā — out of concern; sukha — of happiness; duḥkha — and unhappiness; daḥ — bestower; na — not; ca — and; anyaḥ — anyone else; asti — there is; yataḥ — since; sva — of his own; kṛta — action; bhuk — the sufferer of the reaction; pumān — a man.

Translation
Saintly lady, please do not be displeased with Us out of anxiety for your brother’s disfigurement. No one but oneself is responsible for one’s joy and grief, for a man experiences the result of his own deeds.

Text 39
बन्धुर्वधार्हदोषोऽपि न बन्धोर्वधमर्हति ।
त्याज्य: स्वेनैव दोषेण हत: किं हन्यते पुन: ॥ ३९ ॥
bandhur vadhārha-doṣo ’pi
na bandhor vadham arhati
tyājyaḥ svenaiva doṣeṇa
hataḥ kiṁ hanyate punaḥ
Synonyms
bandhuḥ — a relative; vadha — being killed; arha — which merits; doṣaḥ — whose wrong-doing; api — even though; na — not; bandhoḥ — from a relative; vadham — being killed; arhati — deserves; tyājyaḥ — to be cast out; svena eva — by his own; doṣeṇa — fault; hataḥ — killed; kim — why; hanyate — is to be killed; punaḥ — again.

Translation
[Again addressing Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma said:] A relative should not be killed even if his wrongdoing warrants capital punishment. Rather, he should be thrown out of the family. Since he has already been killed by his own sin, why kill him again?

Text 40
क्षत्रियाणामयं धर्म: प्रजापतिविनिर्मित: ।
भ्रातापि भ्रातरं हन्याद् येन घोरतमस्तत: ॥ ४० ॥
kṣatriyāṇām ayaṁ dharmaḥ
prajāpati-vinirmitaḥ
bhrātāpi bhrātaraṁ hanyād
yena ghoratamas tataḥ
Synonyms
kṣatriyāṇām — of warriors; ayam — this; dharmaḥ — code of sacred duty; prajāpati — by the original progenitor, Lord Brahmā; vinirmitaḥ — established; bhrātā — a brother; api — even; bhrātaram — his brother; hanyāt — has to kill; yena — by which (code); ghora-tamaḥ — most terrible; tataḥ — therefore.

Translation
[Turning to Rukmiṇī, Balarāma continued:] The code of sacred duty for warriors established by Lord Brahmā enjoins that one may have to kill even his own brother. That is indeed a most dreadful law.

Text 41
राज्यस्य भूमेर्वित्तस्य स्‍त्रियो मानस्य तेजस: ।
मानिनोऽन्यस्य वा हेतो: श्रीमदान्धा: क्षिपन्ति हि ॥ ४१ ॥
rājyasya bhūmer vittasya
striyo mānasya tejasaḥ
mānino ’nyasya vā hetoḥ
śrī-madāndhāḥ kṣipanti hi
Synonyms
rājyasya — of kingdom; bhūmeḥ — of land; vittasya — of wealth; striyaḥ — of a woman; mānasya — of honor; tejasaḥ — of power; māninaḥ — those who are proud; anyasya — of something else; vā — or; hetoḥ — for the reason; śrī — in their opulence; mada — by their intoxication; andhāḥ — blinded; kṣipanti — they commit insult; hi — indeed.

Translation
[Again Balarāma addressed Kṛṣṇa:] Blinded by conceit with their personal opulences, proud men offend others for the sake of such things as kingdom, land, wealth, women, honor and power.

Text 42
तवेयं विषमा बुद्धि: सर्वभूतेषु दुर्हृदाम् ।
यन्मन्यसे सदाभद्रं सुहृदां भद्रमज्ञवत् ॥ ४२ ॥
taveyaṁ viṣamā buddhiḥ
sarva-bhūteṣu durhṛdām
yan manyase sadābhadraṁ
suhṛdāṁ bhadram ajña-vat
Synonyms
tava — your; iyam — this; viṣamā — biased; buddhiḥ — attitude; sarva-bhūteṣu — toward all living beings; durhṛdām — of those who have ill intentions; yat — that; manyase — you wish; sadā — always; abhadram — evil; suhṛdām — to your well-wishers; bhadram — good; ajña-vat — like an ignorant person.

Translation
[To Rukmiṇī Balarāma said:] Your attitude is unfair, for like an ignorant person you wish good to those who are inimical to all living beings and who have done evil to your true well-wishers.

Text 43
आत्ममोहो नृणामेव कल्पते देवमायया ।
सुहृद् दुर्हृदुदासीन इति देहात्ममानिनाम् ॥ ४३ ॥
ātma-moho nṛṇām eva
kalpate deva-māyayā
suhṛd durhṛd udāsīna
iti dehātma-māninām
Synonyms
ātma — about the self; mohaḥ — the bewilderment; nṛṇām — of men; eva — only; kalpate — is effected; deva — of the Supreme Lord; māyayā — by the illusory, material energy; suhṛt — a friend; durhṛt — an enemy; udāsīnaḥ — a neutral party; iti — thus thinking; deha — the body; ātma — as the self; māninām — for those who consider.

Translation
The Supreme Lord’s Māyā makes men forget their real selves, and thus, taking the body for the self, they consider others to be friends, enemies or neutral parties.

Text 44
एक एव परो ह्यात्मा सर्वेषामपि देहिनाम् ।
नानेव गृह्यते मूढैर्यथा ज्योतिर्यथा नभ: ॥ ४४ ॥
eka eva paro hy ātmā
sarveṣām api dehinām
nāneva gṛhyate mūḍhair
yathā jyotir yathā nabhaḥ
Synonyms
ekaḥ — one; eva — only; paraḥ — the Supreme; hi — indeed; ātmā — Soul; sarveṣām — among all; api — and; dehinām — embodied beings; nānā — many; iva — as if; gṛhyate — is perceived; mūḍhaiḥ — by those who are bewildered; yathā — as; jyotiḥ — a celestial body; yathā — as; nabhaḥ — the sky.

Translation
Those who are bewildered perceive the one Supreme Soul, who resides in all embodied beings, as many, just as one may perceive the light in the sky, or the sky itself, as many.

Text 45
देह आद्यन्तवानेष द्रव्यप्राणगुणात्मक: ।
आत्मन्यविद्यया क्लृप्त: संसारयति देहिनम् ॥ ४५ ॥
deha ādy-antavān eṣa
dravya-prāṇa-guṇātmakaḥ
ātmany avidyayā kḷptaḥ
saṁsārayati dehinam
Synonyms
dehaḥ — the material body; ādi — beginning; anta — and end; vān — having; eṣaḥ — this; dravya — of the physical elements; prāṇa — the senses; guṇa — and the primary modes of material nature (goodness, passion and ignorance); ātmakaḥ — composed; ātmani — on the self; avidyayā — by material ignorance; kḷptaḥ — imposed; saṁsārayati — causes to experience the cycle of birth and death; dehinam — an embodied being.

Translation
This material body, which has a beginning and an end, is composed of the physical elements, the senses and the modes of nature. The body, imposed on the self by material ignorance, causes one to experience the cycle of birth and death.

Text 46
नात्मनोऽन्येन संयोगो वियोगश्चासत: सति ।
तद्धेतुत्वात्तत्प्रसिद्धेर्द‍ृग्‌रूपाभ्यां यथा रवे: ॥ ४६ ॥
nātmano ’nyena saṁyogo
viyogaś casataḥ sati
tad-dhetutvāt tat-prasiddher
dṛg-rūpābhyāṁ yathā raveḥ
Synonyms
na — not; ātmanaḥ — for the self; anyena — with anything else; saṁyogaḥ — contact; viyogaḥ — separation; ca — and; asataḥ — with that which is insubstantial; sati — O discriminating one; tat — from it (the self); hetutvāt — because of originating; tat — by it (the self); prasiddheḥ — because of being revealed; dṛk — with the sense of vision; rūpābhyām — and visible form; yathā — as; raveḥ — for the sun.

Translation
O intelligent lady, the soul never undergoes contact with or separation from insubstantial, material objects, because the soul is their very origin and illuminator. Thus the soul resembles the sun, which neither comes in contact with nor separates from the sense of sight and what is seen.

Text 47
जन्मादयस्तु देहस्य विक्रियानात्मन: क्व‍‍चित् ।
कलानामिव नैवेन्दोर्मृतिर्ह्यस्य कुहूरिव ॥ ४७ ॥
janmādayas tu dehasya
vikriyā nātmanaḥ kvacit
kalānām iva naivendor
mṛtir hy asya kuhūr iva
Synonyms
janma-ādayaḥ — birth and so on; tu — but; dehasya — of the body; vikriyāḥ — transformations; na — not; ātmanaḥ — of the self; kvacit — ever; kalānām — of the phases; iva — as; na — not; eva — indeed; indoḥ — of the moon; mṛtiḥ — the death; hi — indeed; asya — of it; kuhūḥ — the new moon day; iva — as.

Translation
Birth and other transformations are undergone by the body but never by the self, just as change occurs for the moon’s phases but never for the moon, though the new-moon day may be called the moon’s “death.”

Text 48
यथा शयान आत्मानं विषयान् फलमेव च ।
अनुभुङ्क्ते ऽप्यसत्यर्थे तथाप्नोत्यबुधो भवम् ॥ ४८ ॥
yathā śayāna ātmānaṁ
viṣayān phalam eva ca
anubhuṅkte ’py asaty arthe
tathāpnoty abudho bhavam
Synonyms
yathā — as; śayānaḥ — a sleeping person; ātmānam — himself; viṣayān — sense objects; phalam — the fruits; eva — indeed; ca — also; anubhuṅkte — experiences; api — even; asati arthe — in that which is not real; tathā — so; āpnoti — undergoes; abudhaḥ — the unintelligent; bhavam — material existence.

Translation
As a sleeping person perceives himself, the objects of sense enjoyment and the fruits of his acts within the illusion of a dream, so one who is unintelligent undergoes material existence.

Text 49
तस्मादज्ञानजं शोकमात्मशोषविमोहनम् ।
तत्त्वज्ञानेन निर्हृत्य स्वस्था भव शुचिस्मिते ॥ ४९ ॥
tasmād ajñāna-jaṁ śokam
ātma-śoṣa-vimohanam
tattva-jñānena nirhṛtya
sva-sthā bhava śuci-smite
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; ajñāna — out of ignorance; jam — born; śokam — the lamentation; ātma — yourself; śoṣa — drying up; vimohanam — and bewildering; tattva — of the truth; jñānena — with knowledge; nirhṛtya — dispelling; sva-sthā — reinstated in your natural mood; bhava — please be; śuci-smite — O you whose smile is pure.

Translation
Therefore, with transcendental knowledge dispel the grief that is weakening and confounding your mind. Please resume your natural mood, O princess of the pristine smile.

Text 50
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं भगवता तन्वी रामेण प्रतिबोधिता ।
वैमनस्यं परित्यज्य मनो बुद्ध्या समादधे ॥ ५० ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ bhagavatā tanvī
rāmeṇa pratibodhitā
vaimanasyaṁ parityajya
mano buddhyā samādadhe
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — thus; bhagavatā — by the Supreme Lord; tanvī — slender-waisted Rukmiṇī; rāmeṇa — by Balarāma; pratibodhitā — enlightened; vaimanasyam — her depression; parityajya — giving up; manaḥ — her mind; buddhyā — by intelligence; samādadhe — composed.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus enlightened by Lord Balarāma, slender Rukmiṇī forgot her depression and steadied her mind by spiritual intelligence.

Text 51
प्राणावशेष उत्सृष्टो द्विड्‍‌भिर्हतबलप्रभ: ।
स्मरन् विरूपकरणं वितथात्ममनोरथ: ।
चक्रे भोजकटं नाम निवासाय महत्पुरम् ॥ ५१ ॥
prāṇāvaśeṣa utsṛṣṭo
dviḍbhir hata-bala-prabhaḥ
smaran virūpa-karaṇaṁ
vitathātma-manorathaḥ
cakre bhojakaṭaṁ nāma
nivāsāya mahat puram
Synonyms
prāṇa — his life air; avaśeṣaḥ — remaining only; utṣṛṣṭaḥ — expelled; dviḍbhiḥ — by his enemies; hata — destroyed; bala — his strength; prabhaḥ — and bodily effulgence; smaran — remembering; virūpa-karaṇam — his disfigurement; vitatha — frustrated; ātma — his personal; manaḥ-rathaḥ — desires; cakre — he made; bhoja-kaṭam nāma — named Bhojakaṭa; nivāsāya — for his residence; mahat — large; puram — a city.

Translation
Left with only his life air, cast out by his enemies and deprived of his strength and bodily radiance, Rukmī could not forget how he had been disfigured. In frustration he constructed for his residence a large city, which he called Bhojakaṭa.

Text 52
अहत्वा दुर्मतिं कृष्णमप्रत्यूह्य यवीयसीम् ।
कुण्डिनं न प्रवेक्ष्यामीत्युक्त्वा तत्रावसद् रुषा ॥ ५२ ॥
ahatvā durmatiṁ kṛṣṇam
apratyūhya yavīyasīm
kuṇḍinaṁ na pravekṣyāmīty
uktvā tatrāvasad ruṣā
Synonyms
ahatvā — without killing; durmatim — evil-minded; kṛṣṇam — Kṛṣṇa; apratyūhya — without bringing back; yavīyasīm — my younger sister; kuṇḍinam — Kuṇḍina; na pravekṣyāmi — I will not enter; iti — such; uktvā — having spoken; tatra — there (in the same place where he had been disfigured); avasat — he took up residence; ruṣā — in anger.

Translation
Because he had promised “I will not reenter Kuṇḍina until I have killed wicked Kṛṣṇa and brought back my younger sister,” in a mood of angry frustration Rukmī took up residence at that very place.

Text 53
भगवान् भीष्मकसुतामेवं निर्जित्य भूमिपान् ।
पुरमानीय विधिवदुपयेमे कुरूद्वह ॥ ५३ ॥
bhagavān bhīṣmaka-sutām
evaṁ nirjitya bhūmi-pān
puram ānīya vidhi-vad
upayeme kurūdvaha
Synonyms
bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; bhīṣmaka-sutām — the daughter of Bhīṣmaka; evam — thus; nirjitya — defeating; bhūmi-pān — the kings; puram — to His capital; ānīya — bringing; vidhi-vat — in accordance with the injunctions of the Vedas; upayeme — married; kuru-udvaha — O protector of the Kurus.

Translation
Thus defeating all the opposing kings, the Supreme Personality of Godhead brought the daughter of Bhīṣmaka to His capital and married her according to the Vedic injunctions, O protector of the Kurus.

Text 54
तदा महोत्सवो नृणां यदुपुर्यां गृहे गृहे ।
अभूदनन्यभावानां कृष्णे यदुपतौ नृप ॥ ५४ ॥
tadā mahotsavo nṝṇāṁ
yadu-puryāṁ gṛhe gṛhe
abhūd ananya-bhāvānāṁ
kṛṣṇe yadu-patau nṛpa
Synonyms
tadā — then; mahā-utsavaḥ — great rejoicing; nṝṇām — by the people; yadu-puryām — in the capital of the Yadus, Dvārakā; gṛhe gṛhe — in each and every home; abhūt — arose; ananya-bhāvānām — who had exclusive love; kṛṣṇe — for Kṛṣṇa; yadu-patau — the chief of the Yadus; nṛpa — O King (Parīkṣit).

Translation
At that time, O King, there was great rejoicing in all the homes of Yadupurī, whose citizens loved only Kṛṣṇa, chief of the Yadus.

Text 55
नरा नार्यश्च मुदिता: प्रमृष्टमणिकुण्डला: ।
पारिबर्हमुपाजह्रुर्वरयोश्चित्रवाससो: ॥ ५५ ॥
narā nāryaś ca muditāḥ
pramṛṣṭa-maṇi-kuṇḍalāḥ
pāribarham upājahrur
varayoś citra-vāsasoḥ
Synonyms
narāḥ — the men; nāryaḥ — women; ca — and; muditāḥ — joyful; pramṛṣṭa — polished; maṇi — their jewels; kuṇḍalāḥ — and earrings; pāribarham — wedding gifts; upājahruḥ — they respectfully presented; varayoḥ — to the groom and the bride; citra — wonderful; vāsasoḥ — whose dress.

Translation
All the men and women, full of joy and adorned with shining jewels and earrings, brought wedding presents, which they reverently offered to the exquisitely dressed groom and bride.

Text 56
सा वृष्णिपुर्युत्तम्भितेन्द्रकेतुभि-
र्विचित्रमाल्याम्बररत्नतोरणै: ।
बभौ प्रतिद्वार्युपक्लृप्तमङ्गलै-
रापूर्णकुम्भागुरुधूपदीपकै: ॥ ५६ ॥
sā vṛṣṇi-pury uttambhitendra-ketubhir
vicitra-mālyāmbara-ratna-toraṇaiḥ
babhau prati-dvāry upakḷpta-maṅgalair
āpūrṇa-kumbhāguru-dhūpa-dīpakaiḥ
Synonyms
sā — that; vṛṣṇi-purī — city of the Vṛṣṇis; uttambhita — upraised; indra-ketubhiḥ — with festive columns; vicitra — variegated; mālya — having flower garlands; ambara — cloth banners; ratna — and jewels; toraṇaiḥ — with archways; babhau — appeared beautiful; prati — in every; dvāri — doorway; upakḷpta — arranged; maṅgalaiḥ — with auspicious items; āpūrṇa — full; kumbha — waterpots; aguru — scented with aguru; dhūpa — with incense; dīpakaiḥ — and lamps.

Translation
The city of the Vṛṣṇis appeared most beautiful: there were tall, festive columns, and also archways decorated with flower garlands, cloth banners and precious gems. Arrangements of auspicious, full waterpots, aguru-scented incense, and lamps graced every doorway.

Text 57
सिक्तमार्गा मदच्युद्भ‍िराहूतप्रेष्ठभूभुजाम् ।
गजैर्द्वा:सु परामृष्टरम्भापूगोपशोभिता ॥ ५७ ॥
sikta-mārgā mada-cyudbhir
āhūta-preṣṭha-bhūbhujām
gajair dvāḥsu parāmṛṣṭa-
rambhā-pūgopaśobhitā
Synonyms
sikta — sprinkled; mārgā — its streets; mada — a secretion that flows from the foreheads of excited elephants; cyudbhiḥ — exuding; āhūta — invited; preṣṭha — beloved; bhū-bhujām — of the kings; gajaiḥ — by the elephants; dvāḥsu — in the doorways; parāmṛṣṭa — handled; rambhā — by plantain trees; pūga — and betel-nut trees; upaśobhitā — beautified.

Translation
The city’s streets were cleansed by the intoxicated elephants belonging to the beloved kings who were guests at the wedding, and these elephants further enhanced the beauty of the city by placing trunks of plantain and betel-nut trees in all the doorways.

Text 58
कुरुसृञ्जयकैकेयविदर्भयदुकुन्तय: ।
मिथो मुमुदिरे तस्मिन् सम्भ्रमात् परिधावताम् ॥ ५८ ॥
kuru-sṛñjaya-kaikeya-
vidarbha-yadu-kuntayaḥ
mitho mumudire tasmin
sambhramāt paridhāvatām
Synonyms
kuru-sṛñjaya-kaikeya-vidarbha-yadu-kuntayaḥ — of the members of the Kuru, Sṛñjaya, Kaikeya, Vidarbha, Yadu and Kunti clans; mithaḥ — with one another; mumudire — they took pleasure; tasmin — in that (festivity); sambhramāt — out of excitement; paridhāvatām — among those who were running about.

Translation
Those who belonged to the royal families of the Kuru, Sṛñjaya, Kaikeya, Vidarbha, Yadu and Kunti clans joyfully met one another in the midst of the crowds of people excitedly running here and there.

Text 59
रुक्‍मिण्या हरणं श्रुत्वा गीयमानं ततस्तत: ।
राजानो राजकन्याश्च बभूवुर्भृशविस्मिता: ॥ ५९ ॥
rukmiṇyā haraṇaṁ śrutvā
gīyamānaṁ tatas tataḥ
rājāno rāja-kanyāś ca
babhūvur bhṛśa-vismitāḥ
Synonyms
rukmiṇyāḥ — of Rukmiṇī; haraṇam — about the kidnapping; śrutvā — hearing; gīyamānam — which was being sung; tataḥ tataḥ — all over; rājānaḥ — the kings; rāja-kanyāḥ — the kings’ daughters; ca — and; babhūvuḥ — became; bhṛśa — extremely; vismitāḥ — amazed.

Translation
The kings and their daughters were totally astonished to hear the story of Rukmiṇī’s abduction, which was being glorified in song everywhere.

Text 60
द्वारकायामभूद् राजन् महामोद: पुरौकसाम् ।
रुक्‍मिण्या रमयोपेतं द‍ृष्ट्वा कृष्णं श्रिय: पतिम् ॥ ६० ॥
dvārakāyām abhūd rājan
mahā-modaḥ puraukasām
rukmiṇyā ramayopetaṁ
dṛṣṭvā kṛṣṇaṁ śriyaḥ patim
Synonyms
dvārakāyām — in Dvārakā; abhūt — there was; rājan — O King; mahā-modaḥ — great joy; pura-okasām — for the inhabitants of the city; rukmiṇyā — with Rukmiṇī; ramayā — the goddess of fortune; upetam — joined; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; śriyaḥ — of all opulence; patim — the master.

Translation
Dvārakā’s citizens were overjoyed to see Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of all opulence, united with Rukmiṇī, the goddess of fortune.