Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
बलभद्र: कुरुश्रेष्ठ भगवान् रथमास्थित: ।
सुहृद्दिद‍ृक्षुरुत्कण्ठ: प्रययौ नन्दगोकुलम् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
balabhadraḥ kuru-śreṣṭha
bhagavān ratham āsthitaḥ
suhṛd-didṛkṣur utkaṇṭhaḥ
prayayau nanda-gokulam
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; balabhadraḥ — Lord Balarāma; kuru-śreṣṭha — O best of the Kurus (King Parīkṣit); bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; ratham — on His chariot; āsthitaḥ — mounted; suhṛt — His well-wishing friends; didṛkṣuḥ — wishing to see; utkaṇṭhaḥ — eager; prayayau — traveled; nanda-gokulam — to the cowherd village of Nanda Mahārāja.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O best of the Kurus, once Lord Balarāma, eager to visit His well-wishing friends, mounted His chariot and traveled to Nanda Gokula.

Text 2
परिष्वक्तश्चिरोत्कण्ठैर्गोपैर्गोपीभिरेव च ।
रामोऽभिवाद्य पितरावाशीर्भिरभिनन्दित: ॥ २ ॥
pariṣvaktaś cirotkaṇṭhair
gopair gopībhir eva ca
rāmo ’bhivādya pitarāv
āśīrbhir abhinanditaḥ
Synonyms
pariṣvaktaḥ — embraced; cira — for a long time; utkaṇṭhaiḥ — who had been in anxiety; gopaiḥ — by the cowherd men; gopībhiḥ — by the cowherd women; eva — indeed; ca — also; rāmaḥ — Lord Balarāma; abhivādya — offering respects; pitarau — to His parents (Nanda and Yaśodā); āśīrbhiḥ — with prayers; abhinanditaḥ — joyfully greeted.

Translation
Having long suffered the anxiety of separation, the cowherd men and their wives embraced Lord Balarāma. The Lord then offered respects to His parents, and they joyfully greeted Him with prayers.

Text 3
चिरं न: पाहि दाशार्ह सानुजो जगदीश्वर: ।
इत्यारोप्याङ्कमालिङ्‍ग्य नेत्रै: सिषिचतुर्जलै: ॥ ३ ॥
ciraṁ naḥ pāhi dāśārha
sānujo jagad-īśvaraḥ
ity āropyāṅkam āliṅgya
netraiḥ siṣicatur jalaiḥ
Synonyms
ciram — for a long time; naḥ — us; pāhi — please protect; dāśārha — O descendant of Daśārha; sa — together with; anujaḥ — Your younger brother; jagat — of the universe; īśvaraḥ — the Lord; iti — thus saying; āropya — raising; aṅkam — onto their laps; āliṅgya — embracing; netraiḥ — from their eyes; siṣicatuḥ — they moistened; jalaiḥ — with the water.

Translation
[Nanda and Yaśodā prayed,] “O descendant of Daśārha, O Lord of the universe, may You and Your younger brother Kṛṣṇa ever protect us.” Saying this, they raised Śrī Balarāma onto their laps, embraced Him and moistened Him with tears from their eyes.

Texts 4-6
गोपवृद्धांश्च विधिवद् यविष्ठैरभिवन्दित: ।
यथावयो यथासख्यं यथासम्बन्धमात्मन: ॥ ४ ॥
समुपेत्याथ गोपालान् हास्यहस्तग्रहादिभि: ।
विश्रान्तं सुखमासीनं पप्रच्छु: पर्युपागता: ॥ ५ ॥
पृष्टाश्चानामयं स्वेषु प्रेमगद्गदया गिरा ।
कृष्णे कमलपत्राक्षे सन्न्यस्ताखिलराधस: ॥ ६ ॥
gopa-vṛddhāṁś ca vidhi-vad
yaviṣṭhair abhivanditaḥ
yathā-vayo yathā-sakhyaṁ
yathā-sambandham ātmanaḥ
samupetyātha gopālān
hāsya-hasta-grahādibhiḥ
viśrāntam sukham āsīnaṁ
papracchuḥ paryupāgatāḥ
pṛṣṭāś cānāmayaṁ sveṣu
prema-gadgadayā girā
kṛṣṇe kamala-patrākṣe
sannyastākhila-rādhasaḥ
Synonyms
gopa — of the cowherds; vṛddhān — the elders; ca — and; vidhi-vat — in accordance with Vedic injunctions; yaviṣṭhaiḥ — by those who were younger; abhivanditaḥ — respectfully greeted; yathā-vayaḥ — according to age; yathā-sakhyam — according to friendship; yathā-sambandham — according to family relationship; ātmanaḥ — with Himself; samupetya — going up to; atha — then; gopālān — the cowherd men; hāsya — with smiles; hasta-graha — taking of their hands; ādibhiḥ — and on; viśrāntam — rested; sukham — comfortably; āsīnam — seated; papracchuḥ — they asked; paryupāgatāḥ — having gathered on all sides; pṛṣṭāḥ — questioned; ca — and; anāmayam — about health; sveṣu — in regard to their dear friends; prema — out of love; gadgadayā — faltering; girā — with voices; kṛṣṇe — for Kṛṣṇa; kamala — of a lotus; patra — (like) petals; akṣe — whose eyes; sannyasta — having dedicated; akhila — all; rādhasaḥ — material possessions.

Translation
Lord Balarāma then paid proper respects to the elder cowherd men, and the younger ones all greeted Him respectfully. He met them all with smiles, handshakes and so on, dealing personally with each one according to age, degree of friendship, and family relationship. Then, after resting, the Lord accepted a comfortable seat, and they all gathered around Him. With voices faltering out of love for Him, those cowherds, who had dedicated everything to lotus-eyed Kṛṣṇa, asked about the health of their dear ones [in Dvārakā], and Balarāma in turn asked about the cowherds’ welfare.

Text 7
कच्चिन्नो बान्धवा राम सर्वे कुशलमासते ।
कच्चित् स्मरथ नो राम यूयं दारसुतान्विता: ॥ ७ ॥
kaccin no bāndhavā rāma
sarve kuśalam āsate
kaccit smaratha no rāma
yūyaṁ dāra-sutānvitāḥ
Synonyms
kaccit — whether; naḥ — our; bāndhavāḥ — relatives; rāma — O Balarāma; sarve — all; kuśalam — well; āsate — are; kaccit — whether; smaratha — remember; naḥ — us; rāma — O Rāma; yūyam — all of you; dāra — with wives; suta — and children; anvitāḥ — together.

Translation
[The cowherds said:] O Rāma, are all our relatives doing well? And Rāma, do all of you, with your wives and children, still remember us?

Text 8
दिष्‍ट्या कंसो हत: पापो दिष्‍ट्या मुक्ता: सुहृज्जना: ।
निहत्य निर्जित्य रिपून् दिष्‍ट्या दुर्गं समाश्रिता: ॥ ८ ॥
diṣṭyā kaṁso hataḥ pāpo
diṣṭyā muktāḥ suhṛj-janāḥ
nihatya nirjitya ripūn
diṣṭyā durgaṁ samāśrītāḥ
Synonyms
diṣṭyā — by good fortune; kaṁsaḥ — Kaṁsa; hataḥ — killed; pāpaḥ — sinful; diṣṭyā — by good fortune; muktāḥ — freed; suhṛt-janāḥ — dear relatives; nihatya — killing; nirjitya — conquering; ripūn — enemies; diṣṭyā — by good fortune; durgam — a fortress; samāśrītāḥ — taken shelter of.

Translation
It is our great fortune that sinful Kaṁsa has been killed and our dear relatives have been freed. And it is also our good fortune that our relatives have killed and defeated their enemies and found complete security in a great fortress.

Text 9
गोप्यो हसन्त्य: पप्रच्छू रामसन्दर्शनाद‍ृता: ।
कच्चिदास्ते सुखं कृष्ण: पुरस्‍त्रीजनवल्ल‍भ: ॥ ९ ॥
gopyo hasantyaḥ papracchū
rāma-sandarśanādṛtāḥ
kaccid āste sukhaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ
pura-strī-jana-vallabhaḥ
Synonyms
gopyaḥ — the young cowherd girls; hasantyaḥ — smiling; papracchuḥ — asked; rāma — of Lord Balarāma; sandarśana — by the personal audience; ādṛtāḥ — honored; kaccit — whether; āste — is living; sukham — happily; kṛṣṇaḥ — Kṛṣṇa; pura — of the city; strī-jana — of the women; vallabhaḥ — the darling.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Honored to have the personal audience of Lord Balarāma, the young gopīs smiled and asked Him, “Is Kṛṣṇa, the darling of the city women, living happily?

Text 10
कच्चित् स्मरति वा बन्धून् पितरं मातरं च स: ।
अप्यसौ मातरं द्रष्टुं सकृदप्यागमिष्यति ।
अपि वा स्मरतेऽस्माकमनुसेवां महाभुज: ॥ १० ॥
kaccit smarati vā bandhūn
pitaraṁ mātaraṁ ca saḥ
apy asau mātaraṁ draṣṭuṁ
sakṛd apy āgamiṣyati
api vā smarate ’smākam
anusevāṁ mahā-bhujaḥ
Synonyms
kaccit — whether; smarati — remembers; vā — or; bandhūn — His family members; pitaram — His father; mātaram — His mother; ca — and; saḥ — He; api — also; asau — Himself; mātaram — His mother; draṣṭum — to see; sakṛt — once; api — even; āgamiṣyati — will come; api — indeed; vā — or; smarate — He remembers; asmākam — our; anusevām — steady service; mahā — mighty; bhujaḥ — whose arms.

Translation
“Does He remember His family members, especially His father and mother? Do you think He will ever come back even once to see His mother? And does mighty-armed Kṛṣṇa remember the service we always did for Him?

Texts 11-12
मातरं पितरं भ्रातृन् पतीन् पुत्रान् स्वसृनपि ।
यदर्थे जहिम दाशार्ह दुस्त्यजान् स्वजनान् प्रभो ॥ ११ ॥
ता न: सद्य: परित्यज्य गत: सञ्छिन्नसौहृद: ।
कथं नु ताद‍ृशं स्‍त्रीभिर्न श्रद्धीयेत भाषितम् ॥ १२ ॥
mātaraṁ pitaraṁ bhrātṝn
patīn putrān svasṝn api
yad-arthe jahima dāśārha
dustyajān sva-janān prabho
tā naḥ sadyaḥ parityajya
gataḥ sañchinna-sauhṛdaḥ
kathaṁ nu tādṛśaṁ strībhir
na śraddhīyeta bhāṣitam
Synonyms
mātaram — mother; pitaram — father; bhrātṝn — brothers; patīn — husbands; putrān — children; svasṝn — sisters; api — also; yat — of whom; arthe — for the sake; jahima — we abandoned; dāśārha — O descendant of Dāśārha; dustyajān — difficult to give up; sva-janān — own people; prabho — O Lord; tāḥ — these women; naḥ — ourselves; sadyaḥ — suddenly; parityajya — rejecting; gataḥ — gone away; sañchinna — having broken off; sauhṛdaḥ — friendship; katham — how; nu — indeed; tādṛśam — such; strībhiḥ — by women; na śraddhīyeta — would not be trusted; bhāṣītam — words spoken.

Translation
“For Kṛṣṇa’s sake, O descendant of Dāśārha, we abandoned our mothers, fathers, brothers, husbands, children and sisters, even though these family relations are difficult to give up. But now, O Lord, that same Kṛṣṇa has suddenly abandoned us and gone away, breaking off all affectionate ties with us. And yet how could any woman fail to trust His promises?

Text 13
कथं नु गृह्णन्त्यनवस्थितात्मनो
वच: कृतघ्नस्य बुधा: पुरस्‍त्रिय: ।
गृह्णन्ति वै चित्रकथस्य सुन्दर-
स्मितावलोकोच्छ्वसितस्मरातुरा: ॥ १३ ॥
kathaṁ nu gṛhṇanty anavasthitātmano
vacaḥ kṛta-ghnasya budhāḥ pura-striyaḥ
gṛhṇanti vai citra-kathasya sundara-
smitāvalokocchvasita-smarāturāḥ
Synonyms
katham — how; nu — indeed; gṛhṇanti — do they accept; anavasthita — unsteady; ātmanaḥ — of Him whose heart; vacaḥ — the words; kṛta-ghnasya — who is ungrateful; budhāḥ — intelligent; pura — of the city; striyaḥ — women; gṛhṇanti — they accept; vai — indeed; citra — wonderful; kathasya — whose narrations; sundara — beautifully; smita — smiling; avaloka — by the glances; ucchvasita — brought to life; smara — by lust; āturāḥ — agitated.

Translation
“How can intelligent city women possibly trust the words of one whose heart is so unsteady and who is so ungrateful? They must believe Him because He speaks so wonderfully, and also because His beautiful smiling glances arouse their lust.

Text 14
किं नस्तत्कथया गोप्य: कथा: कथयतापरा: ।
यात्यस्माभिर्विना कालो यदि तस्य तथैव न: ॥ १४ ॥
kiṁ nas tat-kathayā gopyaḥ
kathāḥ kathayatāparāḥ
yāty asmābhir vinā kālo
yadi tasya tathaiva naḥ
Synonyms
kim — what (use); naḥ — for us; tat — about Him; kathayā — with discussion; gopyaḥ — O gopīs; kathāḥ — topics; kathayata — please narrate; aparāḥ — other; yāti — it passes; asmābhiḥ — us; vinā — without; kālaḥ — time; yadi — if; tasya — His; tathā eva — in the very same way; naḥ — ours.

Translation
“Why bother talking about Him, dear gopī? Please talk of something else. If He passes His time without us, then we shall similarly pass ours [without Him].”

Text 15
इति प्रहसितं शौरेर्जल्पितं चारु वीक्षितम् ।
गतिं प्रेमपरिष्वङ्गं स्मरन्त्यो रुरुदु: स्‍त्रिय: ॥ १५ ॥
iti prahasitaṁ śaurer
jalpitaṁ cāru-vīkṣitam
gatiṁ prema-pariṣvaṅgaṁ
smarantyo ruruduḥ striyaḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus speaking; prahasitam — the laughter; śaureḥ — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; jalpitam — the pleasing conversations; cāru — attractive; vīkṣitam — the glances; gatim — the walking; prema — loving; pariṣvaṅgam — the embrace; smarantyaḥ — remembering; ruruduḥ — cried; striyaḥ — the women.

Translation
While speaking these words, the young cowherd women remembered Lord Śauri’s laughter, His pleasing conversations with them, His attractive glances, His style of walking and His loving embraces. Thus they began to cry.

Text 16
सङ्कर्षणस्ता: कृष्णस्य सन्देशैर्हृदयंगमै: ।
सान्‍त्‍वयामास भगवान् नानानुनयकोविद: ॥ १६ ॥
saṅkarṣaṇas tāḥ kṛṣṇasya
sandeśair hṛdayaṁ-gamaiḥ
sāntvayām āsa bhagavān
nānānunaya-kovidaḥ
Synonyms
saṅkarṣaṇaḥ — Lord Balarāma, the supreme attractor; tāḥ — them; kṛṣṇasya — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; sandeśaiḥ — by the confidential messages; hṛdayam — the heart; gamaiḥ — touching; sāntvayām āsa — consoled; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; nānā — of various kinds; anunaya — in conciliation; kovidaḥ — expert.

Translation
The Supreme Lord Balarāma, the attractor of all, being expert at various kinds of conciliation, consoled the gopīs by relaying to them the confidential messages Lord Kṛṣṇa had sent with Him. These messages deeply touched the gopīs’ hearts.

Text 17
द्वौ मासौ तत्र चावात्सीन्मधुं माधवमेव च ।
राम: क्षपासु भगवान् गोपीनां रतिमावहन् ॥ १७ ॥
dvau māsau tatra cāvātsīn
madhuṁ mādhavaṁ eva ca
rāmaḥ kṣapāsu bhagavān
gopīnāṁ ratim āvahan
Synonyms
dvau — two; māsau — months; tatra — there (in Gokula); ca — and; avātsīt — resided; madhum — Madhu (the first month of the Vedic calendar, at the time of the spring equinox); mādhavam — Mādhava (the second month); eva — indeed; ca — also; rāmaḥ — Balarāma; kṣapāsu — during the nights; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; gopīnām — to the gopīs; ratim — conjugal pleasure; āvahan — bringing.

Translation
Lord Balarāma, the Personality of Godhead, resided there for the two months of Madhu and Mādhava, and during the nights He gave His cowherd girlfriends conjugal pleasure.

Text 18
पूर्णचन्द्रकलामृष्टे कौमुदीगन्धवायुना ।
यमुनोपवने रेमे सेविते स्‍त्रीगणैर्वृत: ॥ १८ ॥
pūrṇa-candra-kalā-mṛṣṭe
kaumudī-gandha-vāyunā
yamunopavane reme
sevite strī-gaṇair vṛtaḥ
Synonyms
pūrṇa — full; candra — of the moon; kalā — by the rays; mṛṣṭe — bathed; kaumudī — of lotus flowers that open in the moonlight; gandha — (bearing) the fragrance; vāyunā — by the wind; yamunā — of the Yamunā River; upavane — in a garden; reme — He enjoyed; sevite — served; strī — women; gaṇaiḥ — by many; vṛtaḥ — accompanied.

Translation
In the company of numerous women, Lord Balarāma enjoyed in a garden by the Yamunā River. This garden was bathed in the rays of the full moon and caressed by breezes bearing the fragrance of night-blooming lotuses.

Text 19
वरुणप्रेषिता देवी वारुणी वृक्षकोटरात् ।
पतन्ती तद् वनं सर्वं स्वगन्धेनाध्यवासयत् ॥ १९ ॥
varuṇa-preṣitā devī
vāruṇī vṛkṣa-koṭarāt
patantī tad vanaṁ sarvaṁ
sva-gandhenādhyavāsayat
Synonyms
varuṇa — by Varuṇa, the demigod of the ocean; preṣitā — sent; devī — divine; vāruṇī — the vāruṇī liquor; vṛkṣa — of a tree; koṭarāt — from the hollow; patantī — flowing; tat — that; vanam — forest; sarvam — entire; sva — with its own; gandhena — aroma; adhyavāsayat — made even more fragrant.

Translation
Sent by the demigod Varuṇa, the divine vāruṇī liquor flowed from a tree hollow and made the entire forest even more fragrant with its sweet aroma.

Text 20
तं गन्धं मधुधाराया वायुनोपहृतं बल: ।
आघ्रायोपगतस्तत्र ललनाभि: समं पपौ ॥ २० ॥
taṁ gandhaṁ madhu-dhārāyā
vāyunopahṛtaṁ balaḥ
āghrāyopagatas tatra
lalanābhiḥ samaṁ papau
Synonyms
tam — that; gandham — fragrance; madhu — of honey; dhārāyāḥ — of the flood; vāyunā — by the breeze; upahṛtam — brought near; balaḥ — Lord Balarāma; āghrāya — smelling; upagataḥ — having approached; tatra — there; lalanābhiḥ — with the young women; samam — together; papau — drank.

Translation
The wind carried to Balarāma the fragrance of that flood of sweet liquor, and when He smelled it He went [to the tree]. There He and His female companions drank.

Text 21
उपगीयमानो गन्धर्वैर्वनिताशोभिमण्डले ।
रेमे करेणुयूथेशो माहेन्द्र इव वारण: ॥ २१ ॥
upagīyamāno gandharvair
vanitā-śobhi-maṇḍale
reme kareṇu-yūtheśo
māhendra iva vāraṇaḥ
Synonyms
upagīyamānaḥ — being praised in song; gandharvaiḥ — by Gandharvas; vanitā — by young women; śobhi — beautified; maṇḍale — in the circle; reme — He enjoyed; kareṇu — of she-elephants; yūtha — of a herd; īśaḥ — the master; māhā-indraḥ — of Lord Indra; iva — just like; vāraṇaḥ — the elephant (named Airāvata).

Translation
As the Gandharvas sang His glories, Lord Balarāma enjoyed within the brilliant circle of young women. He appeared just like Indra’s elephant, the lordly Airāvata, enjoying in the company of she-elephants.

Text 22
नेदुर्दुन्दुभयो व्योम्नि ववृषु: कुसुमैर्मुदा ।
गन्धर्वा मुनयो रामं तद्वीर्यैरीडिरे तदा ॥ २२ ॥
nedur dundubhayo vyomni
vavṛṣuḥ kusumair mudā
gandharvā munayo rāmaṁ
tad-vīryair īḍire tadā
Synonyms
neduḥ — resounded; dundubhayaḥ — kettledrums; vyomni — in the sky; vavṛṣuḥ — rained down; kusumaiḥ — with flowers; mudā — with joy; gandharvāḥ — the Gandharvas; munayaḥ — the great sages; rāmam — Lord Balarāma; tat-vīryaiḥ — with His heroic deeds; īḍire — praised; tadā — then.

Translation
At that time kettledrums resounded in the sky, the Gandharvas joyfully rained down flowers, and the great sages praised Lord Balarāma’s heroic deeds.

Text 23
उपगीयमानचरितो वनिताभिर्हलायुध: ।
वनेषु व्यचरत् क्षीवो मदविह्वललोचन: ॥ २३ ॥
upagīyamāna-carito
vanitābhir halāyudha
vaneṣu vyacarat kṣīvo
mada-vihvala-locanaḥ
Synonyms
upagīyamāna — being sung; caritaḥ — His pastimes; vanitābhiḥ — with the women; halāyudhaḥ — Lord Balarāma; vaneṣu — among the forests; vyacarat — wandered; kṣīvaḥ — inebriated; mada — by the intoxication; vihvala — overcome; locanaḥ — His eyes.

Translation
As His deeds were sung, Lord Halāyudha wandered as if inebriated among the various forests with His girlfriends. His eyes rolled from the effects of the liquor.

Texts 24-25
स्रग्व्येककुण्डलो मत्तो वैजयन्त्या च मालया ।
बिभ्रत् स्मितमुखाम्भोजं स्वेदप्रालेयभूषितम् ।
स आजुहाव यमुनां जलक्रीडार्थमीश्वर: ॥ २४ ॥
निजं वाक्यमनाद‍ृत्य मत्त इत्यापगां बल: ।
अनागतां हलाग्रेण कुपितो विचकर्ष ह ॥ २५ ॥
sragvy eka-kuṇḍalo matto
vaijayantyā ca mālayā
bibhrat smita-mukhāmbhojaṁ
sveda-prāleya-bhūṣitam
sa ājuhāva yamunāṁ
jala-krīḍārtham īśvaraḥ
nijaṁ vākyam anādṛtya
matta ity āpagāṁ balaḥ
anāgatāṁ halāgreṇa
kupito vicakarṣa ha
Synonyms
srak-vī — having a garland; eka — with one; kuṇḍalaḥ — earring; mattaḥ — intoxicated with joy; vaijayantyā — named Vaijayantī; ca — and; mālayā — with the garland; bibhrat — displaying; smita — smiling; mukha — His face; ambhojam — lotuslike; sveda — of perspiration; prāleya — with the snow; bhūṣitam — decorated; saḥ — He; ājuhāva — called for; yamunām — the Yamunā River; jala — in the water; kṛīḍā — of playing; artham — for the purpose; īśvaraḥ — the Supreme Lord; nijam — His; vākyam — words; anādṛtya — disregarding; mattaḥ — intoxicated; iti — thus (thinking); āpa-gām — the river; balaḥ — Lord Balarāma; anāgatām — who did not come; hala — of His plow weapon; agreṇa — with the tip; kupitaḥ — angry; vicakarṣa ha — He dragged.

Translation
Intoxicated with joy, Lord Balarāma sported flower garlands, including the famous Vaijayantī. He wore a single earring, and beads of perspiration decorated His smiling lotus face like snowflakes. The Lord then summoned the Yamunā River so that He could play in her waters, but she disregarded His command, thinking He was drunk. This angered Balarāma, and He began dragging the river with the tip of His plow.

Text 26
पापे त्वं मामवज्ञाय यन्नायासि मयाहुता ।
नेष्ये त्वां लाङ्गलाग्रेण शतधा कामचारिणीम् ॥ २६ ॥
pāpe tvaṁ mām avajñāya
yan nāyāsi mayāhutā
neṣye tvāṁ lāṅgalāgreṇa
śatadhā kāma-cāriṇīm
Synonyms
pāpe — O sinful one; tvam — you; mām — Me; avajñāya — disrespecting; yat — because; na āyāsi — you do not come; mayā — by Me; āhutā — called; neṣye — I will bring; tvām — you; lāṅgala — of My plow; agreṇa — with the tip; śatadhā — in a hundred parts; kāma — by whim; cāriṇīm — who moves.

Translation
[Lord Balarāma said:] O sinful one disrespecting Me, you do not come when I call you but rather move only by your own whim. Therefore with the tip of My plow I shall bring you here in a hundred streams!

Text 27
एवं निर्भर्त्सिता भीता यमुना यदुनन्दनम् ।
उवाच चकिता वाचं पतिता पादयोर्नृप ॥ २७ ॥
evaṁ nirbhartsitā bhītā
yamunā yadu-nandanam
uvāca cakitā vācaṁ
patitā pādayor nṛpa
Synonyms
evam — thus; nirbhartsitā — scolded; bhītā — afraid; yamunā — the presiding goddess of the river Yamunā; yadu-nandanam — to the beloved descendant of Yadu, Lord Balarāma; uvāca — spoke; cakitā — trembling; vācam — words; patitā — fallen; pādayoḥ — at His feet; nṛpa — O King (Parīkṣit).

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Thus scolded by the Lord, O King, the frightened river-goddess Yamunā came and fell at the feet of Śrī Balarāma, the beloved descendant of Yadu. Trembling, she spoke to Him the following words.

Text 28
राम राम महाबाहो न जाने तव विक्रमम् ।
यस्यैकांशेन विधृता जगती जगत: पते ॥ २८ ॥
rāma rāma mahā-bāho
na jāne tava vikramam
yasyaikāṁśena vidhṛtā
jagatī jagataḥ pate
Synonyms
rāma rāma — O Rāma, Rāma; mahā-bāho — O mighty-armed one; na jāne — I do not appreciate; tava — Your; vikramam — prowess; yasya — whose; eka — one; aṁśena — by a portion; vidhṛtā — is sustained; jagatī — the earth; jagataḥ — of the universe; pate — O master.

Translation
[Goddess Yamunā said:] Rāma, Rāma, O mighty-armed one! I know nothing of Your prowess. With a single portion of Yourself You hold up the earth, O Lord of the universe.

Text 29
परं भावं भगवतो भगवन् मामजानतीम् ।
मोक्तुमर्हसि विश्‍वात्मन् प्रपन्नां भक्तवत्सल ॥ २९ ॥
paraṁ bhāvaṁ bhagavato
bhagavan mām ajānatīm
moktum arhasi viśvātman
prapannāṁ bhakta-vatsala
Synonyms
param — supreme; bhāvam — the status; bhagavataḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; bhagavan — O Supreme Lord; mām — me; ajānatīm — not knowing; moktum arhasi — please release; viśva — of the universe; ātman — O soul; prapannām — surrendered; bhakta — to Your devotees; vatsala — O You who are compassionate.

Translation
My Lord, please release me. O soul of the universe, I didn’t understand Your position as the Supreme Godhead, but now I have surrendered unto You, and You are always kind to Your devotees.

Text 30
ततो व्यमुञ्चद् यमुनां याचितो भगवान् बल: ।
विजगाह जलं स्‍त्रीभि: करेणुभिरिवेभराट् ॥ ३० ॥
tato vyamuñcad yamunāṁ
yācito bhagavān balaḥ
vijagāha jalaṁ strībhiḥ
kareṇubhir ivebha-rāṭ
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; vyamuñcat — released; yamunām — the Yamunā; yācitaḥ — begged; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; balaḥ — Balarāma; vijagāha — He submerged Himself; jalam — in the water; strībhiḥ — with the women; kareṇubhiḥ — with his she-elephants; iva — as; ibha — of elephants; rāṭ — the king.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Thereupon Lord Balarāma released the Yamunā and, like the king of the elephants with his entourage of she-elephants, entered the river’s water with His female companions.

Text 31
कामं विहृत्य सलिलादुत्तीर्णायासीताम्बरे ।
भूषणानि महार्हाणि ददौ कान्ति: शुभां स्रजम् ॥ ३१ ॥
kāmaṁ vihṛtya salilād
uttīrṇāyāsītāmbare
bhūṣaṇāni mahārhāṇi
dadau kāntiḥ śubhāṁ srajam
Synonyms
kāmam — as pleased Him; vihṛtya — having played; salilāt — from the water; uttīrṇāya — to Him who had risen; asita — blue; ambare — a pair of garments (upper and lower); bhūṣaṇāni — ornaments; mahā — greatly; arhāṇi — valuable; dadau — gave; kāntiḥ — Goddess Kānti; śubhām — splendidly beautiful; srajam — a necklace.

Translation
The Lord played in the water to His full satisfaction, and when He came out Goddess Kānti presented Him with blue garments, precious ornaments and a brilliant necklace.

Text 32
वसित्वा वाससी नीले मालामामुच्य काञ्चनीम् ।
रेये स्वलङ्कृतो लिप्तो माहेन्द्र इव वारण: ॥ ३२ ॥
vasitvā vāsasī nīle
mālāṁ āmucya kāñcanīm
reye sv-alaṅkṛto lipto
māhendra iva vāraṇaḥ
Synonyms
vasitvā — dressing Himself; vāsasī — in the two garments; nīle — blue; mālām — the necklace; āmucya — putting on; kāñcanīm — golden; reje — He appeared resplendent; su — excellently; alaṅkṛtaḥ — ornamented; liptaḥ — anointed; māhā-indraḥ — of Mahendra, the King of heaven; iva — like; vāraṇaḥ — the elephant.

Translation
Lord Balarāma dressed Himself in the blue garments and put on the gold necklace. Anointed with fragrances and beautifully adorned, He appeared as resplendent as Indra’s royal elephant.

Text 33
अद्यापि द‍ृश्यते राजन् यमुनाकृष्टवर्त्मना ।
बलस्यानन्तवीर्यस्य वीर्यं सूचयतीव हि ॥ ३३ ॥
adyāpi dṛśyate rājan
yamunākṛṣṭa-vartmanā
balasyānanta-vīryasya
vīryaṁ sūcayatīva hi
Synonyms
adya — today; api — even; dṛśyate — is seen; rājan — O King (Parīkṣit); yamunā — the Yamunā River; ākṛṣṭa — pulled; vartmanā — whose currents; balasya — of Lord Balarāma; ananta — unlimited; vīryasya — whose potency; vīryam — the prowess; sūcayatī — indicating; iva — as; hi — indeed.

Translation
Even today, O King, one can see how the Yamunā flows through the many channels created when it was dragged by the unlimitedly powerful Lord Balarāma. Thus she demonstrates His prowess.

Text 34
एवं सर्वा निशा याता एकेव रमतो व्रजे ।
रामस्याक्षिप्तचित्तस्य माधुर्यैर्व्रजयोषिताम् ॥ ३४ ॥
evaṁ sarvā niśā yātā
ekeva ramato vraje
rāmasyākṣipta-cittasya
mādhuryair vraja-yoṣitām
Synonyms
evam — in this manner; sarvā — all; niśāḥ — the nights; yātāḥ — passed; ekā — one; iva — as if; ramataḥ — who was enjoying; vraje — in Vraja; rāmasya — for Lord Balarāma; ākṣipta — enchanted; cittasya — whose mind; mādhuryaiḥ — by the exquisite charm and beauty; vraja-yoṣitām — of the women of Vraja.

Translation
Thus for Lord Balarāma all the nights passed like a single night as He enjoyed in Vraja, His mind enchanted by the exquisite charm and beauty of Vraja’s young ladies.