Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
दुर्योधनसुतां राजन् लक्ष्मणां समितिंजय: ।
स्वयंवरस्थामहरत् साम्बो जाम्बवतीसुत: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
duryodhana-sutāṁ rājan
lakṣmaṇāṁ samitiṁ-jayaḥ
svayaṁvara-sthām aharat
sāmbo jāmbavatī-sutaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; duryodhana-sutām — the daughter of Duryodhana; rājan — O King (Parīkṣit); lakṣmaṇām — named Lakṣmaṇā; samitim-jayaḥ — victorious in battle; svayaṁvara — in her svayaṁvara ceremony; sthām — situated; aharat — stole; sāmbaḥ — Sāmba; jāmbavatī-sutaḥ — the son of Jāmbavatī.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, Jāmbavatī’s son Sāmba, ever victorious in battle, kidnapped Duryodhana’s daughter Lakṣmaṇā from her svayaṁvara ceremony.

Text 2
कौरवा: कुपिता ऊचुर्दुर्विनीतोऽयमर्भक: ।
कदर्थीकृत्य न: कन्यामकामामहरद् बलात् ॥ २ ॥
kauravāḥ kupitā ūcur
durvinīto ’yam arbhakaḥ
kadarthī-kṛtya naḥ kanyām
akāmām aharad balāt
Synonyms
kauravāḥ — the Kurus; kupitāḥ — angered; ūcuḥ — said; durvinītaḥ — ill-behaved; ayam — this; arbhakaḥ — boy; kadarthī-kṛtya — insulting; naḥ — us; kanyām — the maiden; akāmām — unwilling; aharat — has taken; balāt — by force.

Translation
The angry Kurus said: This ill-behaved boy has offended us, forcibly kidnapping our unmarried daughter against her will.

Text 3
बध्नीतेमं दुर्विनीतं किं करिष्यन्ति वृष्णय: ।
येऽस्मत्प्रसादोपचितां दत्तां नो भुञ्जते महीम् ॥ ३ ॥
badhnītemaṁ durvinītaṁ
kiṁ kariṣyanti vṛṣṇayaḥ
ye ’smat-prasādopacitāṁ
dattāṁ no bhuñjate mahīm
Synonyms
badhnīta — arrest; imam — him; durvinītam — ill-behaved; kim — what; kariṣyanti — will they do; vṛṣṇayaḥ — the Vṛṣṇis; ye — who; asmat — of us; prasāda — by the grace; upacitām — acquired; dattām — bestowed; naḥ — our; bhuñjate — are enjoying; mahīm — the land.

Translation
Arrest this ill-behaved Sāmba! What will the Vṛṣṇis do? By our grace they are ruling land that we have granted them.

Text 4
निगृहीतं सुतं श्रुत्वा यद्येष्यन्तीह वृष्णय: ।
भग्नदर्पा: शमं यान्ति प्राणा इव सुसंयता: ॥ ४ ॥
nigṛhītaṁ sutaṁ śrutvā
yady eṣyantīha vṛṣṇayaḥ
bhagna-darpāḥ śamaṁ yānti
prāṇā iva su-saṁyatāḥ
Synonyms
nigṛhītam — captured; sutam — their son; śrutvā — hearing; yadi — if; eṣyanti — they will come; iha — here; vṛṣṇayaḥ — the Vṛṣṇis; bhagna — broken; darpāḥ — whose pride; śamam — pacification; yānti — they will attain; prāṇāḥ — the senses; iva — as; su — properly; saṁyatāḥ — brought under control.

Translation
If the Vṛṣṇis come here when they learn that their son has been captured, we will break their pride. Thus they’ll become subdued, like bodily senses brought under strict control.

Text 5
इति कर्ण: शलो भूरिर्यज्ञकेतु: सुयोधन: ।
साम्बमारेभिरे योद्धुं कुरुवृद्धानुमोदिता: ॥ ५ ॥
iti karṇaḥ śalo bhūrir
yajñaketuḥ suyodhanaḥ
sāmbam ārebhire yoddhuṁ
kuru-vṛddhānumoditāḥ
Synonyms
iti — saying this; karṇaḥ śalaḥ bhūriḥ — Karṇa, Śala and Bhūri (Saumadatti); yajñaketuḥ suyodhanaḥ — Yajñaketu (Bhūriśravā) and Duryodhana; sāmbam — against Sāmba; ārebhire — they set out; yoddhum — to fight; kuru-vṛddha — by the elder of the Kurus (Bhīṣma); anumoditāḥ — sanctioned.

Translation
After saying this and having their plan sanctioned by the senior member of the Kuru dynasty, Karṇa, Śala, Bhūri, Yajñaketu and Suyodhana set out to attack Sāmba.

Text 6
द‍ृष्ट्वानुधावत: साम्बो धार्तराष्ट्रान् महारथ: ।
प्रगृह्य रुचिरं चापं तस्थौ सिंह इवैकल: ॥ ६ ॥
dṛṣṭvānudhāvataḥ sāmbo
dhārtarāṣṭrān mahā-rathaḥ
pragṛhya ruciraṁ cāpaṁ
tasthau siṁha ivaikalaḥ
Synonyms
dṛṣṭvā — seeing; anudhāvataḥ — who were rushing toward him; sāmbaḥ — Sāmba; dhārtarāṣṭrān — the followers of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; mahārathaḥ — the great chariot-fighter; pragṛhya — seizing; ruciram — beautiful; cāpam — his bow; tasthau — he stood; siṁhaḥ — a lion; iva — like; ekalaḥ — all alone.

Translation
Seeing Duryodhana and his companions rushing toward him, Sāmba, the great chariot-fighter, took up his splendid bow and stood alone like a lion.

Text 7
तं ते जिघृक्षव: क्रुद्धास्तिष्ठ तिष्ठेति भाषिण: ।
आसाद्य धन्विनो बाणै: कर्णाग्रण्य: समाकिरन् ॥ ७ ॥
taṁ te jighṛkṣavaḥ kruddhās
tiṣṭha tiṣṭheti bhāṣiṇaḥ
āsādya dhanvino bāṇaiḥ
karṇāgraṇyaḥ samākiran
Synonyms
tam — him; te — they; jighṛkṣavaḥ — determined to capture; kruddhāḥ — angry; tiṣṭha tiṣṭha iti — “Stand there! Stand there!”; bhāṣiṇaḥ — saying; āsādya — confronting; dhanvinaḥ — the bowmen; bāṇaiḥ — with their arrows; karṇa-agraṇyaḥ — those headed by Karna; samākiran — showered him.

Translation
Determined to capture him, the angry bowmen led by Karṇa shouted at Sāmba, ‘Stand and fight! Stand and fight!’ They came straight for him and showered him with arrows.

Text 8
सोऽपविद्ध: कुरुश्रेष्ठ कुरुभिर्यदुनन्दन: ।
नामृष्यत्तदचिन्त्यार्भ: सिंह क्षुद्रमृगैरिव ॥ ८ ॥
so ’paviddhaḥ kuru-śreṣṭha
kurubhir yadu-nandanaḥ
nāmṛṣyat tad acintyārbhaḥ
siṁha kṣudra-mṛgair iva
Synonyms
saḥ — he; apaviddhaḥ — unjustly attacked; kuru-śreṣṭha — O best of the Kurus (Parīkṣit Mahārāja); kurubhiḥ — by the Kurus; yadu-nandanaḥ — the dear son of the Yadu dynasty; na amṛṣyat — did not tolerate; tat — it; acintya — of the inconceivable Lord, Kṛṣṇa; arbhaḥ — the child; siṁhaḥ — a lion; kṣudra — insignificant; mṛgaiḥ — by animals; iva — as.

Translation
O best of the Kurus, as Kṛṣṇa’s son Sāmba was being unjustly harassed by the Kurus, that darling of the Yadu dynasty did not tolerate their attack, any more than a lion would tolerate an attack by puny animals.

Texts 9-10
विस्फूर्ज्य रुचिरं चापं सर्वान् विव्याध सायकै: ।
कर्णादीन् षड्रथान् वीरस्तावद्भ‍िर्युगपत् पृथक् ॥ ९ ॥
चतुर्भिश्चतुरो वाहानेकैकेन च सारथीन् ।
रथिनश्च महेष्वासांस्तस्य तत्तेऽभ्यपूजयन् ॥ १० ॥
visphūrjya ruciraṁ cāpaṁ
sarvān vivyādha sāyakaiḥ
karṇādīn ṣaḍ rathān vīras
tāvadbhir yugapat pṛthak
caturbhiś caturo vāhān
ekaikena ca sārathīn
rathinaś ca maheṣvāsāṁs
tasya tat te ’bhyapūjayan
Synonyms
visphūrjya — twanging; ruciram — attractive; cāpam — his bow; sarvān — all of them; vivyādha — he pierced; sāyakaiḥ — with his arrows; karṇa-ādīn — Karṇa and the others; ṣaṭ — six; rathān — the chariots; vīraḥ — the hero, Sāmba; tāvadbhiḥ — with as many; yugapat — simultaneously; pṛthak — each individually; caturbhiḥ — with four (arrows); caturaḥ — the four; vāhān — horses (of each chariot); eka-ekena — with one each; ca — and; sārathīn — the chariot drivers; rathinaḥ — the warriors commanding the chariots; ca — and; mahā-iṣu-āsān — great bowmen; tasya — his; tat — that; te — they; abhyapūjayan — honored.

Translation
Twanging his wonderful bow, heroic Sāmba struck with arrows the six warriors headed by Karṇa. He pierced the six chariots with as many arrows, each team of four horses with four arrows, and each chariot driver with a single arrow, and he similarly struck the great bowmen who commanded the chariots. The enemy warriors congratulated Sāmba for this display of prowess.

Text 11
तं तु ते विरथं चक्रुश्चत्वारश्चतुरो हयान् ।
एकस्तु सारथिं जघ्ने चिच्छेदान्य: शरासनम् ॥ ११ ॥
taṁ tu te virathaṁ cakruś
catvāraś caturo hayān
ekas tu sārathiṁ jaghne
cicchedaṇyaḥ śarāsanam
Synonyms
tam — him; tu — but; te — they; viratham — deprived of his chariot; cakruḥ — made; catvāraḥ — four; caturaḥ — four of them; hayān — horses; ekaḥ — one; tu — and; sārathim — the chariot driver; jaghne — struck; cicheda — split; anyaḥ — another; śara-asanam — his bow.

Translation
But they forced him down from his chariot, and thereupon four of them struck his four horses, one of them struck down his chariot driver, and another broke his bow.

Text 12
तं बद्ध्वा विरथीकृत्य कृच्छ्रेण कुरवो युधि ।
कुमारं स्वस्य कन्यां च स्वपुरं जयिनोऽविशन् ॥ १२ ॥
taṁ baddhvā virathī-kṛtya
kṛcchreṇa kuravo yudhi
kumāraṁ svasya kanyāṁ ca
sva-puraṁ jayino ’viśan
Synonyms
tam — him; baddhvā — binding up; virathī-kṛtya — having deprived him of his chariot; kṛcchreṇa — with difficulty; kuravaḥ — the Kurus; yudhi — in the fight; kumāram — the young boy; svasya — their own; kanyām — girl; ca — and; sva-puram — their city; jayinaḥ — victorious; aviśan — entered.

Translation
Having deprived Sāmba of his chariot during the fight, the Kuru warriors tied him up with great difficulty and then returned victorious to their city, taking the young boy and their princess.

Text 13
तच्छ्रुत्वा नारदोक्तेन राजन् सञ्जातमन्यव: ।
कुरून् प्रत्युद्यमं चक्रुरुग्रसेनप्रचोदिता: ॥ १३ ॥
tac chrutvā nāradoktena
rājan sañjāta-manyavaḥ
kurūn praty udyamaṁ cakrur
ugrasena-pracoditāḥ
Synonyms
tat — this; śrutvā — hearing; nārada — of Nārada Muni; uktena — through the statements; rājan — O King (Parīkṣit); sañjāta — awakened; manyavaḥ — whose anger; kurūn — the Kurus; prati — against; udyamam — preparations for war; cakruḥ — they made; ugrasena — by King Ugrasena; pracoditāḥ — urged on.

Translation
O King, when the Yādavas heard news of this from Śrī Nārada, they became angry. Urged on by King Ugrasena, they prepared for war against the Kurus.

Texts 14-15
सान्‍त्‍वयित्वा तु तान् राम: सन्नद्धान् वृष्णिपुङ्गवान् ।
नैच्छत् कुरूणां वृष्णीनां कलिं कलिमलापह: ॥ १४ ॥
जगाम हास्तिनपुरं रथेनादित्यवर्चसा ।
ब्राह्मणै: कुलवृद्धैश्च वृतश्चन्द्र इव ग्रहै: ॥ १५ ॥
sāntvayitvā tu tān rāmaḥ
sannaddhān vṛṣṇi-puṅgavān
naicchat kurūṇāṁ vṛṣṇīnāṁ
kaliṁ kali-malāpahaḥ
jagāma hāstina-puraṁ
rathenāditya-varcasā
brāhmaṇaiḥ kula-vṛddhaiś ca
vṛtaś candra iva grahaiḥ
Synonyms
sāntvayitvā — calming; tu — but; tān — them; rāmaḥ — Lord Balarāma; sannaddhān — suited in armor; vṛṣṇi-puṅgavān — the heroes of the Vṛṣṇi dynasty; na aicchat — He did not want; kurūṇām vṛṣṇīnām — between the Kurus and the Vṛṣṇis; kalim — a quarrel; kali — of the age of quarrel; mala — the contamination; apahaḥ — He who removes; jagāma — He went; hāstina-puram — to Hastināpura; rathena — with His chariot; āditya — (like) the sun; varcasā — whose effulgence; brāhmaṇaiḥ — by brāhmaṇas; kula — of the family; vṛddhaiḥ — by elders; ca — and; vṛtaḥ — surrounded; candraḥ — the moon; iva — as; grahaiḥ — by the seven planets.

Translation
Lord Balarāma, however, cooled the tempers of the Vṛṣṇi heroes, who had already put on their armor. He who purifies the age of quarrel did not want a quarrel between the Kurus and Vṛṣṇis. Thus, accompanied by brāhmaṇas and family elders, He went to Hastināpura on His chariot, which was as effulgent as the sun. As He went, He appeared like the moon surrounded by the ruling planets.

Text 16
गत्वा गजाह्वयं रामो बाह्योपवनमास्थित: ।
उद्धवं प्रेषयामास धृतराष्ट्रं बुभुत्सया ॥ १६ ॥
gatvā gajāhvayaṁ rāmo
bāhyopavanam āsthitaḥ
uddhavaṁ preṣayām āsa
dhṛtarāṣṭraṁ bubhutsayā
Synonyms
gatvā — going; gajāhvayam — to Hastināpura; rāmaḥ — Lord Balarāma; bāhya — outside; upavanam — in a garden; āsthitaḥ — He stayed; uddhavam — Uddhava; preṣayām āsa — He sent; dhṛtarāṣṭram — about Dhṛtarāṣṭra; bubhutsayā — desiring to find out.

Translation
Upon arriving at Hastināpura, Lord Balarāma remained in a garden outside the city and sent Uddhava ahead to probe King Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s intentions.

Text 17
सोऽभिवन्द्याम्बिकापुत्रं भीष्मं द्रोणं च बाह्लिकम् ।
दुर्योधनं च विधिवद् राममागतमब्रवीत् ॥ १७ ॥
so ’bhivandyāmbikā-putraṁ
bhīṣmaṁ droṇaṁ ca bāhlikam
duryodhanaṁ ca vidhi-vad
rāmam āgataṁ abravīt
Synonyms
saḥ — he, Uddhava; abhivandya — offering respects; ambikā-putram — to Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the son of Ambikā; bhīṣmam droṇam ca — to Bhīṣma and Droṇa; bāhlikam duryodhanam ca — and to Bāhlika and Duryodhana; vidhi-vat — according to scriptural injunctions; rāmam — Lord Balarāma; āgatam — has arrived; abravīt — he said.

Translation
After he had offered proper respects to the son of Ambikā [Dhṛtarāṣṭra] and to Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Bāhlika and Duryodhana, Uddhava informed them that Lord Balarāma had arrived.

Text 18
तेऽतिप्रीतास्तमाकर्ण्य प्राप्तं रामं सुहृत्तमम् ।
तमर्चयित्वाभिययु: सर्वे मङ्गलपाणय: ॥ १८ ॥
te ’ti-prītās tam ākarṇya
prāptaṁ rāmaṁ suhṛt-tamam
tam arcayitvābhiyayuḥ
sarve maṅgala-pāṇayaḥ
Synonyms
te — they; ati — extremely; prītāḥ — pleased; tam — Him; ākarṇya — hearing; prāptam — arrived; rāmam — Balarāma; suhṛt-tamam — their dearest friend; tam — him, Uddhava; arcayitvā — after worshiping; abhiyayuḥ — went forth; sarve — all of them; maṅgala — auspicious offerings; pāṇayaḥ — in their hands.

Translation
Overjoyed to hear that Balarāma, their dearmost friend, had come, they first honored Uddhava and then went forth to meet the Lord, carrying auspicious offerings in their hands.

Text 19
तं सङ्गय यथान्यायं गामर्घ्यं च न्यवेदयन् ।
तेषां ये तत्प्रभावज्ञा: प्रणेमु: शिरसा बलम् ॥ १९ ॥
taṁ saṅgamya yathā-nyāyaṁ
gām arghyaṁ ca nyavedayan
teṣāṁ ye tat-prabhāva-jñāḥ
praṇemuḥ śirasā balam
Synonyms
tam — Him; saṅgamya — going up to; yathā — as; nyāyam — proper; gām — cows; arghyam — arghya water; ca — and; nyavedayan — they presented; teṣām — among them; ye — those who; tat — His; prabhāva — power; jñāḥ — knowing; praṇemuḥ — they bowed down; śirasā — with their heads; balam — to Lord Balarāma.

Translation
They approached Lord Balarāma and worshiped Him with gifts of cows and arghya, as was fitting. Those among the Kurus who understood His true power bowed down to Him, touching their heads to the ground.

Text 20
बन्धून् कुशलिन: श्रुत्वा पृष्ट्वा शिवमनामयम् ।
परस्परमथो रामो बभाषेऽविक्लवं वच: ॥ २० ॥
bandhūn kuśalinaḥ śrutvā
pṛṣṭvā śivam anāmayam
parasparam atho rāmo
babhāṣe ’viklavaṁ vacaḥ
Synonyms
bandhūn — their relatives; kuśalinaḥ — doing well; śrutvā — hearing; pṛṣṭvā — inquiring; śivam — about their welfare; anāmayam — and health; parasparam — among one another; atha u — thereupon; rāmaḥ — Lord Balarāma; babhāṣe — spoke; aviklavam — forthrightly; vacaḥ — words.

Translation
After both parties had heard that their relatives were doing well and both had inquired into each other’s welfare and health, Lord Balarāma forthrightly spoke to the Kurus as follows.

Text 21
उग्रसेन: क्षितेशेशो यद् व आज्ञापयत् प्रभु: ।
तदव्यग्रधिय: श्रुत्वा कुरुध्वमविलम्बितम् ॥ २१ ॥
ugrasenaḥ kṣiteśeśo
yad va ājñāpayat prabhuḥ
tad avyagra-dhiyaḥ śrutvā
kurudhvam avilambitam
Synonyms
ugrasenaḥ — King Ugrasena; kṣita — of the earth; īśa — of rulers; īśaḥ — the ruler; yat — what; vaḥ — of you; ājñāpayat — has demanded; prabhuḥ — our master; tat — that; avyagra-dhiyaḥ — with undivided attention; śrutvā — hearing; kurudhvam — you should do; avilambitam — without delay.

Translation
[Lord Balarāma said:] King Ugrasena is our master and the ruler of kings. With undivided attention you should hear what he has ordered you to do, and then you should do it at once.

Text 22
यद् यूयं बहवस्त्वेकं जित्वाधर्मेण धार्मिकम् ।
अबध्नीताथ तन्मृष्ये बन्धूनामैक्यकाम्यया ॥ २२ ॥
yad yūyaṁ bahavas tv ekaṁ
jitvādharmeṇa dhārmikam
abadhnītātha tan mṛṣye
bandhūnām aikya-kāmyayā
Synonyms
yat — that; yūyam — all of you; bahavaḥ — being many; tu — but; ekam — one person; jitvā — defeating; adharmeṇa — against religious principles; dhārmikam — one who follows religious principles; abadhnīta — you bound up; atha — even so; tat — that; mṛṣye — I am tolerating; bandhūnām — among relatives; aikya — for unity; kāmyayā — with the desire.

Translation
[King Ugrasena has said:] Even though by irreligious means several of you defeated a single opponent who follows the religious codes, still I am tolerating this for the sake of unity among family members.

Text 23
वीर्यशौर्यबलोन्नद्धमात्मशक्तिसमं वच: ।
कुरवो बलदेवस्य निशम्योचु: प्रकोपिता: ॥ २३ ॥
vīrya-śaurya-balonnaddham
ātma-śakti-samaṁ vacaḥ
kuravo baladevasya
niśamyocuḥ prakopitāḥ
Synonyms
vīrya — with potency; śaurya — courage; bala — and strength; unnaddham — filled; ātma — to His own; śakti — power; samam — appropriate; vacaḥ — the words; kuravaḥ — the Kauravas; baladevasya — of Lord Baladeva; niśamya — hearing; ūcuḥ — they spoke; prakopitāḥ — angered.

Translation
Upon hearing these words of Lord Baladeva’s, which were full of potency, courage and strength and were appropriate to His transcendental power, the Kauravas became furious and spoke as follows.

Text 24
अहो महच्चित्रमिदं कालगत्या दुरत्यया ।
आरुरुक्षत्युपानद् वै शिरो मुकुटसेवितम् ॥ २४ ॥
aho mahac citram idaṁ
kāla-gatyā duratyayā
ārurukṣaty upānad vai
śiro mukuṭa-sevitam
Synonyms
aho — oh; mahat — great; citram — wonder; idam — this; kāla — of time; gatyā — by the movement; duratyayā — unavoidable; ārurakṣati — wants to climb on top; upānat — a shoe; vai — indeed; śiraḥ — the head; mukuṭa — with a crown; sevitam — ornamented.

Translation
[The Kuru nobles said:] Oh, how amazing this is! The force of time is indeed insurmountable: a lowly shoe now wants to climb on the head that bears the royal crown.

Text 25
एते यौनेन सम्बद्धा: सहशय्यासनाशना: ।
वृष्णयस्तुल्यतां नीता अस्मद्दत्तनृपासना: ॥ २५ ॥
ete yaunena sambaddhāḥ
saha-śayyāsanāśanāḥ
vṛṣṇayas tulyatāṁ nītā
asmad-datta-nṛpāsanāḥ
Synonyms
ete — these; yaunena — by marital relation; sambaddhāḥ — connected; saha — sharing; śayyā — beds; āsana — seats; aśanāḥ — and meals; vṛṣṇayaḥ — the Vṛṣṇis; tulyatām — to equality; nītāḥ — brought; asmat — by us; datta — given; nṛpa-āsanāḥ — whose thrones.

Translation
It is because these Vṛṣṇis are bound to us by marital ties that we have granted them equality, allowing them to share our beds, seats and meals. Indeed, it is we who have given them their royal thrones.

Text 26
चामरव्यजने शङ्खमातपत्रं च पाण्डुरम् ।
किरीटमासनं शय्यां भुञ्जतेऽस्मदुपेक्षया ॥ २६ ॥
cāmara-vyajane śaṅkham
ātapatraṁ ca pāṇḍuram
kirīṭam āsanaṁ śayyāṁ
bhuñjate ’smad-upekṣayā
Synonyms
cāmara — of yak-tail hair; vyajane — pair of fans; śaṅkham — conchshell; ātapatram — umbrella; ca — and; pāṇḍuram — white; kirīṭam — crown; āsanam — throne; śayyām — royal bed; bhuñjate — they enjoy; asmat — by our; upekṣayā — overlooking.

Translation
Only because we looked the other way could they enjoy the pair of yak-tail fans and the conchshell, white umbrella, throne, and royal bed.

Text 27
अलं यदूनां नरदेवलाञ्छनै-
र्दातु: प्रतीपै: फणिनामिवामृतम् ।
येऽस्मत्प्रसादोपचिता हि यादवा
आज्ञापयन्त्यद्य गतत्रपा बत ॥ २७ ॥
alaṁ yadūnāṁ naradeva-lāñchanair
dātuḥ pratīpaiḥ phaṇinām ivāmṛtam
ye ’smat-prasādopacitā hi yādavā
ājñāpayanty adya gata-trapā bata
Synonyms
alam — enough; yadūnām — for the Yadus; nara-deva — of kings; lāñchanaiḥ — with the symbols; dātuḥ — for the giver; pratīpaiḥ — adverse; phaṇinām — for snakes; iva — just like; amṛtam — nectar; ye — who; asmat — our; prasāda — by the grace; upacitāḥ — made prosperous; hi — indeed; yādavāḥ — the Yadus; ājñāpayanti — are ordering; adya — now; gata-trapāḥ — having lost shame; bata — indeed.

Translation
No longer should the Yadus be allowed to use these royal symbols, which now cause trouble for those who gave them, like milk fed to poisonous snakes. Having prospered by our grace, these Yādavas have now lost all shame and are daring to command us!

Text 28
कथमिन्द्रोऽपि कुरुभिर्भीष्मद्रोणार्जुनादिभि: ।
अदत्तमवरुन्धीत सिंहग्रस्तमिवोरण: ॥ २८ ॥
katham indro ’pi kurubhir
bhīṣma-droṇārjunādibhiḥ
adattam avarundhīta
siṁha-grastam ivoraṇaḥ
Synonyms
katham — how; indraḥ — Lord Indra; api — even; kurubhiḥ — by the Kurus; bhīṣma-droṇa-arjuna-ādibhiḥ — Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Arjuna and others; adattam — not given; avarundhīta — would usurp; siṁha — by a lion; grastam — that which has been seized; iva — as; uraṇaḥ — a sheep.

Translation
How would even Indra dare usurp anything that Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Arjuna or the other Kurus have not given him? It would be like a lamb claiming the lion’s kill.

Text 29
श्रीबादरायणिरुवाच
जन्मबन्धुश्रियोन्नद्धमदास्ते भरतर्षभ ।
आश्राव्य रामं दुर्वाच्यमसभ्या: पुरमाविशन् ॥ २९ ॥
śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca
janma-bandhu-śrīyonnaddha-
madās te bharatarṣabha
āśrāvya rāmaṁ durvācyam
asabhyāḥ puram āviśan
Synonyms
śrī-bādarāyaniḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; janma — of birth; bandhu — and relationships; śrīyā — by the opulences; unnaddha — made great; madāḥ — whose intoxication; te — they; bharata-ṛṣabha — O best of the descendants of Bharata; āśrāvya — making hear; rāmam — Lord Balarāma; durvācyam — their harsh words; asabhyāḥ — rude men; puram — the city; āviśan — entered.

Translation
Śrī Bādarāyaṇi said: O best of the Bhāratas, after the arrogant Kurus, thoroughly puffed up by the opulence of their high birth and relations, had spoken these harsh words to Lord Balarāma, they turned and went back to their city.

Text 30
द‍ृष्ट्वा कुरूणां दौ:शील्यं श्रुत्वावाच्यानि चाच्युत: ।
अवोचत् कोपसंरब्धो दुष्प्रेक्ष्य: प्रहसन् मुहु: ॥ ३० ॥
dṛṣṭvā kurūnāṁ dauḥśīlyaṁ
śrutvāvācyāni cācyutaḥ
avocat kopa-saṁrabdho
duṣprekṣyaḥ prahasan muhuḥ
Synonyms
dṛṣṭvā — seeing; kurūṇām — of the Kurus; dauḥśīlyam — the bad character; śrutvā — hearing; avācyāni — words not to be spoken; ca — and; acyutaḥ — infallible Lord Balarāma; avocat — He said; kopa — with anger; saṁrabdhaḥ — enraged; duṣprekṣyaḥ — difficult to look at; prahasan — laughing; muhuḥ — repeatedly.

Translation
Seeing the bad character of the Kurus and hearing their nasty words, the infallible Lord Balarāma became filled with rage. His countenance frightful to behold, He laughed repeatedly and spoke as follows.

Text 31
नूनं नानामदोन्नद्धा: शान्तिं नेच्छन्त्यसाधव: ।
तेषां हि प्रशमो दण्ड: पशूनां लगुडो यथा ॥ ३१ ॥
nūnaṁ nānā-madonnaddhāḥ
śāntiṁ necchanty asādhavaḥ
teṣāṁ hi praśamo daṇḍaḥ
paśūnāṁ laguḍo yathā
Synonyms
nūnam — certainly; nānā — by various; mada — by passions; unnaddhāḥ — puffed up; śāntim — peace; na icchanti — they do not desire; asādhavaḥ — scoundrels; teṣām — their; hi — indeed; praśamaḥ — pacification; daṇḍaḥ — physical punishment; paśūnām — for animals; laguḍaḥ — a stick; yathā — as.

Translation
[Lord Balarāma said:] “Clearly the many passions of these scoundrels have made them so proud that they do not want peace. Then let them be pacified by physical punishment, as animals are with a stick.

Texts 32-33
अहो यदून् सुसंरब्धान् कृष्णं च कुपितं शनै: ।
सान्‍त्‍वयित्वाहमेतेषां शममिच्छन्निहागत: ॥ ३२ ॥
त इमे मन्दमतय: कलहाभिरता: खला: ।
तं मामवज्ञाय मुहुर्दुर्भाषान् मानिनोऽब्रुवन् ॥ ३३ ॥
aho yadūn su-saṁrabdhān
kṛṣṇaṁ ca kupitaṁ śanaiḥ
sāntvayitvāham eteṣāṁ
śamam icchann ihāgataḥ
ta ime manda-matayaḥ
kalahābhiratāḥ khalāḥ
taṁ mām avajñāya muhur
durbhāṣān mānino ’bruvan
Synonyms
aho — ah; yadūn — the Yadus; su-saṁrabdhān — boiling with rage; kṛṣṇam — Kṛṣṇa; ca — also; kupitam — angry; śanaiḥ — gradually; sāntvayitvā — having calmed; aham — I; eteṣām — for these (Kauravas); śamam — peace; icchan — desiring; iha — here; āgataḥ — came; te ime — those very ones (the Kurus); manda-matayaḥ — dull-headed; kalaha — to quarrel; abhiratāḥ — addicted; khalāḥ — wicked; tam — Him; mām — Myself; avajñāya — disrespecting; muhuḥ — repeatedly; durbhāṣān — harsh words; māninaḥ — being conceited; abruvan — they have spoken.

Translation
“Ah, only gradually was I able to calm the furious Yadus and Lord Kṛṣṇa, who was also enraged. Desiring peace for these Kauravas, I came here. But they are so dull-headed, fond of quarrel and mischievous by nature that they have repeatedly disrespected Me. Out of conceit they dared to address Me with harsh words!

Text 34
नोग्रसेन: किल विभुर्भोजवृष्ण्यन्धकेश्वर: ।
शक्रादयो लोकपाला यस्यादेशानुवर्तिन: ॥ ३४ ॥
nograsenaḥ kila vibhur
bhoja-vṛṣṇy-andhakeśvaraḥ
śakrādayo loka-pālā
yasyādeśānuvartinaḥ
Synonyms
na — not; ugrasenaḥ — King Ugrasena; kila — indeed; vibhuḥ — fit to command; bhoja-vṛṣṇi-andhaka — of the Bhojas, Vṛṣṇis and Andhakas; īśvaraḥ — the lord; śakra-ādayaḥ — Indra and other demigods; loka — of planets; pālāḥ — the rulers; yasya — of whose; ādeśa — orders; anuvartinaḥ — followers.

Translation
“King Ugrasena, the lord of the Bhojas, Vṛṣṇis and Andhakas, is not fit to command, when Indra and other planetary rulers obey his orders?

Text 35
सुधर्माक्रम्यते येन पारिजातोऽमराङ्‍‍घ्रिप: ।
आनीय भुज्यते सोऽसौ न किलाध्यासनार्हण: ॥ ३५ ॥
sudharmākramyate yena
pārijāto ’marāṅghripaḥ
ānīya bhujyate so ’sau
na kilādhyāsanārhaṇaḥ
Synonyms
sudharmā — Sudharmā, the royal council-chamber of heaven; ākramyate — occupies; yena — by whom (Lord Kṛṣṇa); pārijātaḥ — known as pārijāta; amara — of the immortal demigods; aṅghripaḥ — the tree; ānīya — being brought; bhujyate — is enjoyed; saḥ asau — that same person; na — not; kila — indeed; adhyāsana — an elevated seat; arhaṇaḥ — deserving.

Translation
“That same Kṛṣṇa who occupies the Sudharmā assembly hall and for His enjoyment took the pārijāta tree from the immortal demigods — that very Kṛṣṇa is indeed not fit to sit on a royal throne?

Text 36
यस्य पादयुगं साक्षाच्छ्रीरुपास्तेऽखिलेश्वरी ।
स नार्हति किल श्रीशो नरदेवपरिच्छदान् ॥ ३६ ॥
yasya pāda-yugaṁ sākṣāc
chrīr upāste ’khileśvarī
sa nārhati kila śrīśo
naradeva-paricchadān
Synonyms
yasya — whose; pāda-yugam — two feet; sākṣāt — herself; śrīḥ — the goddess of fortune; upāste — worships; akhila — of the whole universe; īśvarī — the ruler; saḥ — He; na arhati — does not deserve; kila — indeed; śrī-īśaḥ — the master of the goddess of fortune; nara-deva — of a human king; paricchadān — the paraphernalia.

Translation
“The goddess of fortune herself, ruler of the entire universe, worships His feet. And the master of the goddess of fortune does not deserve the paraphernalia of a mortal king?

Text 37
यस्याङ्‍‍घ्रिपङ्कजरजोऽखिललोकपालै-
र्मौल्युत्तमैर्धृतमुपासिततीर्थतीर्थम् ।
ब्रह्मा भवोऽहमपि यस्य कला: कलाया:
श्रीश्चोद्वहेम चिरमस्य नृपासनं क्व‍ ॥ ३७ ॥
yasyāṅghri-paṅkaja-rajo ’khila-loka-pālair
mauly-uttamair dhṛtam upāsita-tīrtha-tīrtham
brahmā bhavo ’ham api yasya kalāḥ kalāyāḥ
śrīś codvahema ciram asya nṛpāsanaṁ kva
Synonyms
yasya — whose; aṅghri — of the feet; paṅkaja — lotuslike; rajaḥ — the dust; akhila — of all; loka — worlds; pālaiḥ — by the rulers; mauli — on their helmets; uttamaiḥ — exalted; dhṛtam — held; upāsita — worshipable; tīrtha — of holy places; tīrtham — the source of holiness; brahmā — Lord Brahmā; bhavaḥ — Lord Śiva; aham — I; api — also; yasya — whose; kalāḥ — portions; kalāyāḥ — of a portion; śrīḥ — the goddess of fortune; ca — also; udvahema — carry carefully; ciram — constantly; asya — His; nṛpa-āsanam — king’s throne; kva — where.

Translation
“The dust of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, which is the source of holiness for all places of pilgrimage, is worshiped by all the great demigods. The principal deities of all planets are engaged in His service, and they consider themselves most fortunate to take the dust of the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa on their crowns. Great demigods like Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, and even the goddess of fortune and I, are simply parts of His spiritual identity, and we also carefully carry that dust on our heads. And still Kṛṣṇa is not fit to use the royal insignia or even sit on the royal throne?

Text 38
भुञ्जते कुरुभिर्दत्तं भूखण्डं वृष्णय: किल ।
उपानह: किल वयं स्वयं तु कुरव: शिर: ॥ ३८ ॥
bhuñjate kurubhir dattaṁ
bhū-khaṇḍaṁ vṛṣṇayaḥ kila
upānahaḥ kila vayaṁ
svayaṁ tu kuravaḥ śiraḥ
Synonyms
bhuñjate — they enjoy; kurubhiḥ — by the Kurus; dattam — granted; bhū — of land; khaṇḍam — a limited parcel; vṛṣṇayaḥ — the Vṛṣṇis; kila — indeed; upānahaḥ — shoes; kila — indeed; vayam — we; svayam — themselves; tu — however; kuravaḥ — the Kurus; śiraḥ — the head.

Translation
“We Vṛṣṇis enjoy only whatever small parcel of land the Kurus allow us? And we are indeed shoes, whereas the Kurus are the head?

Text 39
अहो ऐश्वर्यमत्तानां मत्तानामिव मानिनाम् ।
असम्बद्धा गिरो रुक्षा: क: सहेतानुशासिता ॥ ३९ ॥
aho aiśvarya-mattānāṁ
mattānām iva māninām
asambaddhā giṛo rukṣāḥ
kaḥ sahetānuśāsītā
Synonyms
aho — ah; aiśvarya — with their ruling power; mattānām — of those who are mad; mattānām — of those who are physically intoxicated; iva — as if; māninām — who are proud; asambaddhāḥ — incoherent and absurd; giraḥ — words; rukṣāḥ — harsh; kaḥ — who; saheta — can tolerate; anuśāsītā — commander.

Translation
“Just see how these puffed-up Kurus are intoxicated with their so-called power, like ordinary drunken men! What actual ruler, with the power to command, would tolerate their foolish, nasty words?

Text 40
अद्य निष्कौरवं पृथ्वीं करिष्यामीत्यमर्षित: ।
गृहीत्वा हलमुत्तस्थौ दहन्निव जगत्‍त्रयम् ॥ ४० ॥
adya niṣkauravāṁ pṛthvīṁ
kariṣyāmīty amarṣitaḥ
gṛhītvā halam uttasthau
dahann iva jagat-trayam
Synonyms
adya — today; niṣkauravāṁ — devoid of Kauravas; pṛthvīm — the earth; kariṣyāmi — I shall make; iti — thus speaking; amarṣitaḥ — angry; gṛhītvā — taking; halam — His plow; uttasthau — He stood; dahan — burning; iva — as if; jagat — the worlds; trayam — three.

Translation
“Today I shall rid the earth of the Kauravas!” declared the furious Balarāma. Thus He took His plow weapon and rose up as if to set the three worlds ablaze.

Text 41
लाङ्गलाग्रेण नगरमुद्विदार्य गजाह्वयम् ।
विचकर्ष स गङ्गायां प्रहरिष्यन्नमर्षित: ॥ ४१ ॥
lāṅgalāgreṇa nagaram
udvidārya gajāhvayam
vicakarṣa sa gaṅgāyāṁ
prahariṣyann amarṣitaḥ
Synonyms
lāṅgala — of His plow; agreṇa — with the tip; nagaram — the city; udvidārya — tearing up; gajāhvayam — Hastināpura; vicakarṣa — dragged; saḥ — He; gaṅgāyām — in the Ganges; prahariṣyan — about to cast it; amarṣitaḥ — enraged.

Translation
The Lord angrily dug up Hastināpura with the tip of His plow and began to drag it, intending to cast the entire city into the Ganges.

Texts 42-43
जलयानमिवाघूर्णं गङ्गायां नगरं पतत् ।
आकृष्यमाणमालोक्य कौरवा: जातसम्भ्रमा: ॥ ४२ ॥
तमेव शरणं जग्मु: सकुटुम्बा जिजीविषव: ।
सलक्ष्मणं पुरस्कृत्य साम्बं प्राञ्जलय: प्रभुम् ॥ ४३ ॥
jala-yānam ivāghūrṇaṁ
gaṅgāyāṁ nagaraṁ patat
ākṛṣyamāṇam ālokya
kauravāḥ jāta-sambhramāḥ
tam eva śaraṇaṁ jagmuḥ
sa-kuṭumbā jijīviṣavaḥ
sa-lakṣmaṇaṁ puras-kṛtya
sāmbaṁ prāñjalayaḥ prabhum
Synonyms
jala-yānam — a raft; iva — as if; āghūrṇam — tumbling about; gaṅgāyām — into the Ganges; nagaram — the city; patat — falling; ākṛṣyamāṇam — being dragged; ālokya — seeing; kauravāḥ — the Kauravas; jāta — becoming; sambhramāḥ — excited and bewildered; tam — to Him, Lord Balarāma; eva — indeed; śaraṇam — for shelter; jagmuḥ — they went; sa — with; kuṭumbaḥ — their families; jijīviṣavaḥ — wanting to remain alive; sa — with; lakṣmaṇam — Lakṣmaṇā; puraḥ-kṛtya — placing in front; sāmbam — Sāmba; prāñjalayaḥ — with palms joined in supplication; prabhum — to the Lord.

Translation
Seeing that their city was tumbling about like a raft at sea as it was being dragged away, and that it was about to fall into the Ganges, the Kauravas became terrified. To save their lives they approached the Lord for shelter, taking their families with them. Placing Sāmba and Lakṣmaṇā in front, they joined their palms in supplication.

Text 44
राम रामाखिलाधार प्रभावं न विदाम ते ।
मूढानां न: कुबुद्धीनां क्षन्तुमर्हस्यतिक्रमम् ॥ ४४ ॥
rāma rāmākhilādhāra
prabhāvaṁ na vidāma te
mūḍhānāṁ naḥ ku-buddhīnāṁ
kṣantum arhasy atikramam
Synonyms
rāma rāma — O Rāma, Rāma; akhila — of everything; ādhāra — O foundation; prabhāvam — power; na vidāma — we do not know; te — Your; mūḍhānām — of befooled persons; naḥ — us; ku — bad; buddhīnām — whose understanding; kṣantum arhasi — You should please forgive; atikramam — the offense.

Translation
[The Kauravas said:] O Rāma, Rāma, foundation of everything! We know nothing of Your power. Please excuse our offense, for we are ignorant and misguided.

Text 45
स्थित्युत्पत्त्यप्ययानां त्वमेको हेतुर्निराश्रय: ।
लोकान् क्रीडनकानीश क्रीडतस्ते वदन्ति हि ॥ ४५ ॥
sthity-utpatty-apyayānāṁ tvam
eko hetur nirāśrayaḥ
lokān krīḍanakān īśa
krīḍatas te vadanti hi
Synonyms
sthiti — of maintenance; utpatti — creation; apyayānām — and destruction; tvam — You; ekaḥ — alone; hetuḥ — the cause; nirāśrayaḥ — without any other basis; lokān — the worlds; krīḍanakān — playthings; īśa — O Lord; krīḍataḥ — who are playing; te — Your; vadanti — they say; hi — indeed.

Translation
You alone cause the creation, maintenance and annihilation of the cosmos, and of You there is no prior cause. Indeed, O Lord, authorities say that the worlds are mere playthings for You as You perform Your pastimes.

Text 46
त्वमेव मूर्ध्नीदमनन्त लीलया
भूमण्डलं बिभर्षि सहस्रमूर्धन् ।
अन्ते च य: स्वात्मनिरुद्धविश्व:
शेषेऽद्वितीय: परिशिष्यमाण: ॥ ४६ ॥
tvam eva mūrdhnīdam ananta līlayā
bhū-maṇḍalaṁ bibharṣi sahasra-mūrdhan
ante ca yaḥ svātma-niruddha-viśvaḥ
śeṣe ’dvitīyaḥ pariśiṣyamāṇaḥ
Synonyms
tvam — You; eva — alone; mūrdhni — on Your head; idam — this; ananta — O unlimited one; līlayā — easily, as a pastime; bhū — of the earth; maṇḍalam — the globe; bibharṣi — (You) carry; sahasra-mūrdhan — O thousand-headed Lord; ante — in the end; ca — and; yaḥ — the one who; sva — Your own; ātma — within the body; niruddha — having withdrawn; viśvaḥ — the universe; śeṣe — You lie; advitīyaḥ — without a second; pariśiṣyamāṇaḥ — remaining.

Translation
O unlimited one of a thousand heads, as Your pastime You carry this earthly globe upon one of Your heads. At the time of annihilation You withdraw the entire universe within Your body and, remaining all alone, lie down to rest.

Text 47
कोपस्तेऽखिलशिक्षार्थं न द्वेषान्न च मत्सरात् ।
बिभ्रतो भगवन् सत्त्वं स्थितिपालनतत्पर: ॥ ४७ ॥
kopas te ’khila-śikṣārthaṁ
na dveṣān na ca matsarāt
bibhrato bhagavan sattvaṁ
sthiti-pālana-tatparaḥ
Synonyms
kopaḥ — anger; te — Your; akhila — of everyone; śikṣā — for the instruction; artham — meant; na — not; dveṣāt — out of hatred; na ca — nor; matsarāt — out of envy; bibhrataḥ — of You who are sustaining; bhagavan — O Supreme Lord; sattvam — the mode of goodness; sthiti — maintenance; pālana — and protection; tat-paraḥ — having as its intent.

Translation
Your anger is meant for instructing everyone; it is not a manifestation of hatred or envy. O Supreme Lord, You sustain the pure mode of goodness, and You become angry only to maintain and protect this world.

Text 48
नमस्ते सर्वभूतात्मन् सर्वशक्तिधराव्यय ।
विश्वकर्मन् नमस्तेऽस्तु त्वां वयं शरणं गता: ॥ ४८ ॥
namas te sarva-bhūtātman
sarva-śakti-dharāvyaya
viśva-karman namas te ’stu
tvāṁ vayaṁ śaraṇaṁ gatāḥ
Synonyms
namaḥ — obeisances; te — to You; sarva — of all; bhūta — beings; ātman — O Soul; sarva — of all; śakti — energies; dhara — O holder; avyaya — O undepletable one; viśva — of the universe; karman — O maker; namaḥ — obeisances; te — to You; astu — let there be; tvām — to You; vayam — we; śaraṇam — for shelter; gatāḥ — have come.

Translation
We bow down to You, O Soul of all beings, O wielder of all potencies, O tireless maker of the universe! Offering You obeisances, we take shelter of You.

Text 49
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं प्रपन्नै: संविग्नैर्वेपमानायनैर्बल: ।
प्रसादित: सुप्रसन्नो मा भैष्टेत्यभयं ददौ ॥ ४९ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ prapannaiḥ saṁvignair
vepamānāyanair balaḥ
prasāditaḥ su-prasanno
mā bhaiṣṭety abhayaṁ dadau
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — thus; prapannaiḥ — by those who were surrendering; saṁvignaiḥ — greatly distressed; vepamāna — shaking; ayanaiḥ — whose place of residence; balaḥ — Lord Balarāma; prasāditaḥ — propitiated; su — very; prasannaḥ — calm and gracious; mā bhaiṣṭa — do not be afraid; iti — thus saying; abhayam — relief from fear; dadau — He gave.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus propitiated by the Kurus, whose city was trembling and who were surrendering to Him in great distress, Lord Balarāma became very calm and kindly disposed toward them. “Do not be afraid,” He said, and took away their fear.

Texts 50-51
दुर्योधन: पारिबर्हं कुञ्जरान् षष्टिहायनान् ।
ददौ च द्वादशशतान्ययुतानि तुरङ्गमान् ॥ ५० ॥
रथानां षट्‍सहस्राणि रौक्‍माणां सूर्यवर्चसाम् ।
दासीनां निष्ककण्ठीनां सहस्रं दुहितृवत्सल: ॥ ५१ ॥
duryodhanaḥ pāribarhaṁ
kuñjarān ṣaṣṭi-hāyanān
dadau ca dvādaśa-śatāny
ayutāni turaṅgamān
rathānāṁ ṣaṭ-sahasrāṇi
raukmāṇāṁ sūrya-varcasām
dāsīnāṁ niṣka-kaṇṭhīnāṁ
sahasraṁ duhitṛ-vatsalaḥ
Synonyms
duryodhanaḥ — Duryodhana; pāribarham — as a dowry; kuñjarān — elephants; ṣaṣṭi — sixty; hāyanān — years old; dadau — gave; ca — and; dvādaśa — twelve; śatāni — hundred; ayutāni — tens of thousands; turaṅgamān — horses; rathānām — of chariots; ṣaṭ-sahasrāṇi — six thousand; raukmāṇām — golden; sūrya — (like) the sun; varcasām — whose effulgence; dāsīnām — of maidservants; niṣka — jeweled lockets; kaṇṭthīnām — on whose throats; sahasram — one thousand; duhitṛ — for his daughter; vatsalaḥ — having fatherly affection.

Translation
Duryodhana, being very affectionate to his daughter, gave as her dowry 1,200 sixty-year-old elephants, 120,000 horses, 6,000 golden chariots shining like the sun, and 1,000 maidservants with jeweled lockets on their necks.

Text 52
प्रतिगृह्य तु तत्सर्वं भगवान् सात्वतर्षभ: ।
ससुत: सस्‍नुष: प्रायात् सुहृद्भ‍िरभिनन्दित: ॥ ५२ ॥
pratigṛhya tu tat sarvaṁ
bhagavān sātvatarṣabhaḥ
sa-sutaḥ sa-snuṣaḥ prāyāt
suhṛdbhir abhinanditaḥ
Synonyms
pratigṛhya — accepting; tu — and; tat — that; sarvam — all; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; sātvata — of the Yādavas; ṛṣabhaḥ — the chief; sa — with; sutaḥ — His son; sa — and with; snuṣaḥ — His daughter-in-law; prāyāt — He departed; su-hṛdbhiḥ — by His well-wishers (the Kurus); abhinanditaḥ — bid farewell.

Translation
The Supreme Lord, chief of the Yādavas, accepted all these gifts and then departed with His son and daughter-in-law as His well-wishers bid Him farewell.

Text 53
तत: प्रविष्ट: स्वपुरं हलायुध:
समेत्य बन्धूननुरक्तचेतस: ।
शशंस सर्वं यदुपुङ्गवानां
मध्ये सभायां कुरुषु स्वचेष्टितम् ॥ ५३ ॥
tataḥ praviṣṭaḥ sva-puraṁ halāyudhaḥ
sametya bandhūn anurakta-cetasaḥ
śaśaṁsa sarvaṁ yadu-puṅgavānāṁ
madhye sabhāyāṁ kuruṣu sva-ceṣṭitam
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; praviṣṭaḥ — having entered; sva — His; puram — city; hala-āyudhaḥ — Lord Balarāma, who has a plow weapon; sametya — meeting; bandhūn — His relatives; anurakta — attached to Him; cetasaḥ — whose hearts; śaśaṁsa — He related; sarvam — everything; yadu-puṅgavānām — of the leaders of the Yadus; madhye — in the midst; sabhāyām — of the assembly; kuruṣu — among the Kurus; sva — His own; ceṣṭitam — action.

Translation
Then Lord Halāyudha entered His city [Dvārakā] and met His relatives, whose hearts were all bound to Him in loving attachment. In the assembly hall He reported to the Yadu leaders everything about His dealings with the Kurus.

Text 54
अद्यापि च पुरं ह्येतत् सूचयद् रामविक्रमम् ।
समुन्नतं दक्षिणतो गङ्गायामनुद‍ृश्यते ॥ ५४ ॥
adyāpi ca puraṁ hy etat
sūcayad rāma-vikramam
samunnataṁ dakṣiṇato
gaṅgāyām anudṛśyate
Synonyms
adya — today; api — even; ca — and; puram — city; hi — indeed; etat — this; sūcayat — showing the signs of; rāma — of Lord Balarāma; vikramam — the prowess; samunnatam — prominently elevated; dakṣiṇataḥ — on the southern side; gaṅgāyām — by the Ganges; anudṛśyate — is seen.

Translation
Even today the city of Hastināpura is visibly elevated on its southern side along the Ganges, thus showing the signs of Lord Balarāma’s prowess.