Texts 1-2
श्रीशुक उवाच
एकदा तु सभामध्य आस्थितो मुनिभिर्वृत: ।
ब्राह्मणै: क्षत्रियैर्वैश्यैर्भ्रातृभिश्च युधिष्ठिर: ॥ १ ॥
आचार्यै: कुलवृद्धैश्च ज्ञातिसम्बन्धिबान्धवै: ।
श‍ृण्वतामेव चैतेषामाभाष्येदमुवाच ह ॥ २ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
ekadā tu sabhā-madhya
āsthito munibhir vṛtaḥ
brāhmaṇaiḥ kṣatriyair vaiśyair
bhrātṛbhiś ca yudhiṣṭhiraḥ
ācāryaiḥ kula-vṛddhaiś ca
jñāti-sambandhi-bāndhavaiḥ
śṛṇvatām eva caiteṣām
ābhāṣyedam uvāca ha
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ekadā — once; tu — and; sabhā — of the royal assembly; madhye — in the midst; āsthitaḥ — seated; munibhiḥ — by sages; vṛtaḥ — surrounded; brāhmaṇaiḥ kṣatriyaiḥ vaiśyaiḥ — by brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas and vaiśyas; bhrātṛbhiḥ — by his brothers; ca — and; yudhiṣṭhiraḥ — King Yudhiṣṭhira; ācāryaiḥ — by his spiritual masters; kula — of the family; vṛddhaiḥ — by the elders; ca — also; jñāti — by blood relatives; sambandhi — in-laws; bāndhavaiḥ — and friends; śṛṇvatām — as they listened; eva — indeed; ca — and; eteṣām — all of them; ābhāṣya — addressing (Lord Kṛṣṇa); idam — this; uvāca ha — he said.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: One day, as King Yudhiṣṭhira sat in the royal assembly surrounded by eminent sages, brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas and vaiśyas, and also by his brothers, spiritual masters, family elders, blood relations, in-laws and friends, he addressed Lord Kṛṣṇa as everyone listened.

Text 3
श्रीयुधिष्ठिर उवाच
क्रतुराजेन गोविन्द राजसूयेन पावनी: ।
यक्ष्ये विभूतीर्भवतस्तत् सम्पादय न: प्रभो ॥ ३ ॥
śrī-yudhiṣṭhira uvāca
kratu-rājena govinda
rājasūyena pāvanīḥ
yakṣye vibhūtīr bhavatas
tat sampādaya naḥ prabho
Synonyms
śrī-yudhiṣṭhiraḥ uvāca — Śrī Yudhiṣṭhira said; kratu — of major fire sacrifices; rājena — with the king; govinda — O Kṛṣṇa; rājasūyena — named Rājasūya; pāvanīḥ — purifying; yakṣye — I wish to worship; vibhūtīḥ — the opulent expansions; bhavataḥ — of Yourself; tat — that; sampādaya — please allow to happen; naḥ — for us; prabho — O master.

Translation
Śrī Yudhiṣṭhira said: O Govinda, I desire to worship Your auspicious, opulent expansions by the Rājasūya sacrifice, the king of Vedic ceremonies. Please make our endeavor a success, my Lord.

Text 4
त्वत्पादुके अविरतं परि ये चरन्ति
ध्यायन्त्यभद्रनशने शुचयो गृणन्ति ।
विन्दन्ति ते कमलनाभ भवापवर्ग-
माशासते यदि त आशिष ईश नान्ये ॥ ४ ॥
tvat-pāduke avirataṁ pari ye caranti
dhyāyanty abhadra-naśane śucayo gṛṇanti
vindanti te kamala-nābha bhavāpavargam
āśāsate yadi ta āśiṣa īśa nānye
Synonyms
tvat — Your; pāduke — slippers; aviratam — constantly; pari — fully; ye — who; caranti — serve; dhyāyanti — meditate upon; abhadra — of inauspicious things; naśane — which (cause) the destruction; śucayaḥ — purified; gṛṇanti — and describe in their words; vindanti — obtain; te — they; kamala — (like a) lotus; nābha — O You whose navel; bhava — of material life; apavargam — the cessation; āśāsate — harbor desires; yadi — if; te — they; āśiṣaḥ — (attain) the desired objects; īśa — O Lord; na — not; anye — other persons.

Translation
Purified persons who constantly serve, meditate upon and glorify Your shoes, which destroy everything inauspicious, are sure to obtain freedom from material existence, O lotus-naveled one. Even if they desire something in this world, they obtain it, whereas others — those who do not take shelter of You — are never satisfied, O Lord.

Text 5
तद् देवदेव भवतश्चरणारविन्द-
सेवानुभावमिह पश्यतु लोक एष: ।
ये त्वां भजन्ति न भजन्त्युत वोभयेषां
निष्ठां प्रदर्शय विभो कुरुसृञ्जयानाम् ॥ ५ ॥
tad deva-deva bhavataś caraṇāravinda-
sevānubhāvam iha paśyatu loka eṣaḥ
ye tvāṁ bhajanti na bhajanty uta vobhayeṣāṁ
niṣṭhāṁ pradarśaya vibho kuru-sṛñjayānām
Synonyms
tat — therefore; deva-deva — O Lord of lords; bhavataḥ — Your; caraṇa-aravinda — to the lotus feet; sevā — of service; anubhāvam — the power; iha — in this world; paśyatu — may they see; lokaḥ — the populace; eṣaḥ — this; ye — who; tvām — You; bhajanti — worship; na bhajanti — do not worship; uta vā — or else; ubhayeṣām — of both; niṣṭhām — the status; pradarśaya — please show; vibho — O all-powerful one; kuru-sṛñjayānām — of the Kurus and Sṛñjayas.

Translation
Therefore, O Lord of lords, let the people of this world see the power of devotional service rendered to Your lotus feet. Please show them, O almighty one, the position of those Kurus and Sṛñjayas who worship You, and the position of those who do not.

Text 6
न ब्रह्मण: स्वपरभेदमतिस्तव स्यात्
सर्वात्मन: समद‍ृश: स्वसुखानुभूते: ।
संसेवतां सुरतरोरिव ते प्रसाद:
सेवानुरूपमुदयो न विपर्ययोऽत्र ॥ ६ ॥
na brahmaṇaḥ sva-para-bheda-matis tava syāt
sarvātmanaḥ sama-dṛśaḥ sva-sukhānubhūteḥ
saṁsevatāṁ sura-taror iva te prasādaḥ
sevānurūpam udayo na viparyayo ’tra
Synonyms
na — not; brahmaṇaḥ — of the Absolute Truth; sva — of own; para — and other’s; bheda — differential; matiḥ — mentality; tava — of You; syāt — there can be; sarva — of all beings; ātmanaḥ — of the Soul; sama — equal; dṛśaḥ — whose vision; sva — within Himself; sukha — of happiness; anubhūteḥ — whose experience; saṁsevatām — for those who properly worship; sura-taroḥ — of the heavenly desire tree; iva — as if; te — Your; prasādaḥ — grace; sevā — with the service; anurūpam — in accordance; udayaḥ — desirable results; na — not; viparyayaḥ — contradiction; atra — in this.

Translation
Within Your mind there can be no such differentiation as “This one is mine, and that is another’s,” because You are the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Soul of all beings, always equipoised and enjoying transcendental happiness within Yourself. Just like the heavenly desire tree, You bless all who properly worship You, granting their desired fruits in proportion to the service they render You. There is nothing wrong in this.

Text 7
श्रीभगवानुवाच
सम्यग् व्यवसितं राजन् भवता शत्रुकर्शन ।
कल्याणी येन ते कीर्तिर्लोकाननु भविष्यति ॥ ७ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
samyag vyavasitaṁ rājan
bhavatā śatru-karśana
kalyāṇī yena te kīrtir
lokān anubhaviṣyati
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Lord said; samyak — perfectly; vyavasitam — determined; rājan — O King; bhavatā — by you; śatru — of enemies; karśana — O tormentor; kalyāṇī — auspicious; yena — by which; te — your; kīrtiḥ — fame; lokān — all the worlds; anubhaviṣyati — it will see.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Your decision is perfect, O King, and thus your noble fame will spread to all the worlds, O tormentor of your enemies.

Text 8
ऋषीणां पितृदेवानां सुहृदामपि न: प्रभो ।
सर्वेषामपि भूतानामीप्सित: क्रतुराडयम् ॥ ८ ॥
ṛṣīṇāṁ pitṛ-devānāṁ
suhṛdām api naḥ prabho
sarveṣām api bhūtānām
īpsitaḥ kratu-rāḍ ayam
Synonyms
ṛṣīṇām — for the sages; pitṛ — departed forefathers; devānām — and demigods; suhṛdām — for the friends; api — also; naḥ — our; prabhoḥ — master; sarveṣām — for all; api — as well; bhūtānām — living beings; īpsitaḥ — desirable; kratu — of major Vedic sacrifices; rāṭ — king; ayam — this.

Translation
Indeed, My lord, for the great sages, the forefathers and the demigods, for Our well-wishing friends and, indeed, for all living beings, the performance of this king of Vedic sacrifices is desirable.

Text 9
विजित्य नृपतीन्सर्वान् कृत्वा च जगतीं वशे ।
सम्भृत्य सर्वसम्भारानाहरस्व महाक्रतुम् ॥ ९ ॥
vijitya nṛpatīn sarvān
kṛtvā ca jagatīṁ vaśe
sambhṛtya sarva-sambhārān
āharasva mahā-kratum
Synonyms
vijitya — conquering; nṛ-patīn — the kings; sarvān — all; kṛtvā — making; ca — and; jagatīm — the earth; vaśe — under your control; sambhṛtya — collecting; sarva — all; sambhārān — the paraphernalia; āharasva — execute; mahā — great; kratum — the sacrifice.

Translation
First conquer all kings, bring the earth under your control and collect all the required paraphernalia; then execute this great sacrifice.

Text 10
एते ते भ्रातरो राजल्ँ लोकपालांशसम्भवा: ।
जितोऽस्म्यात्मवता तेऽहं दुर्जयो योऽकृतात्मभि: ॥ १० ॥
ete te bhrātaro rājaḻ
loka-pālāṁśa-sambhavāḥ
jito ’smy ātmavatā te ’haṁ
durjayo yo ’kṛtātmabhiḥ
Synonyms
ete — these; te — your; bhrātaraḥ — brothers; rājan — O King; loka — of the planets; pāla — from the ruling demigods; aṁśa — as partial expansions; sambhavāḥ — born; jitaḥ — conquered; asmi — am; ātma-vatā — self-controlled; te — by you; aham — I; durjayaḥ — unconquerable; yaḥ — who; akṛta-ātmabhiḥ — by those who have not conquered their senses.

Translation
These brothers of yours, O King, have taken birth as partial expansions of the demigods ruling various planets. And you are so self-controlled that you have conquered even Me, who am unconquerable for those who cannot control their senses.

Text 11
न कश्चिन्मत्परं लोके तेजसा यशसा श्रिया ।
विभूतिभिर्वाभिभवेद् देवोऽपि किमु पार्थिव: ॥ ११ ॥
na kaścin mat-paraṁ loke
tejasā yaśasā śriyā
vibhūtibhir vābhibhaved
devo ’pi kim u pārthivaḥ
Synonyms
na — not; kaścit — any person; mat — to Me; param — one who is dedicated; loke — in this world; tejasā — by his strength; yaśasā — fame; śriyā — beauty; vibhūtibhiḥ — opulences; vā — or; abhibhavet — can overcome; devaḥ — a demigod; api — even; kim u — what to speak of; pārthivaḥ — a ruler of the earth.

Translation
No one in this world, even a demigod — what to speak of an earthly king — can defeat My devotee with his strength, beauty, fame or riches.

Text 12
श्रीशुक उवाच
निशम्य भगवद्गीतं प्रीत: फुल्ल‍मुखाम्बुज: ।
भ्रातृन् दिग्विजयेऽयुङ्क्त विष्णुतेजोपबृंहितान् ॥ १२ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
niśamya bhagavad-gītaṁ
prītaḥ phulla-mukhāmbujaḥ
bhrātṝn dig-vijaye ’yuṅkta
viṣṇu-tejopabṛṁhitān
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śuka said; niśamya — hearing; bhagavat — of the Supreme Lord; gītam — the song; prītaḥ — pleased; phulla — blossoming; mukha — his face; ambujaḥ — lotuslike; bhrātṝn — his brothers; dik — of all the directions; vijaye — in the conquest; ayuṅkta — engaged; viṣṇu — of Lord Viṣṇu; tejaḥ — with the potency; upabṛṁhitān — fortified.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Upon hearing these words sung by the Supreme Lord, King Yudhiṣṭhira became joyful, and his face blossomed like a lotus. Thus he sent forth his brothers, who were empowered with Lord Viṣṇu’s potency, to conquer all directions.

Text 13
सहदेवं दक्षिणस्यामादिशत् सह सृञ्जयै: ।
दिशि प्रतीच्यां नकुलमुदीच्यां सव्यसाचिनम् ।
प्राच्यां वृकोदरं मत्स्यै: केकयै: सह मद्रकै: ॥ १३ ॥
sahadevaṁ dakṣiṇasyām
ādiśat saha sṛñjayaiḥ
diśi pratīcyāṁ nakulam
udīcyāṁ savyasācinam
prācyāṁ vṛkodaraṁ matsyaiḥ
kekayaiḥ saha madrakaiḥ
Synonyms
sahadevam — Sahadeva; dakṣiṇasyām — to the south; ādiśat — he ordered; saha — with; sṛñjayaiḥ — the warriors of the Sṛñjaya clan; diśi — to the direction; pratīcyām — western; nakulam — Nakula; udīcyām — to the north; savyasācinam — Arjuna; prācyām — to the east; vṛkodaram — Bhīma; matsyaiḥ — the Matsyas; kekayaiḥ — the Kekayas; saha — together with; madrakaiḥ — and the Madrakas.

Translation
He sent Sahadeva to the south with the Sṛñjayas, Nakula to the west with the Matsyas, Arjuna to the north with the Kekayas, and Bhīma to the east with the Madrakas.

Text 14
ते विजित्य नृपान्वीरा आजह्रुर्दिग्भ्य ओजसा ।
अजातशत्रवे भूरि द्रविणं नृप यक्ष्यते ॥ १४ ॥
te vijitya nṛpān vīrā
ājahrur digbhya ojasā
ajāta-śatrave bhūri
draviṇaṁ nṛpa yakṣyate
Synonyms
te — they; vijitya — defeating; nṛpān — kings; vīrāḥ — the heroes; ājahruḥ — brought; digbhyaḥ — from the different directions; ojasā — by their personal strength; ajāta-śatrave — to Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, whose enemy was never born; bhūri — abundant; draviṇam — wealth; nṛpa — O King (Parīkṣit); yakṣyate — who was intending to perform sacrifice.

Translation
After defeating many kings with their prowess, these heroic brothers brought back abundant wealth for Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, who was intent on performing the sacrifice, O King.

Text 15
श्रुत्वाजितं जरासन्धं नृपतेर्ध्यायतो हरि: ।
आहोपायं तमेवाद्य उद्धवो यमुवाच ह ॥ १५ ॥
śrutvājitaṁ jarāsandhaṁ
nṛpater dhyāyato hariḥ
āhopāyaṁ tam evādya
uddhavo yam uvāca ha
Synonyms
śrutvā — hearing; ajitam — unconquered; jarāsandham — Jarāsandha; nṛpateḥ — the King; dhyāyataḥ — as he pondered; hariḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; āha — told; upāyam — the means; tam — to him; eva — indeed; ādyaḥ — the original person; uddhavaḥ — Uddhava; yam — which; uvāca ha — had spoken.

Translation
When King Yudhiṣṭhira heard that Jarāsandha remained undefeated, he set to pondering, and then the primeval Lord, Hari, told him the means Uddhava had described for defeating Jarāsandha.

Text 16
भीमसेनोऽर्जुन: कृष्णो ब्रह्मलिङ्गधरास्‍त्रय: ।
जग्मुर्गिरिव्रजं तात बृहद्रथसुतो यत: ॥ १६ ॥
bhīmaseno ’rjunaḥ kṛṣṇo
brahma-linga-dharās trayaḥ
jagmur girivrajaṁ tāta
bṛhadratha-suto yataḥ
Synonyms
bhīmasenaḥ arjunaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ — Bhīmasena, Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa; brahma — of brāhmaṇas; liṅga — the guises; dharāḥ — wearing; trayaḥ — the three; jagmuḥ — went; girivrajam — to the fortress city Girivraja; tāta — my dear (Parīkṣit); bṛhadratha-sutaḥ — the son of Bṛhadratha (Jarāsandha); yataḥ — where.

Translation
Thus Bhīmasena, Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa disguised themselves as brāhmaṇas and went to Girivraja, my dear King, where the son of Bṛhadratha was to be found.

Text 17
ते गत्वातिथ्यवेलायां गृहेषु गृहमेधिनम् ।
ब्रह्मण्यं समयाचेरन् राजन्या ब्रह्मलिङ्गिन: ॥ १७ ॥
te gatvātithya-velāyāṁ
gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinam
brahmaṇyaṁ samayāceran
rājanyā brahma-liṅginaḥ
Synonyms
te — they; gatvā — going; ātithya — for receiving uninvited guests; velāyām — at the appointed hour; gṛheṣu — in his residence; gṛha-medhinam — from the religious householder; brahmaṇyam — respectful to brāhmaṇas; samayāceran — begged; rājanyāḥ — the kings; brahma-liṅginaḥ — appearing with the signs of brāhmaṇas.

Translation
Disguised as brāhmaṇas, the royal warriors approached Jarāsandha at home during the appointed hour for receiving guests. They submitted their entreaty to that dutiful householder, who was especially respectful to the brahminical class.

Text 18
राजन् विद्ध्यतिथीन् प्राप्तानर्थिनो दूरमागतान् ।
तन्न: प्रयच्छ भद्रं ते यद्वयं कामयामहे ॥ १८ ॥
rājan viddhy atithīn prāptān
arthino dūram āgatān
tan naḥ prayaccha bhadraṁ te
yad vayaṁ kāmayāmahe
Synonyms
rājan — O King; viddhi — please know; atithīn — guests; prāptān — arrived; arthinaḥ — desirous of gain; dūram — from far away; āgatān — come; tat — that; naḥ — to us; prayaccha — please grant; bhadram — all good; te — unto you; yat — whatever; vayam — we; kāmayāmahe — are desiring.

Translation
[Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna and Bhīma said:] O King, know us to be needy guests who have come to you from afar. We wish all good unto you. Please grant us whatever we desire.

Text 19
किं दुर्मर्षं तितिक्षूणां किमकार्यमसाधुभि: ।
किं न देयं वदान्यानां क: पर: समदर्शिनाम् ॥ १९ ॥
kiṁ durmarṣaṁ titikṣūṇāṁ
kim akāryam asādhubhiḥ
kiṁ na deyaṁ vadānyānāṁ
kaḥ paraḥ sama-darśinām
Synonyms
kim — what; durmarṣam — intolerable; titikṣūṇām — for the patient; kim — what; akāryam — impossible to do; asādhubhiḥ — for the impious; kim — what; na deyam — impossible to give away; vadānyānām — for the generous; kaḥ — who; paraḥ — separate; sama — equal; darśinām — for those whose vision.

Translation
What can the tolerant not bear? What will the wicked not do? What will the generous not give in charity? And who will those of equal vision see as an outsider?

Text 20
योऽनित्येन शरीरेण सतां गेयं यशो ध्रुवम् ।
नाचिनोति स्वयं कल्प: स वाच्य: शोच्य एव स: ॥ २० ॥
yo ’nityena śarīreṇa
satāṁ geyaṁ yaśo dhruvam
nācinoti svayaṁ kalpaḥ
sa vācyaḥ śocya eva saḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — who; anityena — temporary; śarīreṇa — with the material body; satām — by saints; geyam — to be glorified; yaśaḥ — fame; dhruvam — permanent; na ācinoti — does not acquire; svayam — himself; kalpaḥ — capable; saḥ — he; vācyaḥ — contemptible; śocyaḥ — pitiable; eva — indeed; saḥ — he.

Translation
He indeed is to be censured and pitied who, though able to do so, fails to achieve with his temporary body the lasting fame glorified by great saints.

Text 21
हरिश्चन्द्रो रन्तिदेव उञ्छवृत्ति: शिबिर्बलि: ।
व्याध: कपोतो बहवो ह्यध्रुवेण ध्रुवं गता: ॥ २१ ॥
hariścandro rantideva
uñchavṛttiḥ śibir baliḥ
vyādhaḥ kapoto bahavo
hy adhruveṇa dhruvaṁ gatāḥ
Synonyms
hariścandraḥ rantidevaḥ — Hariścandra and Rantideva; uñcha-vṛttiḥ — Mudgala, who lived by gathering grains left behind in the fields after the harvest; śibiḥ baliḥ — Śibi and Bali; vyādhaḥ — the hunter; kapotaḥ — the pigeon; bahavaḥ — many; hi — indeed; adhruveṇa — by the temporary; dhruvam — to the permanent; gatāḥ — went.

Translation
Hariścandra, Rantideva, Uñchavṛtti Mudgala, Śibi, Bali, the legendary hunter and pigeon, and many others have attained the permanent by means of the impermanent.

Text 22
श्रीशुक उवाच
स्वरैराकृतिभिस्तांस्तु प्रकोष्ठैर्ज्याहतैरपि ।
राजन्यबन्धून् विज्ञाय द‍ृष्टपूर्वानचिन्तयत् ॥ २२ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
svarair ākṛtibhis tāṁs tu
prakoṣṭhair jyā-hatair api
rājanya-bandhūn vijñāya
dṛṣṭa-pūrvān acintayat
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; svaraiḥ — by their voices; ākṛtibhiḥ — their bodily statures; tān — them; tu — however; prakoṣṭhaiḥ — by (seeing) their forearms; jyā — by bowstrings; hataiḥ — imprinted; api — even; rājanya — of royalty; bandhūn — as family members; vijñāya — recognizing; dṛṣṭa — seen; pūrvān — previously; acintayat — he considered.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: From the sound of their voices, their physical stature and the marks of bowstrings on their forearms, Jarāsandha could tell that his guests were of the royal order. He began to think he had seen them somewhere before.

Text 23
राजन्यबन्धवो ह्येते ब्रह्मलिङ्गानि बिभ्रति ।
ददानि भिक्षितं तेभ्य आत्मानमपि दुस्त्यजम् ॥ २३ ॥
rājanya-bandhavo hy ete
brahma-liṅgāni bibhrati
dadāni bhikṣitaṁ tebhya
ātmānam api dustyajam
Synonyms
rājanya-bandhavaḥ — relatives of kṣatriyas; hi — indeed; ete — these; brahma — of brāhmaṇas; liṅgāni — the signs; bibhrati — they are wearing; dadāni — I should give; bhikṣitam — what is begged; tebhyaḥ — to them; ātmānam — my own body; api — even; dustyajam — impossible to give up.

Translation
[Jarāsandha thought:] These are surely members of the royal order dressed as brāhmaṇas, but still I must grant their request for charity, even if they beg me for my own body.

Texts 24-25
बलेर्नु श्रूयते कीर्तिर्वितता दिक्ष्वकल्मषा ।
ऐश्वर्याद् भ्रंशितस्यापि विप्रव्याजेन विष्णुना ॥ २४ ॥
श्रियं जिहीर्षतेन्द्रस्य विष्णवे द्विजरूपिणे ।
जानन्नपि महीं प्रादाद् वार्यमाणोऽपि दैत्यराट् ॥ २५ ॥
baler nu śrūyate kīrtir
vitatā dikṣv akalmaṣā
aiśvaryād bhraṁśitasyāpi
vipra-vyājena viṣṇunā
śriyaṁ jihīrṣatendrasya
viṣṇave dvija-rūpiṇe
jānann api mahīm prādād
vāryamāṇo ’pi daitya-rāṭ
Synonyms
baleḥ — of Bali; nu — is it not so; śrūyate — are heard; kīrtiḥ — the glories; vitatā — widespread; dikṣu — in all directions; akalmaṣā — spotless; aiśvaryāt — from his powerful position; bhraṁśitasya — who was made to fall; api — even though; vipra — of a brāhmaṇa; vyājena — in the guise; viṣṇunā — by Lord Viṣṇu; śrīyam — the opulence; jihīrṣatā — who wanted to take away; indrasya — of Indra; viṣṇave — to Viṣṇu; dvija-rūpiṇe — appearing as a brāhmaṇa; jānan — aware; api — although; mahīm — the whole earth; prādāt — he gave; vāryamāṇaḥ — being forbidden; api — even; daitya — of the demons; rāṭ — the king.

Translation
Indeed, the spotless glories of Bali Mahārāja are heard throughout the world. Lord Viṣṇu, wishing to recover Indra’s opulence from Bali, appeared before him in the guise of a brāhmaṇa and made him fall from his powerful position. Though aware of the ruse and forbidden by his guru, Bali, king of the demons, still gave Viṣṇu the whole earth in charity.

Text 26
जीवता ब्राह्मणार्थाय को न्वर्थ: क्षत्रबन्धुना ।
देहेन पतमानेन नेहता विपुलं यश: ॥ २६ ॥
jīvatā brāhmaṇārthāya
ko nv arthaḥ kṣatra-bandhunā
dehena patamānena
nehatā vipulaṁ yaśaḥ
Synonyms
jīvatā — who is alive; brāhmaṇa-arthāya — for the benefit of brāhmaṇas; kaḥ — what; nu — at all; arthaḥ — use; kṣatra-bandhunā — with a fallen kṣatriya; dehena — by his body; patamānena — about to fall; na īhatā — who is not endeavoring; vipulam — for extensive; yaśaḥ — glory.

Translation
What is the use of an unqualified kṣatriya who goes on living but fails to gain everlasting glory by working with his perishable body for the benefit of brāhmaṇas?

Text 27
इत्युदारमति: प्राह कृष्णार्जुनवृकोदरान् ।
हे विप्रा व्रियतां कामो ददाम्यात्मशिरोऽपि व: ॥ २७ ॥
ity udāra-matiḥ prāha
kṛṣṇārjuna-vṛkodarān
he viprā vriyatāṁ kāmo
dadāmy ātma-śiro ’pi vaḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus; udāra — generous; matiḥ — whose mentality; prāha — said; kṛṣṇa-arjuna-vṛkodarān — to Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna and Bhīma; he vipraḥ — O learned brāhmaṇas; vriyatām — let it be chosen; kāmaḥ — what you desire; dadāmi — I will give; ātma — my own; śiraḥ — head; api — even; vaḥ — to you.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Thus making up his mind, the generous Jarāsandha addressed Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna and Bhīma: “O learned brāhmaṇas, choose whatever you wish. I will give it to you, even if it is my own head.”

Text 28
श्रीभगवानुवाच
युद्धं नो देहि राजेन्द्र द्वन्द्वशो यदि मन्यसे ।
युद्धार्थिनो वयं प्राप्ता राजन्या नान्यकाङ्‍‍क्षिण: ॥ २८ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
yuddhaṁ no dehi rājendra
dvandvaśo yadi manyase
yuddhārthino vayaṁ prāptā
rājanyā nānya-kāṅkṣiṇaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Lord (Kṛṣṇa) said; yuddham — battle; naḥ — to us; dehi — please give; rāja-indra — O exalted King; dvandvaśaḥ — as a one-on-one duel; yadi — if; manyase — you think it proper; yuddha — for a fight; arthinaḥ — desirous; vayam — we; prāptāḥ — have come here; rājanyāḥ — members of the royal order; na — not; anya — anything else; kāṅkṣiṇaḥ — wanting.

Translation
The Supreme Lord said: O exalted King, give us battle in the form of a duel, if you think it fitting. We are princes and have come to beg a fight. We have no other request to make of you.

Text 29
असौ वृकोदर: पार्थस्तस्य भ्रातार्जुनो ह्ययम् ।
अनयोर्मातुलेयं मां कृष्णं जानीहि ते रिपुम् ॥ २९ ॥
asau vṛkodaraḥ pārthas
tasya bhrātārjuno hy ayam
anayor mātuleyaṁ māṁ
kṛṣṇaṁ jānīhi te ripum
Synonyms
asau — that one; vṛkodaraḥ — Bhīma; pārthaḥ — the son of Pṛthā; tasya — his; bhrātā — brother; arjunaḥ — Arjuna; hi — indeed; ayam — this other; anayoḥ — of the two of them; mātuleyam — the maternal cousin; mām — Me; kṛṣṇam — Kṛṣṇa; jānīhi — please know; te — your; ripum — enemy.

Translation
Over there is Bhīma, son of Pṛthā, and this is his brother Arjuna. Know Me to be their maternal cousin, Kṛṣṇa, your enemy.

Text 30
एवमावेदितो राजा जहासोच्चै: स्म मागध: ।
आह चामर्षितो मन्दा युद्धं तर्हि ददामि व: ॥ ३० ॥
evam āvedito rājā
jahāsoccaiḥ sma māgadhaḥ
āha cāmarṣito mandā
yuddhaṁ tarhi dadāmi vaḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; āveditaḥ — invited; rāja — the King; jahāsa — laughed; uccaiḥ — out loud; sma — indeed; māgadhaḥ — Jarāsandha; āha — he said; ca — and; amarṣitaḥ — intolerant; mandāḥ — O fools; yuddham — battle; tarhi — then; dadāmi — I will give; vaḥ — to you.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Thus challenged, Magadharāja laughed out loud and contemptuously said, “All right, you fools, I’ll give you a fight!

Text 31
न त्वया भीरुणा योत्स्ये युधि विक्लवतेजसा ।
मथुरां स्वपुरीं त्यक्त्वा समुद्रं शरणं गत: ॥ ३१ ॥
na tvayā bhīruṇā yotsye
yudhi viklava-tejasā
mathurāṁ sva-purīṁ tyaktvā
samudraṁ śaraṇaṁ gataḥ
Synonyms
na — not; tvayā — with You; bhīruṇā — cowardly; yotsye — I will fight; yudhi — in battle; viklava — impaired; tejasā — whose strength; mathurām — Mathurā; sva — Your own; purīm — city; tyaktvā — leaving; samudram — to the ocean; śaraṇam — for shelter; gataḥ — gone.

Translation
“But I will not fight with You, Kṛṣṇa, for You are a coward. Your strength abandoned You in the midst of battle, and You fled Your own capital of Mathurā to take shelter in the sea.

Text 32
अयं तु वयसातुल्यो नातिसत्त्वो न मे सम: ।
अर्जुनो न भवेद् योद्धा भीमस्तुल्यबलो मम ॥ ३२ ॥
ayaṁ tu vayasātulyo
nāti-sattvo na me samaḥ
arjuno na bhaved yoddhā
bhīmas tulya-balo mama
Synonyms
ayam — this; tu — on the other hand; vayasā — in age; atulyaḥ — unequal; na — not; ati — much; sattvaḥ — having strength; na — not; me — to me; samaḥ — evenly matched; arjunaḥ — Arjuna; na bhavet — should not be; yoddhā — the contender; bhīmaḥ — Bhīma; tulya — equal; balaḥ — in strength; mama — with me.

Translation
“As for this one, Arjuna, he is not as old as I, nor is he very strong. Since he is no match for me, he should not be the contender. Bhīma, however, is as strong as I am.”

Text 33
इत्युक्त्वा भीमसेनाय प्रादाय महतीं गदाम् ।
द्वितीयां स्वयमादाय निर्जगाम पुराद् बहि: ॥ ३३ ॥
ity uktvā bhīmasenāya
prādāya mahatīṁ gadām
dvitīyāṁ svayam ādāya
nirjagāma purād bahiḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus; uktvā — saying; bhīmasenāya — to Bhīmasena; prādāya — giving; mahatīm — a large; gadām — club; dvitīyām — another; svayam — himself; ādāya — taking; nirjagāma — he went out; purāt — from the city; bahiḥ — to the outside.

Translation
Having said this, Jarāsandha offered Bhīmasena a huge club, took up another himself and went outside the city.

Text 34
तत: समेखले वीरौ संयुक्तावितरेतरम् ।
जघ्नतुर्वज्रकल्पाभ्यां गदाभ्यां रणदुर्मदौ ॥ ३४ ॥
tataḥ samekhale vīrau
saṁyuktāv itaretaram
jaghnatur vajra-kalpābhyāṁ
gadābhyāṁ raṇa-durmadau
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; samekhale — on the level fighting grounds; vīrau — the two heroes; saṁyuktau — engaged; itara-itaram — each other; jaghnatuḥ — struck; vajra-kalpābhyām — like lightning bolts; gadābhyām — with their clubs; raṇa — by the fight; durmadau — driven to a mad fury.

Translation
The two heroes thus began battling each other on the level fighting grounds outside the city. Maddened with the fury of combat, they struck each other with their lightning-bolt-like clubs.

Text 35
मण्डलानि विचित्राणि सव्यं दक्षिणमेव च ।
चरतो: शुशुभे युद्धं नटयोरिव रङ्गिणो: ॥ ३५ ॥
maṇḍalāni vicitrāṇi
savyaṁ dakṣiṇam eva ca
caratoḥ śuśubhe yuddhaṁ
naṭayor iva raṅgiṇoḥ
Synonyms
maṇḍalāni — arcs; vicitrāṇi — skillful; savyam — to the left; dakṣiṇam — to the right; eva ca — also; caratoḥ — of them who were moving; śuśubhe — appeared splendid; yuddham — the fight; naṭayoḥ — of actors; iva — like; raṅgiṇoḥ — on a stage.

Translation
As they skillfully circled left and right, like actors dancing on a stage, the fight presented a magnificent spectacle.

Text 36
ततश्चटचटाशब्दो वज्रनिष्पेससन्निभ: ।
गदयो: क्षिप्तयो राजन्दन्तयोरिव दन्तिनो: ॥ ३६ ॥
tataś caṭa-caṭā-śabdo
vajra-niṣpesa-sannibhaḥ
gadayoḥ kṣiptayo rājan
dantayor iva dantinoḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; caṭa-caṭā-śabdaḥ — the clattering sound; vajra — of lightning; niṣpeṣa — the crash; sannibhaḥ — resembling; gadayoḥ — of their clubs; kṣiptayoḥ — being swung; rājan — O King (Parīkṣit); dantayoḥ — of the tusks; iva — as if; dantinoḥ — of elephants.

Translation
When Jarāsandha’s and Bhīmasena’s clubs loudly collided, O King, the sound was like the impact of the big tusks of two fighting elephants, or the crash of a thunderbolt in a flashing electrical storm.

Text 37
ते वै गदे भुजजवेन निपात्यमाने
अन्योन्यतोंऽसकटिपादकरोरुजत्रुम् ।
चूर्णीबभूवतुरुपेत्य यथार्कशाखे
संयुध्यतोर्द्विरदयोरिव दीप्तमन्व्यो: ॥ ३७ ॥
te vai gade bhuja-javena nipātyamāne
anyonyato ’ṁsa-kaṭi-pāda-karoru-jatrum
cūrṇī-babhūvatur upetya yathārka-śākhe
saṁyudhyator dviradayor iva dīpta-manvyoḥ
Synonyms
te — they; vai — indeed; gade — the two clubs; bhuja — of their arms; javena — by the rapid force; nipātyamāne — being powerfully swung; anyonyataḥ — against one another; aṁsa — their shoulders; kaṭi — hips; pāda — feet; kara — hands; ūru — thighs; jatrum — and collarbones; cūrṇī — crushed; babhūvatuḥ — became; upetya — contacting; yathā — as; arka-śākhe — two branches of arka trees; saṁyudhyatoḥ — fighting vigorously; dviradayoḥ — of a pair of elephants; iva — as; dīpta — inflamed; manvyoḥ — whose anger.

Translation
They swung their clubs at each other with such speed and force that as the clubs struck their shoulders, hips, feet, hands, thighs and collarbones, the weapons were crushed and broken like branches of arka trees with which two enraged elephants furiously attack each other.

Text 38
इत्थं तयो: प्रहतयोर्गदयोर्नृवीरौ
क्रुद्धौ स्वमुष्टिभिरय:स्परशैरपिष्टाम् ।
शब्दस्तयो: प्रहरतोरिभयोरिवासी-
न्निर्घातवज्रपरुषस्तलताडनोत्थ: ॥ ३८ ॥
itthaṁ tayoḥ prahatayor gadayor nṛ-vīrau
kruddhau sva-muṣṭibhir ayaḥ-sparaśair apiṣṭām
śabdas tayoḥ praharator ibhayor ivāsīn
nirghāta-vajra-paruṣas tala-tāḍanotthaḥ
Synonyms
ittham — in this manner; tayoḥ — their; prahatayoḥ — being ruined; gadayoḥ — the clubs; nr — among human beings; vīrau — the two great heroes; kruddhau — angry; sva — their own; muṣṭibhiḥ — with the fists; ayaḥ — like iron; sparaśaiḥ — whose touch; apiṣṭām — they battered; śabdaḥ — the sound; tayoḥ — of them; praharatoḥ — striking; ibhayoḥ — of two elephants; iva — as; āsīt — became; nirghāta — crashing; vajra — like thunder; paruṣaḥ — harsh; tala — of their palms; tāḍana — by the hitting; utthaḥ — raised.

Translation
Their clubs thus ruined, those great heroes among men angrily pummeled each other with their iron-hard fists. As they slapped each other, the sound resembled the crash of elephants colliding or harsh thunderclaps.

Text 39
तयोरेवं प्रहरतो: समशिक्षाबलौजसो: ।
निर्विशेषमभूद् युद्धमक्षीणजवयोर्नृप ॥ ३९ ॥
tayor evaṁ praharatoḥ
sama-śikṣā-balaujasoḥ
nirviśeṣam abhūd yuddham
akṣīṇa-javayor nṛpa
Synonyms
tayoḥ — of the two; evam — thus; praharatoḥ — striking; sama — equal; śikṣā — whose training; bala — strength; ojasoḥ — and stamina; nirviśeṣam — indecisive; abhūt — was; yuddham — the fight; akṣīṇa — undiminished; javayoḥ — whose exertion; nṛpa — O King.

Translation
As they thus fought, this contest between opponents of equal training, strength and stamina reached no conclusion. And so they kept on fighting, O King, without any letup.

Text 40
शत्रोर्जन्ममृती विद्वाञ्जीवितं च जराकृतम् ।
पार्थमाप्याययन् स्वेन तेजसाचिन्तयद्धरि: ॥ ४० ॥
śatror janma-mṛtī vidvāñ
jīvitaṁ ca jarā-kṛtam
pārtham āpyāyayan svena
tejasācintayad dhariḥ
Synonyms
śatroḥ — of the enemy; janma — the birth; mṛtī — and death; vidvān — knowing; jīvitam — the bringing to life; ca — and; jarā — by the demoness Jarā; kṛtam — done; pārtham — Bhīma, the son of Pṛthā; āpyāyayan — empowering; svena — with His own; tejasā — potency; acintayat — thought; hariḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Translation
Lord Kṛṣṇa knew the secret of His enemy Jarāsandha’s birth and death, and also how he had been given life by the demoness Jarā. Considering all this, Lord Kṛṣṇa imparted His special power to Bhīma.

Text 41
सञ्चिन्त्यारिवधोपायं भीमस्यामोघदर्शन: ।
दर्शयामास विटपं पाटयन्निव संज्ञया ॥ ४१ ॥
sañcintyārī-vadhopāyaṁ
bhīmasyāmogha-darśanaḥ
darśayām āsa viṭapaṁ
pāṭayann iva saṁjñayā
Synonyms
sañcintya — having thought; ari — their enemy; vadha — for killing; upāyam — about the means; bhīmasya — to Bhīma; amogha-darśanaḥ — the Supreme Lord, whose vision is infallible; darśayām āsa — showed; viṭapam — a tree branch; pāṭayan — tearing apart; iva — as if; saṁjñayā — as a sign.

Translation
Having determined how to kill the enemy, that Lord of infallible vision made a sign to Bhīma by tearing in half a small branch of a tree.

Text 42
तद् विज्ञाय महासत्त्वो भीम: प्रहरतां वर: ।
गृहीत्वा पादयो: शत्रुं पातयामास भूतले ॥ ४२ ॥
tad vijñāya mahā-sattvo
bhīmaḥ praharatāṁ varaḥ
gṛhītvā pādayoḥ śatruṁ
pātayām āsa bhū-tale
Synonyms
tat — that; vijñāya — understanding; mahā — great; sattvaḥ — whose strength; bhīmaḥ — Bhīma; praharatām — of fighters; varaḥ — the best; gṛhītvā — seizing; pādayoḥ — by the feet; śatrum — his enemy; pātayām asa — he made him fall; bhū-tale — to the ground.

Translation
Understanding this sign, mighty Bhīma, the best of fighters, seized his opponent by the feet and threw him to the ground.

Text 43
एकं पादं पदाक्रम्य दोर्भ्यामन्यं प्रगृह्य स: ।
गुदत: पाटयामास शाखमिव महागज: ॥ ४३ ॥
ekam pādaṁ padākramya
dorbhyām anyaṁ pragṛhya saḥ
gudataḥ pāṭayām āsa
śākham iva mahā-gajaḥ
Synonyms
ekam — one; pādam — leg; padā — with his foot; ākramya — standing on top of; dorbhyām — with his two hands; anyam — the other; pragṛhya — taking hold of; saḥ — he; gudataḥ — beginning from the anus; pāṭayām āsa — tore him asunder; śākhām — a tree branch; iva — as; mahā — great; gajaḥ — an elephant.

Translation
Bhīma pressed down on one leg with his foot while grabbing Jarāsandha’s other leg in his hands, and just as a great elephant might break the branch of a tree, Bhīma tore Jarāsandha apart from the anus upward.

Text 44
एकपादोरुवृषणकटिपृष्ठस्तनांसके ।
एकबाह्वक्षिभ्रूकर्णे शकले दद‍ृशु: प्रजा: ॥ ४४ ॥
eka-pādoru-vṛṣaṇa-
kaṭi-pṛṣṭha-stanāṁsake
eka-bāhv-akṣi-bhrū-karṇe
śakale dadṛśuḥ prajāḥ
Synonyms
eka — with one; pāda — leg; ūru — thigh; vṛṣaṇa — testicle; kati — hip; pṛṣṭha — side of the back; stana — chest; aṁsake — and shoulder; eka — with one; bāhu — arm; akṣi — eye; bhrū — eyebrow; karṇe — and ear; śakale — two pieces; dadṛśuḥ — saw; prajāḥ — the citizens.

Translation
The King’s subjects then saw him lying in two separate pieces, each with a single leg, thigh, testicle, hip, shoulder, arm, eye, eyebrow and ear, and with half a back and chest.

Text 45
हाहाकारो महानासीन्निहते मगधेश्वरे ।
पूजयामासतुर्भीमं परिरभ्य जयाच्युतौ ॥ ४५ ॥
hāhā-kāro mahān āsīn
nihate magadheśvare
pūjayām āsatur bhīmaṁ
parirabhya jayācyatau
Synonyms
hāhā-kāraḥ — a cry of lamentation; mahān — great; āsīt — arose; nihate — having been killed; magadha-īśvare — the lord of the Magadha province; pūjayām āsatuḥ — the two of them honored; bhīmam — Bhīma; parirabhya — embracing; jaya — Arjuna; acyutau — and Kṛṣṇa.

Translation
With the death of the lord of Magadha, a great cry of lamentation arose, while Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa congratulated Bhīma by embracing him.

Text 46
सहदेवं तत्तनयं भगवान् भूतभावन: ।
अभ्यषिञ्चदमेयात्मा मगधानां पतिं प्रभु: ।
मोचयामास राजन्यान्संरुद्धा मागधेन ये ॥ ४६ ॥
sahadevaṁ tat-tanayaṁ
bhagavān bhūta-bhāvanaḥ
abhyaṣiñcad ameyātmā
magadhānāṁ patiṁ prabhuḥ
mocayām āsa rājanyān
saṁruddhā māgadhena ye
Synonyms
sahadevam — named Sahadeva; tat — his (Jarāsandha’s); tanayam — son; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; bhūta — of all living beings; bhāvanaḥ — the sustainer; abhyaṣiñcat — coronated; ameya-ātmā — the immeasurable one; magadhānām — of the Magadhas; patim — as the master; prabhuḥ — the Lord; mocayām āsa — He released; rājanyān — the kings; saṁruddhāḥ — imprisoned; māgadhena — by Jarāsandha; ye — who.

Translation
The immeasurable Supreme Personality of Godhead, the sustainer and benefactor of all living beings, coronated Jarāsandha’s son, Sahadeva, as the new ruler of the Magadhas. The Lord then freed all the kings Jarāsandha had imprisoned.