Texts 1-2
श्रीशुक उवाच
शिशुपालस्य शाल्वस्य पौण्ड्रकस्यापि दुर्मति: ।
परलोकगतानां च कुर्वन् पारोक्ष्यसौहृदम् ॥ १ ॥
एक: पदाति: सङ्‌क्रुद्धो गदापाणि: प्रकम्पयन् ।
पद्‍भ्यामिमां महाराज महासत्त्वो व्यद‍ृश्यत ॥ २ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
śiśupālasya śālvasya
pauṇḍrakasyāpi durmatiḥ
para-loka-gatānāṁ ca
kurvan pārokṣya-sauhṛdam
ekaḥ padātiḥ saṅkruddho
gadā-pāṇiḥ prakampayan
padbhyām imāṁ mahā-rāja
mahā-sattvo vyadṛśyata
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; śiśupālasya — for Śiśupāla; śālvasya — Śālva; pauṇḍrakasya — Pauṇḍraka; api — also; durmatiḥ — evil-hearted (Dantavakra); para-loka — to the next world; gatānāṁ — who had gone; ca — and; kurvan — doing; pārokṣya — for those who have passed away; sauhṛdam — act of friendship; ekaḥ — alone; padātiḥ — on foot; saṅkruddhaḥ — infuriated; gadā — a club; pāṇiḥ — in his hand; prakampayan — making tremble; padbhyām — with his feet; imam — this (earth); mahā-rāja — O great King (Parīkṣit); mahā — great; sattvaḥ — whose physical power; vyadṛśyata — was seen.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Acting out of friendship for Śiśupāla, Śālva and Pauṇḍraka, who had all passed on to the next world, the wicked Dantavakra appeared on the battlefield in a great rage, O King. All alone, on foot and wielding a club in his hand, the mighty warrior shook the earth with his footsteps.

Text 3
तं तथायान्तमालोक्य गदामादाय सत्वर: ।
अवप्लुत्य रथात् कृष्ण: सिन्धुं वेलेव प्रत्यधात् ॥ ३ ॥
taṁ tathāyāntam ālokya
gadām ādāya satvaraḥ
avaplutya rathāt kṛṣṇaḥ
sindhuṁ veleva pratyadhāt
Synonyms
tam — him; tathā — in this way; āyāntam — approaching; ālokya — seeing; gadām — His club; ādāya — taking; satvaraḥ — quickly; avaplutya — leaping down; rathāt — from His chariot; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; sindhum — the sea; velā — the shore; iva — as; pratyadhāt — checked.

Translation
Seeing Dantavakra approach, Lord Kṛṣṇa quickly picked up His club, jumped down from His chariot and stopped His advancing opponent just as the shore holds back the ocean.

Text 4
गदामुद्यम्य कारूषो मुकुन्दं प्राह दुर्मद: ।
दिष्‍ट्या दिष्‍ट्या भवानद्य मम द‍ृष्टिपथं गत: ॥ ४ ॥
gadām udyamya kārūṣo
mukundaṁ prāha durmadaḥ
diṣṭyā diṣṭyā bhavān adya
mama dṛṣṭi-pathaṁ gataḥ
Synonyms
gadām — his club; udyamya — wielding; kārūṣaḥ — the King of Karūṣa (Dantavakra); mukundam — to Lord Kṛṣṇa; prāha — said; durmadaḥ — intoxicated by foolish pride; diṣṭyā — by good fortune; diṣṭyā — by good fortune; bhavān — You; adya — today; mama — my; dṛṣṭi — of the sight; patham — into the path; gataḥ — come.

Translation
Raising his club, the reckless King of Karūṣa said to Lord Mukunda, “What luck! What luck — to have You come before me today!

Text 5
त्वं मातुलेयो न: कृष्ण मित्रध्रुङ्‍मां जिघांससि ।
अतस्त्वां गदया मन्द हनिष्ये वज्रकल्पया ॥ ५ ॥
tvaṁ mātuleyo naḥ kṛṣṇa
mitra-dhruṅ māṁ jighāṁsasi
atas tvāṁ gadayā manda
haniṣye vajra-kalpayā
Synonyms
tvam — You; mātuleyaḥ — maternal cousin; naḥ — our; kṛṣṇa — O Kṛṣṇa; mitra — to my friends; dhruk — who have committed violence; mām — me; jighāṁsasi — You wish to kill; ataḥ — therefore; tvām — You; gadayā — with my club; manda — O fool; haniṣye — I will kill; vajra-kalpayā — like a thunderbolt.

Translation
“You are our maternal cousin, Kṛṣṇa, but You committed violence against my friends, and now You want to kill me also. Therefore, fool, I will kill You with my thunderbolt club.

Text 6
तर्ह्यानृण्यमुपैम्यज्ञ मित्राणां मित्रवत्सल: ।
बन्धुरूपमरिं हत्वा व्याधिं देहचरं यथा ॥ ६ ॥
tarhy ānṛṇyam upaimy ajña
mitrāṇāṁ mitra-vatsalaḥ
bandhu-rūpam ariṁ hatvā
vyādhiṁ deha-caraṁ yathā
Synonyms
tarhi — then; ānṛṇyam — payment of my debt; upaimi — I will achieve; ajña — O unintelligent one; mitrāṇām — to my friends; mitra-vatsalaḥ — who am affectionate to my friends; bandhu — of a family member; rūpam — in the form; arim — the enemy; hatvā — having killed; vyādhim — a disease; deha-caram — in one’s body; yathā — like.

Translation
“Then, O unintelligent one, I who am obliged to my friends will have repaid my debt to them by killing You, my enemy disguised as a relative, who are like a disease within my body.”

Text 7
एवं रूक्षैस्तुदन् वाक्यै: कृष्णं तोत्रैरिव द्विपम् ।
गदया ताडयन्मूर्ध्‍नि सिंहवद् व्यनदच्च स: ॥ ७ ॥
evaṁ rūkṣais tudan vākyaiḥ
kṛṣṇaṁ totrair iva dvipam
gadayātāḍayan mūrdhni
siṁha-vad vyanadac ca saḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; rūkṣaiḥ — harsh; tudan — harassing; vākyaiḥ — with words; kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; totraiḥ — with goads; iva — as if; dvipam — an elephant; gadayā — with his club; atāḍayat — he struck Him; mūrdhni — on the head; siṁha-vat — like a lion; vyanadat — roared; ca — and; saḥ — he.

Translation
Thus trying to harass Lord Kṛṣṇa with harsh words, as one might prick an elephant with sharp goads, Dantavakra struck the Lord on the head with his club and roared like a lion.

Text 8
गदयाभिहतोऽप्याजौ न चचाल यदूद्वह: ।
कृष्णोऽपि तमहन् गुर्व्या कौमोदक्या स्तनान्तरे ॥ ८ ॥
gadayābhihato ’py ājau
na cacāla yadūdvahaḥ
kṛṣṇo ’pi tam ahan gurvyā
kaumodakyā stanāntare
Synonyms
gadayā — by the club; abhihataḥ — hit; api — although; ājau — on the battlefield; na cacāla — did not move; yadu-udvahaḥ — the deliverer of the Yadus; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; api — and; tam — him, Dantavakra; ahan — struck; gurvyā — heavy; kaumodakyā — with His club, named Kaumodakī; stana-antare — in the middle of his chest.

Translation
Although hit by Dantavakra’s club, Lord Kṛṣṇa, the deliverer of the Yadus, did not budge from His place on the battlefield. Rather, with His massive Kaumodakī club the Lord struck Dantavakra in the middle of his chest.

Text 9
गदानिर्भिन्नहृदय उद्वमन् रुधिरं मुखात् ।
प्रसार्य केशबाह्वङ्‍‍घ्रीन् धरण्यां न्यपतद् व्यसु: ॥ ९ ॥
gadā-nirbhinna-hṛdaya
udvaman rudhiraṁ mukhāt
prasārya keśa-bāhv-aṅghrīn
dharaṇyāṁ nyapatad vyasuḥ
Synonyms
gadā — by the club; nirbhinna — broken to pieces; hṛdayaḥ — his heart; udvaman — vomiting; rudhiram — blood; mukhāt — from his mouth; prasārya — thrusting outward; keśa — his hair; bāhu — arms; aṅghrīn — and legs; dharaṇyām — on the ground; nyapatat — he fell; vyasuḥ — lifeless.

Translation
His heart shattered by the club’s blow, Dantavakra vomited blood and fell lifeless to the ground, his hair disheveled and his arms and legs sprawling.

Text 10
तत: सूक्ष्मतरं ज्योति: कृष्णमाविशदद्भ‍ुतम् ।
पश्यतां सर्वभूतानां यथा चैद्यवधे नृप ॥ १० ॥
tataḥ sūkṣmataraṁ jyotiḥ
kṛṣṇam āviśad adbhutam
paśyatāṁ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
yathā caidya-vadhe nṛpa
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; sūkṣma-taram — very subtle; jyotiḥ — a light; kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; āviśat — entered; adbhutam — amazing; paśyatām — as they watched; sarva — all; bhūtānām — living beings; yathā — just as; caidya-vadhe — when Śiśupāla was killed; nṛpa — O King (Parīkṣit).

Translation
A most subtle and wondrous spark of light then [rose from the demon’s body and] entered Lord Kṛṣṇa while everyone looked on, O King, just as when Śiśupāla was killed.

Text 11
विदूरथस्तु तद्भ्राता भ्रातृशोकपरिप्लुत: ।
आगच्छदसिचर्माभ्यामुच्छ्वसंस्तज्जिघांसया ॥ ११ ॥
vidūrathas tu tad-bhrātā
bhrātṛ-śoka-pariplutaḥ
āgacchad asi-carmābhyām
ucchvasaṁs taj-jighāṁsayā
Synonyms
vidūrathaḥ — Vidūratha; tu — but; tat — his, Dantavakra’s; bhrātā — brother; bhrātṛ — for his brother; śoka — in sorrow; pariplutaḥ — submerged; āgacchat — came forward; asi — with sword; carmābhyām — and shield; ucchvasan — breathing heavily; tat — Him, Lord Kṛṣṇa; jighāṁsayā — wanting to kill.

Translation
But then Dantavakra’s brother Vidūratha, immersed in sorrow over his brother’s death, came forward breathing heavily, sword and shield in hand. He wanted to kill the Lord.

Text 12
तस्य चापतत: कृष्णश्चक्रेण क्षुरनेमिना ।
शिरो जहार राजेन्द्र सकिरीटं सकुण्डलम् ॥ १२ ॥
tasya cāpatataḥ kṛṣṇaś
cakreṇa kṣura-neminā
śiro jahāra rājendra
sa-kirīṭaṁ sa-kuṇḍalam
Synonyms
tasya — of him; ca — and; āpatataḥ — who was attacking; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; cakreṇa — with His Sudarśana disc; kṣura — like a razor; neminā — whose edge; śiraḥ — the head; jahāra — removed; rāja-indra — O best of kings; sa — with; kirīṭam — helmet; sa — with; kuṇḍalam — earrings.

Translation
O best of kings, as Vidūratha fell upon Him, Lord Kṛṣṇa used His razor-edged Sudarśana disc to remove his head, complete with its helmet and earrings.

Texts 13-15
एवं सौभं च शाल्वं च दन्तवक्रं सहानुजम् ।
हत्वा दुर्विषहानन्यैरीडित: सुरमानवै: ॥ १३ ॥
मुनिभि: सिद्धगन्धर्वैर्विद्याधरमहोरगै: ।
अप्सरोभि: पितृगणैर्यक्षै: किन्नरचारणै: ॥ १४ ॥
उपगीयमानविजय: कुसुमैरभिवर्षित: ।
वृतश्च वृष्णिप्रवरैर्विवेशालङ्कृतां पुरीम् ॥ १५ ॥
evaṁ saubhaṁ ca śālvaṁ ca
dantavakraṁ sahānujam
hatvā durviṣahān anyair
īḍitaḥ sura-mānavaiḥ
munibhiḥ siddha-gandharvair
vidyādhara-mahoragaiḥ
apsarobhiḥ pitṛ-gaṇair
yakṣaiḥ kinnara-cāraṇaiḥ
upagīyamāna-vijayaḥ
kusumair abhivarṣitaḥ
vṛtaś ca vṛṣṇi-pravarair
viveśālaṅkṛtāṁ purīm
Synonyms
evam — thus; saubham — the vehicle Saubha; ca — and; śālvam — Śālva; ca — and; dantavakram — Dantavakra; saha — together with; anujam — his younger brother, Vidūratha; hatvā — having killed; durviṣahān — insurmountable; anyaiḥ — by others; īḍitaḥ — praised; sura — by demigods; mānavaiḥ — and men; munibhiḥ — by sages; siddha — by perfected mystics; gandharvaiḥ — and by heavenly singers; vidyādhara — by residents of the Vidyādhara planet; mahā-uragaiḥ — and celestial serpents; apsarobhiḥ — by dancing girls of heaven; pitṛ-gaṇaiḥ — by elevated forefathers; yakṣaiḥ — Yakṣas; kinnara-cāraṇaiḥ — and by Kinnaras and Cāraṇas; upagīyamāna — being chanted; vijayaḥ — whose victory; kusumaiḥ — with flowers; abhivarṣitaḥ — rained upon; vṛtaḥ — surrounded; ca — and; vṛṣṇi-pravaraiḥ — by the most eminent of the Vṛṣṇis; viveśa — He entered; alaṅkṛtām — decorated; purīm — His capital, Dvārakā.

Translation
Having thus destroyed Śālva and his Saubha airship, along with Dantavakra and his younger brother, all of whom were invincible before any other opponent, the Lord was praised by demigods, human beings and great sages, by Siddhas, Gandharvas, Vidyādharas and Mahoragas, and also by Apsarās, Pitās, Yakṣas, Kinnaras and Cāraṇas. As they sang His glories and showered Him with flowers, the Supreme Lord entered His festively decorated capital city in the company of the most eminent Vṛṣṇis.

Text 16
एवं योगेश्वर: कृष्णो भगवान् जगदीश्वर: ।
ईयते पशुद‍ृष्टीनां निर्जितो जयतीति स: ॥ १६ ॥
evaṁ yogeśvaraḥ kṛṣṇo
bhagavān jagad-īśvaraḥ
īyate paśu-dṛṣṭīnāṁ
nirjito jayatīti saḥ
Synonyms
evam — in this fashion; yoga — of mystic yoga; īśvaraḥ — the Lord; kṛṣṇaḥ — Kṛṣṇa; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; jagat — of the universe; īśvaraḥ — the Lord; īyate — seems; paśu — like animals; dṛṣṭīnām — to those whose sight; nirjitaḥ — defeated; jayati — is victorious; iti — as if; saḥ — He.

Translation
Thus Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master all mystic power and Lord of the universe, is ever victorious. Only those of beastly vision think He sometimes suffers defeat.

Text 17
श्रुत्वा युद्धोद्यमं राम: कुरूणां सह पाण्डवै: ।
तीर्थाभिषेकव्याजेन मध्यस्थ: प्रययौ किल ॥ १७ ॥
śrutvā yuddhodyamaṁ rāmaḥ
kurūṇāṁ saha pāṇḍavaiḥ
tīrthābhiṣeka-vyājena
madhya-sthaḥ prayayau kila
Synonyms
śrutvā — hearing; yuddha — for battle; udyamam — the preparations; rāmaḥ — Lord Balarāma; kurūṇām — of the Kurus; saha — with; pāṇḍavaiḥ — the Pāṇḍavas; tīrtha — in holy places; abhiṣeka — of bathing; vyājena — on the pretext; madhya-sthaḥ — neutral; prayayau — He departed; kila — indeed.

Translation
Lord Balarāma then heard that the Kurus were preparing for war with the Pāṇḍavas. Being neutral, He departed on the pretext of going to bathe in holy places.

Text 18
स्‍नात्वा प्रभासे सन्तर्प्य देवर्षिपितृमानवान् ।
सरस्वतीं प्रतिस्रोतं ययौ ब्राह्मणसंवृत: ॥ १८ ॥
snātvā prabhāse santarpya
devarṣi-pitṛ-mānavān
sarasvatīṁ prati-srotaṁ
yayau brāhmaṇa-saṁvṛtaḥ
Synonyms
snātvā — having bathed; prabhāse — at Prabhāsa; santarpya — and having honored; deva — the demigods; ṛṣi — sages; pitṛ — forefathers; mānavān — and human beings; sarasvatīm — to the river Sarasvatī; prati-srotam — which flows toward the sea; yayau — He went; brāhmaṇa-saṁvṛtaḥ — surrounded by brāhmaṇas.

Translation
After bathing at Prabhāsa and honoring the demigods, sages, forefathers and prominent human beings, He went in the company of brāhmaṇas to the portion of the Sarasvatī that flows westward into the sea.

Texts 19-20
पृथूदकं बिन्दुसरस्‍त्रितकूपं सुदर्शनम् ।
विशालं ब्रह्मतीर्थं च चक्रं प्राचीं सरस्वतीम् ॥ १९ ॥
यमुनामनु यान्येव गङ्गामनु च भारत ।
जगाम नैमिषं यत्र ऋषय: सत्रमासते ॥ २० ॥
pṛthūdakaṁ bindu-saras
tritakūpaṁ sudarśanam
viśālaṁ brahma-tīrthaṁ ca
cakraṁ prācīṁ sarasvatīm
yamunām anu yāny eva
gaṅgām anu ca bhārata
jagāma naimiṣaṁ yatra
ṛṣayaḥ satram āsate
Synonyms
pṛthu — broad; udakam — whose water; bindu-saraḥ — the lake Bindu-sarovara; trita-kūpam sudarśanam — the pilgrimage places known as Tritakūpa and Sudarśana; viśālam brahma-tīrtham ca — Viśāla and Brahma-tīrtha; cakram — Cakra-tīrtha; prācīm — flowing east; sarasvatīm — the Sarasvatī River; yamunām — the Yamunā River; anu — along; yāni — which; eva — all; gaṅgām — the Ganges; anu — along; ca — also; bhārata — O descendant of Bharata (Parīkṣit Mahārāja); jagāma — He visited; naimiṣam — the Naimiṣa forest; yatra — where; ṛṣayaḥ — great sages; satram — an elaborate sacrifice; āsate — were performing.

Translation
Lord Balarāma visited the broad Bindu-saras Lake, Tritakūpa, Sudarśana, Viśāla, Brahma-tīrtha, Cakra-tīrtha and the eastward-flowing Sarasvatī. He also went to all the holy places along the Yamunā and the Ganges, O Bhārata, and then He came to the Naimiṣa forest, where great sages were performing an elaborate sacrifice.

Text 21
तमागतमभिप्रेत्य मुनयो दीर्घसत्रिण: ।
अभिनन्द्य यथान्यायं प्रणम्योत्थाय चार्चयन् ॥ २१ ॥
tam āgatam abhipretya
munayo dīrgha-satriṇaḥ
abhinandya yathā-nyāyaṁ
praṇamyotthāya cārcayan
Synonyms
tam — Him; āgatam — arrived; abhipretya — recognizing; munayaḥ — the sages; dīrgha — for a long time; satriṇaḥ — who had been engaged in the sacrificial performance; abhinandya — greeting; yathā — as; nyāyam — correct; praṇamya — bowing down; utthāya — having stood up; ca — and; ārcayan — they worshiped.

Translation
Recognizing the Lord upon His arrival, the sages, who had been engaged in their sacrificial rituals for a long time, greeted Him properly by standing up, bowing down and worshiping Him.

Text 22
सोऽर्चित: सपरीवार: कृतासनपरिग्रह: ।
रोमहर्षणमासीनं महर्षे: शिष्यमैक्षत ॥ २२ ॥
so ’rcitaḥ sa-parīvāraḥ
kṛtāsana-parigrahaḥ
romaharṣaṇam āsīnaṁ
maharṣeḥ śiṣyam aikṣata
Synonyms
saḥ — He; arcitaḥ — worshiped; sa — together with; parīvāraḥ — His entourage; kṛta — having done; āsana — of a seat; parigrahaḥ — acceptance; romaharṣaṇam — Romaharṣaṇa Sūta; āsīnam — seated; mahā-ṛṣeḥ — of the greatest of sages, Vyāsadeva; śiṣyam — the disciple; aikṣata — saw.

Translation
After being thus worshiped along with His entourage, the Lord accepted a seat of honor. Then He noticed that Romaharṣaṇa, Vyāsadeva’s disciple, had remained seated.

Text 23
अप्रत्युत्थायिनं सूतमकृतप्रह्वणाञ्जलिम् ।
अध्यासीनं च तान् विप्रांश्चुकोपोद्वीक्ष्य माधव: ॥ २३ ॥
apratyutthāyinaṁ sūtam
akṛta-prahvaṇāñjalim
adhyāsīnaṁ ca tān viprāṁś
cukopodvīkṣya mādhavaḥ
Synonyms
apratyutthāyinam — who had failed to stand up; sūtam — the son of a mixed marriage between a kṣatriya father and brāhmaṇa mother; akṛta — who had not done; prahvaṇa — bowing down; añjalim — and joining of palms; adhyāsīnam — sitting higher; ca — and; tān — than those; viprān — learned brāhmaṇas; cukopa — became angry; udvīkṣya — seeing; mādhavaḥ — Lord Balarāma.

Translation
Lord Balarāma became extremely angry upon seeing how this member of the sūta caste had failed to stand up, bow down or join his palms, and also how he was sitting above all the learned brāhmaṇas.

Text 24
यस्मादसाविमान् विप्रानध्यास्ते प्रतिलोमज: ।
धर्मपालांस्तथैवास्मान् वधमर्हति दुर्मति: ॥ २४ ॥
yasmād asāv imān viprān
adhyāste pratiloma-jaḥ
dharma-pālāṁs tathaivāsmān
vadham arhati durmatiḥ
Synonyms
yasmāt — because; asau — he; imān — than these; viprān — brāhmaṇas; adhyāste — is sitting higher; pratiloma-jaḥ — born from an improperly mixed marriage; dharma — of the principles of religion; pālān — the protector; tathā eva — also; asmān — Myself; vadham — death; arhati — he deserves; durmatiḥ — foolish.

Translation
[Lord Balarāma said:] Because this fool born from an improperly mixed marriage sits above all these brāhmaṇas and even above Me, the protector of religion, he deserves to die.

Texts 25-26
ऋषेर्भगवतो भूत्वा शिष्योऽधीत्य बहूनि च ।
सेतिहासपुराणानि धर्मशास्‍त्राणि सर्वश: ॥ २५ ॥
अदान्तस्याविनीतस्य वृथा पण्डितमानिन: ।
न गुणाय भवन्ति स्म नटस्येवाजितात्मन: ॥ २६ ॥
ṛṣer bhagavato bhūtvā
śiṣyo ’dhītya bahūni ca
setihāsa-purāṇāni
dharma-śāstrāṇi sarvaśaḥ
adāntasyāvinītasya
vṛthā paṇḍita-māninaḥ
na guṇāya bhavanti sma
naṭasyevājitātmanaḥ
Synonyms
ṛṣeḥ — of the sage (Vyāsadeva); bhagavataḥ — the incarnation of Godhead; bhūtvā — becoming; śiṣyaḥ — a disciple; adhītya — studying; bahūni — many; ca — and; sa — together with; itihāsa — epic histories; purāṇāni — and Purāṇas; dharma-śāstrāṇi — the scriptures describing the religious duties of man; sarvaśaḥ — fully; adāntasya — for him who is not self-controlled; avinītasya — not humble; vṛthā — vainly; paṇḍita — a scholarly authority; māninaḥ — thinking himself; na guṇāya — not leading to good qualities; bhavanti sma — they have become; naṭasya — of a stage performer; iva — like; ajita — unconquered; ātmanaḥ — whose mind.

Translation
Although he is a disciple of the divine sage Vyāsa and has thoroughly learned many scriptures from him, including the lawbooks of religious duties and the epic histories and Purāṇas, all this study has not produced good qualities in him. Rather, his study of the scriptures is like an actor’s studying his part, for he is not self-controlled or humble and vainly presumes himself a scholarly authority, though he has failed to conquer his own mind.

Text 27
एतदर्थो हि लोकेऽस्मिन्नवतारो मया कृत: ।
वध्या मे धर्मध्वजिनस्ते हि पातकिनोऽधिका: ॥ २७ ॥
etad-artho hi loke ’sminn
avatāro mayā kṛtaḥ
vadhyā me dharma-dhvajinas
te hi pātakino ’dhikāḥ
Synonyms
etat — for this; arthaḥ — purpose; hi — indeed; loke — into the world; asmin — this; avatāraḥ — descent; mayā — by Me; kṛtaḥ — done; vadhyāḥ — to be killed; me — by Me; dharma-dhvajinaḥ — those who pose as religious; te — they; hi — indeed; pātakinaḥ — sinful; adhikāḥ — most.

Translation
The very purpose of My descent into this world is to kill such hypocrites who pretend to be religious. Indeed, they are the most sinful rascals.

Text 28
एतावदुक्त्वा भगवान् निवृत्तोऽसद्वधादपि ।
भावित्वात् तं कुशाग्रेण करस्थेनाहनत् प्रभु: ॥ २८ ॥
etāvad uktvā bhagavān
nivṛtto ’sad-vadhād api
bhāvitvāt taṁ kuśāgreṇa
kara-sthenāhanat prabhuḥ
Synonyms
etāvat — this much; uktvā — saying; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; nivṛttaḥ — stopped; asat — the impious; vadhāt — from killing; api — although; bhāvitvāt — because it was inevitable; tam — him, Romaharṣaṇa; kuśa — of kuśa grass; agreṇa — with the tip of a blade; kara — in His hand; sthena — held; ahanat — killed; prabhuḥ — the Lord.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Although Lord Balarāma had stopped killing the impious, Romaharṣaṇa’s death was inevitable. Thus, having spoken, the Lord killed him by picking up a blade of kuśa grass and touching him with its tip.

Text 29
हाहेति वादिन: सर्वे मुनय: खिन्नमानसा: ।
ऊचु: सङ्कर्षणं देवमधर्मस्ते कृत: प्रभो ॥ २९ ॥
hāheti-vādinaḥ sarve
munayaḥ khinna-mānasāḥ
ūcuḥ saṅkarṣaṇaṁ devam
adharmas te kṛtaḥ prabho
Synonyms
hā-hā — “alas, alas”; iti — thus; vādinaḥ — saying; sarve — all; munayaḥ — the sages; khinna — disturbed; mānasāḥ — whose minds; ūcuḥ — they told; saṅkarṣaṇam — Balarāma; devam — the Supreme Lord; adharmaḥ — an irreligious act; te — by You; kṛtaḥ — done; prabho — O master.

Translation
All the sages cried out, “Alas, alas!” in great distress. They told Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa, “O master, You have committed an irreligious act!

Text 30
अस्य ब्रह्मासनं दत्तमस्माभिर्यदुनन्दन ।
आयुश्चात्माक्लमं तावद् यावत् सत्रं समाप्यते ॥ ३० ॥
asya brahmāsanaṁ dattam
asmābhir yadu-nandana
āyuś cātmāklamaṁ tāvad
yāvat satraṁ samāpyate
Synonyms
asya — his; brahma-āsanam — the spiritual master’s seat; dattam — given; asmābhiḥ — by us; yadu-nandana — O darling of the Yadus; āyuḥ — long life; ca — and; ātma — bodily; aklamam — freedom from trouble; tāvat — for that long; yāvat — until; satram — the sacrifice; samāpyate — is completed.

Translation
“O favorite of the Yadus, we gave him the seat of the spiritual master and promised him long life and freedom from physical pain for as long as this sacrifice continues.

Texts 31-32
अजानतैवाचरितस्त्वया ब्रह्मवधो यथा ।
योगेश्वरस्य भवतो नाम्नायोऽपि नियामक: ॥ ३१ ॥
यद्येतद् ब्रह्महत्याया: पावनं लोकपावन ।
चरिष्यति भवाँल्ल‍ोकसङ्ग्रहोऽनन्यचोदित: ॥ ३२ ॥
ajānataivācaritas
tvayā brahma-vadho yathā
yogeśvarasya bhavato
nāmnāyo ’pi niyāmakaḥ
yady etad-brahma-hatyāyāḥ
pāvanaṁ loka-pāvana
cariṣyati bhavāḻ loka-
saṅgraho ’nanya-coditaḥ
Synonyms
ajānatā — not knowing; eva — only; ācaritaḥ — done; tvayā — by You; brahma — of a brāhmaṇa; vadhaḥ — the killing; yathā — actually; yoga — of mystic power; īśvarasya — for the Lord; bhavataḥ — Yourself; na — not; āmnāyaḥ — scriptural injunction; api — even; niyāmakaḥ — regulator; yadi — if; etat — for this; brahma — of a brāhmaṇa; hatyāyāḥ — killing; pāvanam — purifying atonement; loka — of the world; pāvana — O purifier; cariṣyati — executes; bhavān — Your good self; loka-saṅgrahaḥ — benefit for the people in general; ananya — by no one else; coditaḥ — impelled.

Translation
“You have unknowingly killed a brāhmaṇa. Of course, even the injunctions of revealed scripture cannot dictate to You, the Lord of all mystic power. But if by Your own free will You nonetheless carry out the prescribed purification for this slaying of a brāhmaṇa, O purifier of the whole world, people in general will greatly benefit by Your example.”

Text 33
श्रीभगवानुवाच
चरिष्ये वधनिर्वेशं लोकानुग्रहकाम्यया ।
नियम: प्रथमे कल्पे यावान् स तु विधीयताम् ॥ ३३ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
cariṣye vadha-nirveśaṁ
lokānugraha-kāmyayā
niyamaḥ prathame kalpe
yāvān sa tu vidhīyatām
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Lord said; cariṣye — I will execute; vadha — for the killing; nirveśam — atonement; loka — for the people in general; anugraha — compassion; kāmyayā — desiring to show; niyamaḥ — the regulative injunction; prathame — in the primary; kalpe — ritual; yāvān — as much; saḥ — that; tu — indeed; vidhīyatām — please prescribe.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead said: I will certainly perform the atonement for this killing, since I wish to show compassion to the people in general. Please, therefore, prescribe for Me whatever ritual is to be done first.

Text 34
दीर्घमायुर्बतैतस्य सत्त्वमिन्द्रियमेव च ।
आशासितं यत्तद्ब्रूते साधये योगमायया ॥ ३४ ॥
dīrgham āyur bataitasya
sattvam indriyam eva ca
āśāsitaṁ yat tad brūte
sādhaye yoga-māyayā
Synonyms
dīrgham — long; āyuḥ — life span; bata — oh; etasya — for him; sattvam — strength; indriyam — sensory power; eva ca — also; āśāsitam — promised; yat — which; tat — that; brūte — please say; sādhaye — I shall make happen; yoga-māyayā — by My mystic power.

Translation
O sages, just say the word, and by My mystic power I shall restore everything you promised him — long life, strength and sensory power.

Text 35
ऋषय ऊचु:
अस्‍त्रस्य तव वीर्यस्य मृत्योरस्माकमेव च ।
यथा भवेद्वच: सत्यं तथा राम विधीयताम् ॥ ३५ ॥
ṛṣaya ūcuḥ
astrasya tava vīryasya
mṛtyor asmākam eva ca
yathā bhaved vacaḥ satyaṁ
tathā rāma vidhīyatām
Synonyms
ṛṣayaḥ ūcuḥ — the sages said; astrasya — of the weapon (the blade of kuśa grass); tava — Your; vīryasya — potency; mṛtyoḥ — of the death; asmākam — our; eva ca — also; yathā — so that; bhavet — may remain; vacaḥ — the words; satyam — true; tathā — thus; rāma — O Rāma; vidhīyatām — please arrange.

Translation
The sages said: Please see to it, O Rāma, that Your power and that of Your kuśa weapon, as well as our promise and Romaharṣaṇa’s death, all remain intact.

Text 36
श्रीभगवानुवाच
आत्मा वै पुत्र उत्पन्न इति वेदानुशासनम् ।
तस्मादस्य भवेद्वक्ता आयुरिन्द्रियसत्त्ववान् ॥ ३६ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
ātmā vai putra utpanna
iti vedānuśāsanam
tasmād asya bhaved vaktā
āyur-indriya-sattva-vān
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Lord said; ātmā — one’s self; vai — indeed; putraḥ — the son; utpannaḥ — born; iti — thus; veda-anuśāsanam — the instruction of the Vedas; tasmāt — therefore; asya — his (son); bhavet — should be; vaktā — the speaker; āyuḥ — long life; indriya — strong senses; sattva — and physical power; vān — possessing.

Translation
The Supreme Lord said: The Vedas instruct us that one’s own self takes birth again as one’s son. Thus let Romaharṣaṇa’s son become the speaker of the Purāṇas, and let him be endowed with long life, strong senses and stamina.

Text 37
किं व: कामो मुनिश्रेष्ठा ब्रूताहं करवाण्यथ ।
अजानतस्त्वपचितिं यथा मे चिन्त्यतां बुधा: ॥ ३७ ॥
kiṁ vaḥ kāmo muni-śreṣṭhā
brūtāhaṁ karavāṇy atha
ajānatas tv apacitiṁ
yathā me cintyatāṁ budhāḥ
Synonyms
kim — what; vaḥ — your; kāmaḥ — desire; muni — of sages; śreṣṭhāḥ — O best; brūta — please say; aham — I; karavāṇi — shall do it; atha — and then; ajānataḥ — who does not know; tu — indeed; apacitim — the atonement; yathā — properly; me — for Me; cintyatām — please think of; budhāḥ — O intelligent ones.

Translation
Please tell Me your desire, O best of sages, and I shall certainly fulfill it. And, O wise souls, please carefully determine My proper atonement, since I do not know what it might be.

Text 38
ऋषय ऊचु:
इल्वलस्य सुतो घोरो बल्वलो नाम दानव: ।
स दूषयति न: सत्रमेत्य पर्वणि पर्वणि ॥ ३८ ॥
ṛṣaya ūcuḥ
ilvalasya suto ghoro
balvalo nāma dānavaḥ
sa dūṣayati naḥ satram
etya parvaṇi parvaṇi
Synonyms
ṛṣayaḥ ūcuḥ — the sages said; ilvalasya — of Ilvala; sutaḥ — the son; ghoraḥ — fearsome; balvalaḥ nāma — named Balvala; dānavaḥ — demon; saḥ — he; dūṣayati — contaminates; naḥ — our; satram — sacrifice; etya — coming; parvaṇi parvaṇi — on each new-moon day.

Translation
The sages said: A fearsome demon named Balvala, the son of Ilvala, comes here every new-moon day and contaminates our sacrifice.

Text 39
तं पापं जहि दाशार्ह तन्न: शुश्रूषणं परम् ।
पूयशोणितविन् मूत्रसुरामांसाभिवर्षिणम् ॥ ३९ ॥
taṁ pāpaṁ jahi dāśārha
tan naḥ śuśrūṣaṇaṁ param
pūya-śoṇita-vin-mūtra-
surā-māṁsābhivarṣiṇam
Synonyms
tam — that; pāpam — sinful person; jahi — please kill; dāśārha — O descendant of Daśārha; tat — that; naḥ — to us; śuśrūṣaṇam — service; param — best; pūya — pus; śoṇita — blood; vit — feces; mūtra — urine; surā — wine; māṁsa — and meat; abhivarṣiṇam — who pours down.

Translation
O descendant of Daśārha, please kill that sinful demon, who pours down pus, blood, feces, urine, wine and meat upon us. This is the best service You can do for us.

Text 40
ततश्च भारतं वर्षं परीत्य सुसमाहित: ।
चरित्वा द्वादश मासांस्तीर्थस्‍नायी विशुध्यसि ॥ ४० ॥
tataś ca bhārataṁ varṣaṁ
parītya su-samāhitaḥ
caritvā dvādaśa-māsāṁs
tīrtha-snāyī viśudhyasi
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; ca — and; bhāratam varṣam — the land of Bhārata (India); parītya — circumambulating; su-samāhitaḥ — in a serious mood; caritvā — performing penances; dvādaśa — twelve; māsān — months; tīrtha — at holy places of pilgrimage; snāyī — bathing; viśudhyasi — You will be purified.

Translation
Thereafter, for twelve months, You should circumambulate the land of Bhārata in a mood of serious meditation, executing austerities and bathing at various holy pilgrimage sites. In this way You will become purified.