Texts 1-2
श्रीशुक उवाच
स इत्थं द्विजमुख्येन सह सङ्कथयन् हरि: ।
सर्वभूतमनोऽभिज्ञ: स्मयमान उवाच तम् ॥ १ ॥
ब्रह्मण्यो ब्राह्मणं कृष्णो भगवान् प्रहसन् प्रियम् ।
प्रेम्णा निरीक्षणेनैव प्रेक्षन् खलु सतां गति: ॥ २ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
sa itthaṁ dvija-mukhyena
saha saṅkathayan hariḥ
sarva-bhūta-mano-’bhijñaḥ
smayamāna uvāca tam
brahmaṇyo brāhmaṇaṁ kṛṣṇo
bhagavān prahasan priyam
premṇā nirīkṣaṇenaiva
prekṣan khalu satāṁ gatiḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; saḥ — He; ittham — in this manner; dvija — of brāhmaṇas; mukhyena — with the best; saha — together; saṅkathayan — conversing; hariḥ — Lord Hari; sarva — of all; bhūta — living beings; manaḥ — the minds; abhijñaḥ — who knows perfectly; smayamānaḥ — smiling; uvāca — said; tam — to him; brahmaṇyaḥ — devoted to the brāhmaṇas; brāhmaṇam — to the brāhmaṇa; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prahasan — laughing; priyam — at His dear friend; premṇā — lovingly; nirīkṣaṇena — with a glance; eva — indeed; prekṣan — looking; khalu — indeed; satām — of the saintly devotees; gatiḥ — the goal.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:] Lord Hari, Kṛṣṇa, perfectly knows the hearts of all living beings, and He is especially devoted to the brāhmaṇas. While the Supreme Lord, the goal of all saintly persons, conversed in this way with the best of the twice-born, He laughed and spoke the following words to that dear friend of His, the brāhmaṇa Sudāmā, all the while smiling and looking upon him with affection.

Text 3
श्रीभगवानुवाच
किमुपायनमानीतं ब्रह्मन् मे भवता गृहात् ।
अण्वप्युपाहृतं भक्तै: प्रेम्णा भूर्येव मे भवेत् ।
भूर्यप्यभक्तोपहृतं न मे तोषाय कल्पते ॥ ३ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
kim upāyanam ānītaṁ
brahman me bhavatā gṛhāt
aṇv apy upāhṛtaṁ bhaktaiḥ
premṇā bhury eva me bhavet
bhūry apy abhaktopahṛtaṁ
na me toṣāya kalpate
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Lord said; kim — what; upāyanam — gift; ānītam — brought; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; me — for Me; bhavatā — by you; gṛhāt — from your home; aṇu — infinitesimal; api — even; upāhṛtam — thing offered; bhaktaiḥ — by devotees; premṇā — in pure love; bhūri — immense; eva — indeed; me — for Me; bhavet — it becomes; bhūri — huge; api — even; abhakta — by nondevotees; upahṛtam — presented; na — not; me — My; toṣāya — for the satisfaction; kalpate — is competent.

Translation
The Supreme Lord said: O brāhmaṇa, what gift have you brought Me from home? I regard as great even the smallest gift offered by My devotees in pure love, but even great offerings presented by nondevotees do not please Me.

Text 4
पत्रं पुष्पं फलं तोयं यो मे भक्त्या प्रयच्छति ।
तदहं भक्त्युपहृतमश्न‍ामि प्रयतात्मन: ॥ ४ ॥
patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ
yo me bhaktyā prayacchati
tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam
aśnāmi prayatātmanaḥ
Synonyms
patram — a leaf; puṣpam — a flower; phalam — a fruit; toyam — water; yaḥ — whoever; me — unto Me; bhaktyā — with devotion; prayacchati — offers; tat — that; aham — I; bhakti-upahṛtam — offered in devotion; aśnāmi — accept; prayata-ātmanaḥ — from one in pure consciousness.

Translation
If one offers Me with love and devotion a leaf, a flower, a fruit or water, I will accept it.

Text 5
इत्युक्तोऽपि द्वियस्तस्मै व्रीडित: पतये श्रिय: ।
पृथुकप्रसृतिं राजन् न प्रायच्छदवाङ्‍मुख: ॥ ५ ॥
ity ukto ’pi dviyas tasmai
vrīḍitaḥ pataye śriyaḥ
pṛthuka-prasṛtiṁ rājan
na prāyacchad avāṅ-mukhaḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus; uktaḥ — addressed; api — although; dvijaḥ — the brāhmaṇa; tasmai — to Him; vrīḍitaḥ — embarrassed; pataye — to the husband; śriyaḥ — of the goddess of fortune; pṛthuka — of flat rice; prasṛtim — the palmfuls; rājan — O King (Parīkṣit); na prāyacchat — did not offer; avāk — bowed down; mukhaḥ — whose head.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Even after being addressed in this way, O King, the brāhmaṇa felt too embarrassed to offer his palmfuls of flat rice to the husband of the goddess of fortune. He simply kept his head bowed in shame.

Texts 6-7
सर्वभूतात्मद‍ृक् साक्षात् तस्यागमनकारणम् ।
विज्ञायाचिन्तयन्नायं श्रीकामो माभजत्पुरा ॥ ६ ॥
पत्न्‍या: पतिव्रतायास्तु सखा प्रियचिकीर्षया ।
प्राप्तो मामस्य दास्यामि सम्पदोऽमर्त्यदुर्लभा: ॥ ७ ॥
sarva-bhūtātma-dṛk sākṣāt
tasyāgamana-kāraṇam
vijṅāyācintayan nāyaṁ
śrī-kāmo mābhajat purā
patnyāḥ pati-vratāyās tu
sakhā priya-cikīrṣayā
prāpto mām asya dāsyāmi
sampado ’martya-durlabhāḥ
Synonyms
sarva — of all; bhūta — living beings; ātma — of the hearts; dṛk — the witness; sākṣāt — direct; tasya — his (Sudāmā’s); āgamana — for the coming; kāraṇam — the reason; vijñāya — understanding fully; acintayat — He thought; na — not; ayam — he; śrī — of opulence; kāmaḥ — desirous; mā — Me; abhajat — worshiped; purā — in the past; patnyāḥ — of his wife; pati — to her husband; vratāyāḥ — chastely devoted; tu — however; sakhā — My friend; priya — the satisfaction; cikīrṣayā — with the desire of securing; prāptaḥ — now come; mām — to Me; asya — to him; dāsyāmi — I will give; sampadaḥ — riches; amartya — by the demigods; durlabhāḥ — unobtainable.

Translation
Being the direct witness in the hearts of all living beings, Lord Kṛṣṇa fully understood why Sudāmā had come to see Him. Thus He thought, “In the past My friend has never worshiped Me out of a desire for material opulence, but now he comes to Me to satisfy his chaste and devoted wife. I will give him riches that even the immortal demigods cannot obtain.”

Text 8
इत्थं विचिन्त्य वसनाच्चीरबद्धान्द्विजन्मन: ।
स्वयं जहार किमिदमिति पृथुकतण्डुलान् ॥ ८ ॥
itthaṁ vicintya vasanāc
cīra-baddhān dvi-janmanaḥ
svayaṁ jahāra kim idam
iti pṛthuka-taṇḍulān
Synonyms
ittham — in this manner; vicintya — thinking; vasanāt — from the garment; cīra — in a strip of cloth; baddhān — tied up; dvi-janmanaḥ — of the twice-born brāhmaṇa; svayam — Himself; jahāra — He took hold of; kim — what; idam — this; iti — so saying; pṛthuka-taṇḍulān — the grains of flat rice.

Translation
Thinking like this, the Lord snatched from the brāhmaṇa’s garment the grains of flat rice tied up in an old piece of cloth and exclaimed, “What is this?

Text 9
नन्वेतदुपनीतं मे परमप्रीणनं सखे ।
तर्पयन्त्यङ्ग मां विश्वमेते पृथुकतण्डुला: ॥ ९ ॥
nanv etad upanītaṁ me
parama-prīṇanaṁ sakhe
tarpayanty aṅga māṁ viśvam
ete pṛthuka-taṇḍulāḥ
Synonyms
nanu — whether; etat — this; upanītam — brought; me — for Me; parama — supreme; prīṇanam — giving satisfaction; sakhe — O friend; tarpayanti — ingratiate; aṅga — My dear; mām — Me; viśvam — (who am) the whole universe; ete — these; pṛṭhuka-taṇḍulāḥ — grains of flat rice.

Translation
“My friend, have You brought this for Me? It gives Me extreme pleasure. Indeed, these few grains of flat rice will satisfy not only Me but also the entire universe.”

Text 10
इति मुष्टिं सकृज्जग्ध्वा द्वितीयां जग्धुमाददे ।
तावच्छ्रीर्जगृहे हस्तं तत्परा परमेष्ठिन: ॥ १० ॥
iti muṣṭiṁ sakṛj jagdhvā
dvitīyāṁ jagdhum ādade
tāvac chrīr jagṛhe hastaṁ
tat-parā parameṣṭhinaḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus speaking; muṣṭim — a handful; sakṛt — one time; jagdhvā — eating; dvitīyam — a second; jagdhum — to eat; ādade — He took; tāvat — thereupon; śrīḥ — the goddess of fortune (Rukmiṇī-devī); jagṛhe — seized; hastam — the hand; tat — to Him; parā — devoted; parame-sthinaḥ — of the Supreme Lord.

Translation
After saying this, the Supreme Lord ate one palmful and was about to eat a second when the devoted goddess Rukmiṇī took hold of His hand.

Text 11
एतावतालं विश्वात्मन् सर्वसम्पत्समृद्धये ।
अस्मिन्लोकेऽथवामुष्मिन् पुंसस्त्वत्तोषकारणम् ॥ ११ ॥
etāvatālaṁ viśvātman
sarva-sampat-samṛddhaye
asmin loke ’tha vāmuṣmin
puṁsas tvat-toṣa-kāraṇam
Synonyms
etāvatā — this much; alam — enough; viśva — of the universe; ātman — O Soul; sarva — of all; sampat — opulent assets; samṛddhaye — for the prospering; asmin — in this; loke — world; atha vā — or else; amuṣmin — in the next; puṁsaḥ — for a person; tvat — Your; toṣa — satisfaction; kāraṇam — having as its cause.

Translation
[Queen Rukmiṇī said:] This is more than enough, O Soul of the universe, to secure him an abundance of all kinds of wealth in this world and the next. After all, one’s prosperity depends simply on Your satisfaction.

Text 12
ब्राह्मणस्तां तु रजनीमुषित्वाच्युतमन्दिरे ।
भुक्त्वा पीत्वा सुखं मेने आत्मानं स्वर्गतं यथा ॥ १२ ॥
brāhmaṇas tāṁ tu rajanīm
uṣitvācyuta-mandire
bhuktvā pītvā sukhaṁ mene
ātmānaṁ svar-gataṁ yathā
Synonyms
brāhmaṇaḥ — the brāhmaṇa; tām — that; tu — and; rajanīm — night; uṣitvā — residing; acyuta — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; mandire — in the palace; bhuktvā — eating; pītvā — drinking; sukham — to his satisfaction; mene — he thought; ātmānam — himself; svaḥ — the spiritual world; gatam — having attained; yathā — as if.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] The brāhmaṇa spent that night in Lord Acyuta’s palace after eating and drinking to his full satisfaction. He felt as if he had gone to the spiritual world.

Text 13
श्वोभूते विश्वभावेन स्वसुखेनाभिवन्दित: ।
जगाम स्वालयं तात पथ्यनुव्रज्य नन्दित: ॥ १३ ॥
śvo-bhūte viśva-bhāvena
sva-sukhenābhivanditaḥ
jagāma svālayaṁ tāta
pathy anavrajya nanditaḥ
Synonyms
śvaḥ-bhūte — on the following day; viśva — of the universe; bhāvena — by the maintainer; sva — within Himself; sukhena — who experiences happiness; abhivanditaḥ — honored; jagāma — he went; sva — to his own; ālayam — residence; tāta — my dear (King Parīkṣit); pathi — along the path; anuvrajya — walking; nanditaḥ — delighted.

Translation
The next day, Sudāmā set off for home while being honored by Lord Kṛṣṇa, the self-satisfied maintainer of the universe. The brāhmaṇa felt greatly delighted, my dear King, as he walked along the road.

Text 14
स चालब्ध्वा धनं कृष्णान्न तु याचितवान्स्वयम् ।
स्वगृहान् व्रीडितोऽगच्छन्महद्दर्शननिर्वृत: ॥ १४ ॥
sa cālabdhvā dhanaṁ kṛṣṇān
na tu yācitavān svayam
sva-gṛhān vrīḍito ’gacchan
mahad-darśana-nirvṛtaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he; ca — and; alabdhvā — not having obtained; dhanam — wealth; kṛṣṇāt — from Lord Kṛṣṇa; na — not; tu — however; yācitavān — did beg; svayam — on his own initiative; sva — to his; gṛhān — home; vrīḍitaḥ — embarrassed; agacchat — he went; mahat — of the Supreme Lord; darśana — by the audience; nirvṛtaḥ — made joyful.

Translation
Although he had apparently received no wealth from Lord Kṛṣṇa, Sudāmā was too shy to beg for it on his own. He simply returned home, feeling perfectly satisfied to have had the Supreme Lord’s audience.

Text 15
अहो ब्रह्मण्यदेवस्य द‍ृष्टा ब्रह्मण्यता मया ।
यद् दरिद्रतमो लक्ष्मीमाश्लिष्टो बिभ्रतोरसि ॥ १५ ॥
aho brahmaṇya-devasya
dṛṣṭā brahmaṇyatā mayā
yad daridratamo lakṣmīm
āśliṣṭo bibhratorasi
Synonyms
aho — ah; brahmaṇya — who is dedicated to brāhmaṇas; devasya — of the Supreme Lord; dṛṣṭa — seen; brahmaṇyatā — the devotion to brāhmaṇas; mayā — by me; yat — inasmuch; daridra-tamaḥ — the poorest person; lakṣmīm — the goddess of fortune; āśliṣṭaḥ — embraced; bibhratā — by Him who carries; urasi — on His chest.

Translation
[Sudāmā thought:] Lord Kṛṣṇa is known to be devoted to the brāhmaṇas, and now I have personally seen this devotion. Indeed, He who carries the goddess of fortune on His chest has embraced the poorest beggar.

Text 16
क्व‍ाहं दरिद्र: पापीयान् क्व‍ कृष्ण: श्रीनिकेतन: ।
ब्रह्मबन्धुरिति स्माहं बाहुभ्यां परिरम्भित: ॥ १६ ॥
kvāhaṁ daridraḥ pāpīyān
kva kṛṣṇaḥ śrī-niketanaḥ
brahma-bandhur iti smāhaṁ
bāhubhyāṁ parirambhitaḥ
Synonyms
kva — who am; aham — I; daridraḥ — poor; pāpīyān — sinful; kva — who is; kṛṣṇaḥ — Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śrī-niketanaḥ — the transcendental form of all opulence; brahma-bandhuḥ — the friend of a brāhmaṇa, not fit even to be called a brāhmaṇa; iti — thus; sma — certainly; aham — I; bāhubhyām — by the arms; parirambhitaḥ — embraced.

Translation
Who am I? A sinful, poor friend of a brāhmaṇa. And who is Kṛṣṇa? The Supreme Personality of Godhead, full in six opulences. Nonetheless, He has embraced me with His two arms.

Text 17
निवासित: प्रियाजुष्टे पर्यङ्के भ्रातरो यथा ।
महिष्या वीजित: श्रान्तो बालव्यजनहस्तया ॥ १७ ॥
nivāsitaḥ priyā-juṣṭe
paryaṅke bhrātaro yathā
mahiṣyā vījitaḥ śrānto
bāla-vyajana-hastayā
Synonyms
nivāsitaḥ — seated; priyā — by His beloved; juṣṭe — used; paryaṅke — on the bed; bhrātaraḥ — brothers; yathā — just as; mahiṣyā — by His queen; vījitaḥ — fanned; śrāntaḥ — tired; bāla — of (yak-tail) hair; vyajana — a fan; hastayā — in whose hand.

Translation
He treated me just like one of His brothers, making me sit on the bed of His beloved consort. And because I was fatigued, His queen personally fanned me with a yak-tail cāmara.

Text 18
शुश्रूषया परमया पादसंवाहनादिभि: ।
पूजितो देवदेवेन विप्रदेवेन देववत् ॥ १८ ॥
śuśrūṣayā paramayā
pāda-saṁvāhanādibhiḥ
pūjito deva-devena
vipra-devena deva-vat
Synonyms
śuśrūṣayā — with service; paramayā — sincere; pāda — of the feet; saṁvāhana — massaging; ādibhiḥ — and so on; pūjitaḥ — worshiped; deva-devena — by the Lord of all the demigods; vipra-devena — by the Lord of the brāhmaṇas; deva — a demigod; vat — like.

Translation
Although He is the Lord of all demigods and the object of worship for all brāhmaṇas, He worshiped me as if I were a demigod myself, massaging my feet and rendering other humble services.

Text 19
स्वर्गापवर्गयो: पुंसां रसायां भुवि सम्पदाम् ।
सर्वासामपि सिद्धीनां मूलं तच्चरणार्चनम् ॥ १९ ॥
svargāpavargayoḥ puṁsāṁ
rasāyāṁ bhuvi sampadām
sarvāsām api siddhīnāṁ
mūlaṁ tac-caraṇārcanam
Synonyms
svarga — of heaven; apavargayoḥ — and of ultimate liberation; puṁsām — for all men; rasāyām — in the subterranean regions; bhuvi — and on the earth; sampadām — of opulences; sarvāsām — all; api — also; siddhīnām — of mystic perfections; mūlam — the root cause; tat — His; caraṇa — of the feet; arcanam — the worship.

Translation
Devotional service to His lotus feet is the root cause of all the perfections a person can find in heaven, in liberation, in the subterranean regions and on earth.

Text 20
अधनोऽयं धनं प्राप्य माद्यन्नुच्चैर्न मां स्मरेत् ।
इति कारुणिको नूनं धनं मेऽभूरि नाददात् ॥ २० ॥
adhano ’yaṁ dhanaṁ prāpya
mādyann uccair na māṁ smaret
iti kāruṇiko nūnaṁ
dhanaṁ me ’bhūri nādadāt
Synonyms
adhanaḥ — poor person; ayam — this; dhanam — riches; prāpya — obtaining; mādyan — delighting; uccaiḥ — excessively; na — not; mām — Me; smaret — will remember; iti — thus thinking; kāruṇikaḥ — compassionate; nūnam — indeed; dhanam — wealth; me — to me; abhūri — slight; na ādadāt — He did not give.

Translation
Thinking “If this poor wretch suddenly becomes rich, he will forget Me in his intoxicating happiness,” the compassionate Lord did not grant me even a little wealth.

Texts 21-23
इति तच्चिन्तयन्नन्त: प्राप्तो निजगृहान्तिकम् ।
सूर्यानलेन्दुसङ्काशैर्विमानै: सर्वतो वृतम् ॥ २१ ॥
विचित्रोपवनोद्यानै: कूजद्‌द्विजकुलाकुलै: ।
प्रोत्फुल्ल‍कमुदाम्भोजकह्लारोत्पलवारिभि: ॥ २२ ॥
जुष्टं स्वलङ्कृतै: पुम्भि: स्‍त्रीभिश्च हरिणाक्षिभि: ।
किमिदं कस्य वा स्थानं कथं तदिदमित्यभूत् ॥ २३ ॥
iti tac cintayann antaḥ
prāpto niya-gṛhāntikam
sūryānalendu-saṅkāśair
vimānaiḥ sarvato vṛtam
vicitropavanodyānaiḥ
kūjad-dvija-kulākulaiḥ
protphulla-kamudāmbhoja-
kahlārotpala-vāribhiḥ
juṣṭaṁ sv-alaṅkṛtaiḥ pumbhiḥ
strībhiś ca hariṇākṣibhiḥ
kim idaṁ kasya vā sthānaṁ
kathaṁ tad idam ity abhūt
Synonyms
iti — thus; tat — this; cintayan — thinking; antaḥ — inwardly; prāptaḥ — arrived; nija — his; gṛha — of the home; antikam — at the vicinity; sūrya — the sun; anala — fire; indu — and the moon; saṅkāśaiḥ — rivaling; vimānaiḥ — with celestial palaces; sarvataḥ — on all sides; vṛtam — surrounded; vicitra — wonderful; upavana — with courtyards; udyānaiḥ — and gardens; kūjat — cooing; dvija — of birds; kula — with hordes; ākulaiḥ — swarming; protphulla — fully bloomed; kumuda — having night-blooming lotuses; ambhoja — day-blooming lotuses; kahlāra — white lotuses; utpala — and water lilies; vāribhiḥ — with reservoirs of water; juṣṭam — adorned; su — well; alaṅkṛtaiḥ — ornamented; pumbhiḥ — with men; strībhiḥ — with women; ca — and; hariṇā — like those of she-deer; akṣibhiḥ — whose eyes; kim — what; idam — this; kasya — whose; vā — or; sthānam — place; katham — how; tat — it; idam — this; iti — so; abhūt — has become.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Thinking thus to himself, Sudāmā finally came to the place where his home stood. But that place was now crowded on all sides with towering, celestial palaces rivaling the combined brilliance of the sun, fire and the moon. There were splendorous courtyards and gardens, each filled with flocks of cooing birds and beautified by ponds in which kumuda, ambhoja, kahlāra and utpala lotuses grew. Finely attired men and doe-eyed women stood in attendance. Sudāmā wondered, “What is all this? Whose property is it? How has this all come about?”

Text 24
एवं मीमांसमानं तं नरा नार्योऽमरप्रभा: ।
प्रत्यगृह्णन् महाभागं गीतवाद्येन भूयसा ॥ २४ ॥
evaṁ mīmāṁsamānaṁ taṁ
narā nāryo ’mara-prabhāḥ
pratyagṛhṇan mahā-bhāgaṁ
gīta-vādyena bhūyasā
Synonyms
evam — thus; mīmāṁsamānam — who was deeply pondering; tam — him; narāḥ — the men; nāryaḥ — and women; amara — like the demigods’; prabhāḥ — whose effulgent complexions; pratyagṛhṇan — greeted; mahā-bhāgam — most fortunate; gīta — with singing; vādyena — and instrumental accompaniment; bhūyasā — loud.

Translation
As he continued to ponder in this way, the beautiful men — and maidservants, as effulgent as demigods, came forward to greet their greatly fortunate master with loud song and instrumental music.

Text 25
पतिमागतमाकर्ण्य पत्न्‍युद्धर्षातिसम्भ्रमा ।
निश्चक्राम गृहात्तूर्णं रूपिणी श्रीरिवालयात् ॥ २५ ॥
patim āgatam ākarṇya
patny uddharṣāti-sambhramā
niścakrāma gṛhāt tūrṇaṁ
rūpiṇī śrīr ivālayāt
Synonyms
patim — her husband; āgatam — come; ākarṇya — hearing; patnī — his wife; uddharṣā — jubilant; ati — extremely; sambhramā — excited; niścakrāma — she came out; gṛhāt — from the house; tūrṇam — quickly; rūpiṇī — manifesting her personal form; śrīḥ — the goddess of fortune; iva — as if; ālayāt — from her abode.

Translation
When she heard that her husband had arrived, the brāhmaṇa’s wife quickly came out of the house in a jubilant flurry. She resembled the goddess of fortune herself emerging from her divine abode.

Text 26
पतिव्रता पतिं द‍ृष्ट्वा प्रेमोत्कण्ठाश्रुलोचना ।
मीलिताक्ष्यनमद्बुद्ध्या मनसा परिषस्वजे ॥ २६ ॥
pati-vratā patiṁ dṛṣṭvā
premotkaṇṭhāśru-locanā
mīlitākṣy anamad buddhyā
manasā pariṣasvaje
Synonyms
pati-vratā — devoted to her husband; patim — her husband; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; prema — of love; utkaṇṭha — with the eagerness; aśru — tearful; locanā — whose eyes; mīlita — holding closed; akṣī — her eyes; anamat — she bowed down; buddhyā — with thoughtful reflection; manasā — with her heart; pariṣasvaje — she embraced.

Translation
When the chaste lady saw her husband, her eyes filled with tears of love and eagerness. As she held her eyes closed, she solemnly bowed down to him, and in her heart she embraced him.

Text 27
पत्नीं वीक्ष्य विस्फुरन्तीं देवीं वैमानिकीमिव ।
दासीनां निष्ककण्ठीनां मध्ये भान्तीं स विस्मित: ॥ २७ ॥
patnīṁ vīkṣya visphurantīṁ
devīṁ vaimānikīm iva
dāsīnāṁ niṣka-kaṇṭhīnāṁ
madhye bhāntīṁ sa vismitaḥ
Synonyms
patnīm — his wife; vīkṣya — seeing; visphurantīm — appearing effulgent; devīm — a demigoddess; vaimānikīm — come in a heavenly airplane; iva — as if; dāsīnām — of maidservants; niṣka — lockets; kaṇṭhīnām — on whose necks; madhye — in the midst; bhāntīm — shining; saḥ — he; vismitaḥ — amazed.

Translation
Sudāmā was amazed to see his wife. Shining forth in the midst of maidservants adorned with jeweled lockets, she looked as effulgent as a demigoddess in her celestial airplane.

Text 28
प्रीत: स्वयं तया युक्त: प्रविष्टो निजमन्दिरम् ।
मणिस्तम्भशतोपेतं महेन्द्रभवनं यथा ॥ २८ ॥
prītaḥ svayaṁ tayā yuktaḥ
praviṣṭo nija-mandiram
maṇi-stambha-śatopetaṁ
mahendra-bhavanaṁ yathā
Synonyms
prītaḥ — pleased; svayam — himself; tayā — by her; yuktaḥ — joined; praviṣṭaḥ — having entered; nija — his; mandiram — home; maṇi — with gems; stambha — columns; śata — hundreds; upetam — having; mahā-indra — of great Indra, the King of heaven; bhavanam — the palace; yathā — like.

Translation
With pleasure he took his wife with him and entered his house, where there were hundreds of gem-studded pillars, just as in the palace of Lord Mahendra.

Texts 29-32
पय:फेननिभा: शय्या दान्ता रुक्‍मपरिच्छदा: ।
पर्यङ्का हेमदण्डानि चामरव्यजनानि च ॥ २९ ॥
आसनानि च हैमानि मृदूपस्तरणानि च ।
मुक्तादामविलम्बीनि वितानानि द्युमन्ति च ॥ ३० ॥
स्वच्छस्फटिककुड्येषु महामारकतेषु च ।
रत्नदीपान् भ्राजमानान् ललनारत्नसंयुता: ॥ ३१ ॥
विलोक्य ब्राह्मणस्तत्र समृद्धी: सर्वसम्पदाम् ।
तर्कयामास निर्व्यग्र: स्वसमृद्धिमहैतुकीम् ॥ ३२ ॥
payaḥ-phena-nibhāḥ śayyā
dāntā rukma-paricchadāḥ
paryaṅkā hema-daṇḍāni
cāmara-vyajanāni ca
āsanāni ca haimāni
mṛdūpastaraṇāni ca
muktādāma-vilambīni
vitānāni dyumanti ca
svaccha-sphaṭika-kuḍyeṣu
mahā-mārakateṣu ca
ratna-dīpān bhrājamānān
lalanā ratna-saṁyutāḥ
vilokya brāhmaṇas tatra
samṛddhīḥ sarva-sampadām
tarkayām āsa nirvyagraḥ
sva-samṛddhim ahaitukīm
Synonyms
payaḥ — of milk; phena — the foam; nibhāḥ — resembling; śayyāḥ — beds; dāntāḥ — made of elephant tusks; rukma — golden; paricchadāḥ — whose ornamentation; paryaṅkāḥ — couches; hema — of gold; daṇḍāni — whose legs; cāmara-vyajanāni — yak-tail fans; ca — and; āsanāni — chairs; ca — and; haimāni — golden; mṛdu — soft; upastaraṇāni — cushions; ca — and; muktā-dāma — with strings of pearls; vilambīni — hanging; vitānāni — canopies; dyumanti — gleaming; ca — and; svaccha — clear; sphaṭika — of crystal glass; kuḍyeṣu — upon the walls; mahā-mārakateṣu — with precious emeralds; ca — also; ratna — jeweled; dīpān — lamps; bhrājamānān — shining; lalanāḥ — women; ratna — with jewels; saṁyutāḥ — decorated; vilokya — seeing; brāhmaṇaḥ — the brāhmaṇa; tatra — there; samṛddhīḥ — the flourishing; sarva — all; sampadām — of opulences; tarkayām āsa — he conjectured; nirvyagraḥ — free from agitation; sva — his own; samṛddhim — about the prosperity; ahaitukīm — unexpected.

Translation
In Sudāmā’s home were beds as soft and white as the foam of milk, with bedsteads made of ivory and ornamented with gold. There were also couches with golden legs, as well as royal cāmara fans, golden thrones, soft cushions and gleaming canopies hung with strings of pearls. Upon the walls of sparkling crystal glass, inlaid with precious emeralds, shone jeweled lamps, and the women in the palace were all adorned with precious gems. As he viewed this luxurious opulence of all varieties, the brāhmaṇa calmly reasoned to himself about his unexpected prosperity.

Text 33
नूनं बतैतन्मम दुर्भगस्य
शश्वद्दरिद्रस्य समृद्धिहेतु: ।
महाविभूतेरवलोकतोऽन्यो
नैवोपपद्येत यदूत्तमस्य ॥ ३३ ॥
nūnaṁ bataitan mama durbhagasya
śaśvad daridrasya samṛddhi-hetuḥ
mahā-vibhūter avalokato ’nyo
naivopapadyeta yadūttamasya
Synonyms
nūnam bata — certainly; etat — of this same person; mama — myself; durbhagasya — who am unfortunate; śaśvat — always; daridrasya — poverty-stricken; samṛddhi — of the prosperity; hetuḥ — cause; mahā-vibhūteḥ — of Him who possesses the greatest opulences; avalokataḥ — than the glance; anyaḥ — other; na — not; eva — indeed; upapadyeta — is to be found; yadu-uttamasya — of the best of the Yadus.

Translation
[Sudāmā thought:] I have always been poor. Certainly the only possible way that such an unfortunate person as myself could become suddenly rich is that Lord Kṛṣṇa, the supremely opulent chief of the Yadu dynasty, has glanced upon Me.

Text 34
नन्वब्रुवाणो दिशते समक्षं
याचिष्णवे भूर्यपि भूरिभोज: ।
पर्जन्यवत्तत् स्वयमीक्षमाणो
दाशार्हकाणामृषभ: सखा मे ॥ ३४ ॥
nanv abruvāṇo diśate samakṣaṁ
yāciṣṇave bhūry api bhūri-bhojaḥ
parjanya-vat tat svayam īkṣamāṇo
dāśārhakāṇām ṛṣabhaḥ sakhā me
Synonyms
nanu — after all; abruvānaḥ — not speaking; diśate — He has given; samakṣam — in His presence; yāciṣṇave — to him who was intending to beg; bhūri — plentiful (wealth); api — even; bhūri — of plentiful (wealth); bhojaḥ — the enjoyer; parjanya-vat — like a cloud; tat — that; svayam — Himself; īkṣamāṇaḥ — seeing; dāśārhakāṇām — of the descendants of King Daśārha; ṛṣabhaḥ — the most exalted; sakhā — friend; me — my.

Translation
After all, my friend Kṛṣṇa, the most exalted of the Dāśārhas and the enjoyer of unlimited wealth, noticed that I secretly intended to beg from Him. Thus even though He said nothing about it when I stood before Him, He actually bestowed upon me the most abundant riches. In this way He acted just like a merciful rain cloud.

Text 35
किञ्चित्करोत्युर्वपि यत् स्वदत्तं
सुहृत्कृतं फल्ग्वपि भूरिकारी ।
मयोपनीतं पृथुकैकमुष्टिं
प्रत्यग्रहीत् प्रीतियुतो महात्मा ॥ ३५ ॥
kiñcit karoty urv api yat sva-dattaṁ
suhṛt-kṛtaṁ phalgv api bhūri-kārī
mayopaṇītaṁ pṛthukaika-muṣṭiṁ
pratyagrahīt prīti-yuto mahātmā
Synonyms
kiñcit — insignificant; karoti — He makes; uru — great; api — even; yat — which; sva — by Himself; dattam — given; suhṛt — by a well-wishing friend; kṛtam — done; phalgu — meager; api — even; bhūri — great; kārī — making; mayā — by me; upanītam — brought; pṛthuka — of flat rice; eka — one; muṣṭim — palmful; pratyagrahīt — He accepted; prīti-yutaḥ — with pleasure; mahā-ātmā — the Supreme Soul.

Translation
The Lord considers even His greatest benedictions to be insignificant, while He magnifies even a small service rendered to Him by His well-wishing devotee. Thus with pleasure the Supreme Soul accepted a single palmful of the flat rice I brought Him.

Text 36
तस्यैव मे सौहृदसख्यमैत्री
दास्यं पुनर्जन्मनि जन्मनि स्यात् ।
महानुभावेन गुणालयेन
विषज्जतस्तत्पुरुषप्रसङ्ग: ॥ ३६ ॥
tasyaiva me sauhṛda-sakhya-maitrī-
dāsyaṁ punar janmani janmani syāt
mahānubhāvena guṇālayena
viṣajjatas tat-puruṣa-prasaṅgaḥ
Synonyms
tasya — for Him; eva — indeed; me — my; sauhṛda — love; sakhya — friendship; maitrī — sympathy; dāsyam — and servitude; punaḥ — repeatedly; janmani janmani — life after life; syāt — may be; mahā-anubhāvena — with the supremely compassionate Lord; guṇa — of transcendental qualities; ālayena — the reservoir; viṣajjataḥ — who becomes thoroughly attached; tat — His; puruṣa — of the devotees; prasaṅgaḥ — the valuable association.

Translation
The Lord is the supremely compassionate reservoir of all transcendental qualities. Life after life may I serve Him with love, friendship and sympathy, and may I cultivate such firm attachment for Him by the precious association of His devotees.

Text 37
भक्ताय चित्रा भगवान् हि सम्पदो
राज्यं विभूतीर्न समर्थयत्यज: ।
अदीर्घबोधाय विचक्षण: स्वयं
पश्यन् निपातं धनिनां मदोद्भ‍वम् ॥ ३७ ॥
bhaktāya citrā bhagavān hi sampado
rājyaṁ vibhūtīr na samarthayaty ajaḥ
adīrgha-bodhāya vicakṣaṇaḥ svayaṁ
paśyan nipātaṁ dhanināṁ madodbhavam
Synonyms
bhaktāya — to His devotee; citrāḥ — wonderful; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; hi — indeed; sampadaḥ — opulences; rājyam — kingdom; vibhūtīḥ — material assets; na samarthayati — does not bestow; ajaḥ — unborn; adīrgha — short; bodhāya — whose understanding; vicakṣanaḥ — wise; svayam — Himself; paśyan — seeing; nipātam — the downfall; dhaninām — of the wealthy; mada — of the intoxication of pride; udbhavam — the rise.

Translation
To a devotee who lacks spiritual insight, the Supreme Lord will not grant the wonderful opulences of this world — kingly power and material assets. Indeed, in His infinite wisdom the unborn Lord well knows how the intoxication of pride can cause the downfall of the wealthy.

Text 38
इत्थं व्यवसितो बुद्ध्या भक्तोऽतीव जनार्दने ।
विषयान् जायया त्यक्ष्यन्बुभुजे नातिलम्पट: ॥ ३८ ॥
itthaṁ vyavasito buddhyā
bhakto ’tīva janārdane
viṣayān jāyayā tyakṣyan
bubhuje nāti-lampaṭaḥ
Synonyms
ittham — in this way; vyavasitaḥ — fixing his determination; buddhyā — with intelligence; bhaktaḥ — devoted; atīva — absolutely; janārdane — to Lord Kṛṣṇa, the shelter of all living beings; viṣayān — the objects of sense gratification; jāyayā — with his wife; tyakṣyan — wanting to renounce; bubhuje — he enjoyed; na — not; ati-lampaṭaḥ — very avaricious.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Thus firmly fixing his determination by means of his spiritual intelligence, Sudāmā remained absolutely devoted to Lord Kṛṣṇa, the shelter of all living beings. Free from avarice, he enjoyed, together with his wife, the sense pleasures that had been bestowed upon him, always with the idea of eventually renouncing all sense gratification.

Text 39
तस्य वै देवदेवस्य हरेर्यज्ञपते: प्रभो: ।
ब्राह्मणा: प्रभवो दैवं न तेभ्यो विद्यते परम् ॥ ३९ ॥
tasya vai deva-devasya
harer yajña-pateḥ prabhoḥ
brāhmaṇāḥ prabhavo daivaṁ
na tebhyo vidyate param
Synonyms
tasya — of Him; vai — even; deva-devasya — of the Lord of lords; hareḥ — Kṛṣṇa; yajña — of Vedic sacrifice; pateḥ — the controller; prabhoḥ — the supreme master; brāhmaṇāḥ — the brāhmaṇas; prabhavaḥ — masters; daivam — deity; na — not; tebhyaḥ — than them; vidyate — exists; param — greater.

Translation
Lord Hari is the God of all gods, the master of all sacrifices, and the supreme ruler. But He accepts the saintly brāhmaṇas as His masters, and so there exists no deity higher than them.

Text 40
एवं स विप्रो भगवत्सुहृत्तदा
द‍ृष्ट्वा स्वभृत्यैरजितं पराजितम् ।
तद्ध्यानवेगोद्ग्रथितात्मबन्धन-
स्तद्धाम लेभेऽचिरत: सतां गतिम् ॥ ४० ॥
evaṁ sa vipro bhagavat-suhṛt tadā
dṛṣṭvā sva-bhṛtyair ajitaṁ parājitam
tad-dhyāna-vegodgrathitātma-bandhanas
tad-dhāma lebhe ’cirataḥ satāṁ gatim
Synonyms
evam — thus; saḥ — he; vipraḥ — the brāhmaṇa; bhagavat — of the Supreme Lord; suhṛt — the friend; tadā — then; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; sva — His own; bhṛtyaiḥ — by the servants; ajitam — unconquerable; parājitam — conquered; tat — upon Him; dhyāna — of his meditation; vega — by the momentum; udgrathita — untied; ātma — of the self; bandhanaḥ — his bondage; tat — His; dhāma — abode; lebhe — he attained; acirataḥ — in a short time; satām — of great saints; gatim — the destination.

Translation
Thus seeing how the unconquerable Supreme Lord is nonetheless conquered by His own servants, the Lord’s dear brāhmaṇa friend felt the remaining knots of material attachment within his heart being cut by the force of his constant meditation on the Lord. In a short time he attained Lord Kṛṣṇa’s supreme abode, the destination of great saints.

Text 41
एतद् ब्रह्मण्यदेवस्य श्रुत्वा ब्रह्मण्यतां नर: ।
लब्धभावो भगवति कर्मबन्धाद् विमुच्यते ॥ ४१ ॥
etad brahmaṇya-devasya
śrutvā brahmaṇyatāṁ naraḥ
labdha-bhāvo bhagavati
karma-bandhād vimucyate
Synonyms
etat — this; brahmaṇya-devasya — of the Supreme Lord, who especially favors the brāhmaṇas; śrutvā — hearing; brahmaṇyatām — of the kindness toward brāhmaṇas; naraḥ — a man; labdha — obtaining; bhāvaḥ — love; bhagavati — for the Lord; karma — of material work; bandhāt — from the bondage; vimucyate — becomes freed.

Translation
The Lord always shows brāhmaṇas special favor. Anyone who hears this account of the Supreme Lord’s kindness to brāhmaṇas will come to develop love for the Lord and thus become freed from the bondage of material work.