Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
अथैकदा द्वारवत्यां वसतो रामकृष्णयो: ।
सूर्योपराग: सुमहानासीत् कल्पक्षये यथा ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
athaikadā dvāravatyāṁ
vasato rāma-kṛṣṇayoḥ
sūryoparāgaḥ su-mahān
āsīt kalpa-kṣaye yathā
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; atha — then; ekadā — on one occasion; dvāravatyām — in Dvārakā; vasatoḥ — while They were living; rāma-kṛṣṇayoḥ — Balarāma and Kṛṣṇa; sūrya — of the sun; uparāgaḥ — an eclipse; su-mahān — very great; āsīt — there was; kalpa — of Lord Brahmā’s day; kṣaye — at the end; yathā — as if.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Once, while Balarāma and Kṛṣṇa were living in Dvārakā, there occurred a great eclipse of the sun, just as if the end of Lord Brahmā’s day had come.

Text 2
तं ज्ञात्वा मनुजा राजन् पुरस्तादेव सर्वत: ।
समन्तपञ्चकं क्षेत्रं ययु: श्रेयोविधित्सया ॥ २ ॥
taṁ jñātvā manujā rājan
purastād eva sarvataḥ
samanta-pañcakaṁ kṣetraṁ
yayuḥ śreyo-vidhitsayā
Synonyms
tam — that; jñātvā — knowing; manujāḥ — people; rājan — O King (Parīkṣit); purastāt — beforehand; eva — even; sarvataḥ — from everywhere; samanta-pañcakam — named Samanta-pañcaka (within the sacred district of Kurukṣetra); kṣetram — to the field; yayuḥ — went; śreyaḥ — benefit; vidhitsayā — wishing to create.

Translation
Knowing of this eclipse in advance, O King, many people went to the holy place known as Samanta-pañcaka in order to earn pious credit.

Texts 3-6
नि:क्षत्रियां महीं कुर्वन् राम: शस्‍त्रभृतां वर: ।
नृपाणां रुधिरौघेण यत्र चक्रे महाह्रदान् ॥ ३ ॥
ईजे च भगवान् रामो यत्रास्पृष्टोऽपि कर्मणा ।
लोकं सङ्ग्राहयन्नीशो यथान्योऽघापनुत्तये ॥ ४ ॥
महत्यां तीर्थयात्रायां तत्रागन् भारती: प्रजा: ।
वृष्णयश्च तथाक्रूरवसुदेवाहुकादय: ॥ ५ ॥
ययुर्भारत तत् क्षेत्रं स्वमघं क्षपयिष्णव: ।
गदप्रद्युम्नसाम्बाद्या: सुचन्द्रशुकसारणै: ।
आस्तेऽनिरुद्धो रक्षायां कृतवर्मा च यूथप: ॥ ६ ॥
niḥkṣatriyāṁ mahīṁ kurvan
rāmaḥ śastra-bhṛtāṁ varaḥ
nṛpāṇāṁ rudhiraugheṇa
yatra cakre mahā-hradān
īje ca bhagavān rāmo
yatrāspṛṣṭo ’pi karmaṇā
lokaṁ saṅgrāhayann īśo
yathānyo ’ghāpanuttaye
mahatyāṁ tīrtha-yātrāyāṁ
tatrāgan bhāratīḥ prajāḥ
vṛṣṇayaś ca tathākrūra-
vasudevāhukādayaḥ
yayur bhārata tat kṣetraṁ
svam aghaṁ kṣapayiṣṇavaḥ
gada-pradyumna-sāmbādyāḥ
sucandra-śuka-sāraṇaiḥ
āste ’niruddho rakṣāyāṁ
kṛtavarmā ca yūtha-paḥ
Synonyms
niḥkṣatriyām — rid of kings; mahīm — the earth; kurvan — having made; rāmaḥ — Lord Paraśurāma; śastra — of weapons; bhṛtām — of the holders; varaḥ — the greatest; nṛpāṇām — of kings; rudhira — of the blood; oghena — with the floods; yatra — where; cakre — he made; mahā — great; hradān — lakes; īje — worshiped; ca — and; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; rāmaḥ — Paraśurāma; yatra — where; aspṛṣṭaḥ — untouched; api — even though; karmaṇā — by material work and its reactions; lokam — the world in general; saṅgrāhayan — instructing; īśaḥ — the Lord; yathā — as if; anyaḥ — another person; agha — sins; apanuttaye — in order to dispel; mahatyām — mighty; tīrtha-yātrāyām — on the occasion of the holy pilgrimage; tatra — there; āgan — came; bhāratīḥ — of Bhārata-varṣa; prajāḥ — people; vṛṣṇayaḥ — members of the Vṛṣṇi clan; ca — and; tathā — also; akrūra-vasudeva-āhuka-ādayaḥ — Akrūra, Vasudeva, Āhuka (Ugrasena) and others; yayuḥ — went; bhārata — O descendant of Bharata (Parīkṣit); tat — that; kṣetram — to the holy place; svam — their own; agham — sins; kṣapayiṣṇavaḥ — desirous of eradicating; gada-pradyumna-sāmba-ādayaḥ — Gada, Pradyumna, Sāmba and others; sucandra-śuka-sāraṇaiḥ — with Sucandra, Śuka and Sāraṇa; āste — remained; aniruddhaḥ — Aniruddha; rakṣāyām — for guarding; kṛtavarmā — Kṛtavarmā; ca — and; yūtha-paḥ — leader of the army.

Translation
After ridding the earth of kings, Lord Paraśurāma, the foremost of warriors, created huge lakes from the kings’ blood at Samantaka-pañcaka. Although he is never tainted by karmic reactions, Lord Paraśurāma performed sacrifices there to instruct people in general; thus he acted like an ordinary person trying to free himself of sins. From all parts of Bhārata-varṣa a great number of people now came to that Samanta-pañcaka on pilgrimage. O descendant of Bharata, among those arriving at the holy place were many Vṛṣṇis, such as Gada, Pradyumna and Sāmba, hoping to be relieved of their sins; Akrūra, Vasudeva, Āhuka and other kings also went there. Aniruddha remained in Dvārakā with Sucandra, Śuka and Sāraṇa to guard the city, together with Kṛtavarmā, the commander of their armed forces.

Texts 7-8
ते रथैर्देवधिष्ण्याभैर्हयैश्च तरलप्लवै: ।
गजैर्नदद्भ‍िरभ्राभैर्नृभिर्विद्याधरद्युभि: ॥ ७ ॥
व्यरोचन्त महातेजा: पथि काञ्चनमालिन: ।
दिव्यस्रग्वस्‍त्रसन्नाहा: कलत्रै: खेचरा इव ॥ ८ ॥
te rathair deva-dhiṣṇyābhair
hayaiś ca tarala-plavaiḥ
gajair nadadbhir abhrābhair
nṛbhir vidyādhara-dyubhiḥ
vyarocanta mahā-tejāḥ
pathi kāñcana-mālinaḥ
divya-srag-vastra-sannāhāḥ
kalatraiḥ khe-carā iva
Synonyms
te — they; rathaiḥ — with (soldiers riding) chariots; deva — of demigods; dhiṣṇya — the airplanes; ābhaiḥ — resembling; hayaiḥ — horses; ca — and; tarala — (like) waves; plavaiḥ — whose movement; gajaiḥ — elephants; nadadbhiḥ — bellowing; abhra — clouds; ābhaiḥ — resembling; nṛbhiḥ — and foot soldiers; vidyādhara — (like) Vidyādhara demigods; dyubhiḥ — effulgent; vyarocanta — (the Yādava princes) appeared resplendent; mahā — very; tejāḥ — powerful; pathi — on the road; kāñcana — gold; mālinaḥ — having necklaces; divya — divine; srak — having flower garlands; vastra — dress; sannāhāḥ — and armor; kalatraiḥ — with their wives; khe-carāḥ — demigods who fly in the sky; iva — as if.

Translation
The mighty Yādavas passed with great majesty along the road. They were attended by their soldiers, who rode on chariots rivaling the airplanes of heaven, on horses moving with a rhythmic gait, and on bellowing elephants as huge as clouds. Also with them were many infantrymen as effulgent as celestial Vidyādharas. The Yādavas were so divinely dressed — being adorned with gold necklaces and flower garlands and wearing fine armor — that as they proceeded along the road with their wives they seemed to be demigods flying through the sky.

Text 9
तत्र स्‍नात्वा महाभागा उपोष्य सुसमाहिता: ।
ब्राह्मणेभ्यो ददुर्धेनूर्वास:स्रग्रुक्‍ममालिनी: ॥ ९ ॥
tatra snātvā mahā-bhāgā
upoṣya su-samāhitāḥ
brāhmaṇebhyo dadur dhenūr
vāsaḥ-srag-rukma-mālinīḥ
Synonyms
tatra — there; snātvā — bathing; mahā-bhāgāḥ — the greatly pious (Yādavas); upoṣya — fasting; su-samāhitāḥ — with careful attention; brāhmaṇebhyaḥ — to brāhmaṇas; daduḥ — they gave; dhenūḥ — cows; vāsaḥ — with garments; srak — flower garlands; rukma — gold; mālinīḥ — and necklaces.

Translation
At Samanta-pañcaka, the saintly Yādavas bathed and then observed a fast with careful attention. Afterward they presented brāhmaṇas with cows bedecked with garments, flower garlands and gold necklaces.

Text 10
रामह्रदेषु विधिवत् पुनराप्लुत्य वृष्णय: ।
ददु: स्वन्नं द्विजाग्र्‍येभ्य: कृष्णे नो भक्तिरस्त्विति ॥ १० ॥
rāma-hradeṣu vidhi-vat
punar āplutya vṛṣṇayaḥ
dadaḥ sv-annaṁ dvijāgryebhyaḥ
kṛṣṇe no bhaktir astv iti
Synonyms
rāma — of Lord Paraśurāma; hradeṣu — in the lakes; vidhi-vat — in accordance with scriptural injunctions; punaḥ — again; āplutya — taking a bath; vṛṣṇayaḥ — the Vṛṣṇis; daduḥ — gave; su — fine; annam — food; dvija — to brāhmaṇas; agryebhyaḥ — excellent; kṛṣṇe — to Kṛṣṇa; naḥ — our; bhaktiḥ — devotion; astu — may there be; iti — thus.

Translation
In accordance with scriptural injunctions, the descendants of Vṛṣṇi then bathed once more in Lord Paraśurāma’s lakes and fed first-class brāhmaṇas with sumptuous food. All the while they prayed, “May we be granted devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa.”

Text 11
स्वयं च तदनुज्ञाता वृष्णय: कृष्णदेवता: ।
भुक्त्वोपविविशु: कामं स्‍निग्धच्छायाङ्‍‍घ्रिपाङ्‍‍घ्रिषु ॥ ११ ॥
svayaṁ ca tad-anujñātā
vṛṣṇayaḥ kṛṣṇa-devatāḥ
bhuktvopaviviśuḥ kāmaṁ
snigdha-cchāyāṅghripāṅghriṣu
Synonyms
svayam — themselves; ca — and; tat — by Him (Lord Kṛṣṇa); anujñātāḥ — given permission; vṛṣṇayaḥ — the Vṛṣṇis; kṛṣṇa — Lord Kṛṣṇa; devatāḥ — whose exclusive Deity; bhuktvā — eating; upaviviśuḥ — sat down; kāmam — at will; snigdha — cool; chāyā — whose shade; aṅghripa — of trees; aṅghriṣu — at the feet.

Translation
Then, with the permission of Lord Kṛṣṇa, their sole object of worship, the Vṛṣṇis ate breakfast and sat down at their leisure beneath trees that gave cooling shade.

Texts 12-13
तत्रागतांस्ते दद‍ृशु: सुहृत्सम्बन्धिनो नृपान् ।
मत्स्योशीनरकौशल्यविदर्भकुरुसृञ्जयान् ।
काम्बोजकैकयान् मद्रान् कुन्तीनानर्तकेरलान् ॥ १२ ॥
अन्यांश्चैवात्मपक्षीयान् परांश्च शतशो नृप ।
नन्दादीन्सुहृदो गोपान्गोपीश्चोत्कण्ठिताश्चिरम् ॥ १३ ॥
tatrāgatāṁs te dadṛśuḥ
suhṛt-sambandhino nṛpān
matsyośīnara-kauśalya-
vidarbha-kuru-sṛñjayān
kāmboja-kaikayān madrān
kuntīn ānarta-keralān
anyāṁś caivātma-pakṣīyān
parāṁś ca śataśo nṛpa
nandādīn suhṛdo gopān
gopīś cotkaṇṭhitāś ciram
Synonyms
tatra — there; āgatān — arrived; te — they (the Yādavas); dadṛśuḥ — saw; suhṛt — friends; sambandhinaḥ — and relatives; nṛpān — kings; matsya-uśīnara-kauśalya-vidarbha-kuru-sṛñjayān — the Matsyas, Uśīnaras, Kauśalyas, Vidarbhas, Kurus and Sṛñjayas; kāmboja-kaikayān — the Kāmbojas and Kaikayas; madrān — the Madras; kuntīn — the Kuntīs; ānarta-keralān — the Ānartas and Keralas; anyān — others; ca eva — also; ātma-pakṣīyān — of their own party; parān — adversaries; ca — and; śataśaḥ — by the hundreds; nṛpa — O King (Parīkṣit); nanda-ādīn — headed by Nanda Mahārāja; suhṛdaḥ — their dear friends; gopān — the cowherd men; gopīḥ — the cowherd women; ca — and; utkaṇṭhitāḥ — in anxiety; ciram — for a long time.

Translation
The Yādavas saw that many of the kings who had arrived were old friends and relatives — the Matsyas, Uśīnaras, Kauśalyas, Vidarbhas, Kurus, Sṛñjayas, Kāmbojas, Kaikayas, Madras, Kuntīs and the kings of Ānarta and Kerala. They also saw many hundreds of other kings, both allies and adversaries. In addition, my dear King Parīkṣit, they saw their dear friends Nanda Mahārāja and the cowherd men and women, who had been suffering in anxiety for so long.

Text 14
अन्योन्यसन्दर्शनहर्षरंहसा
प्रोत्फुल्ल‍हृद्वक्त्रसरोरुहश्रिय: ।
आश्लिष्य गाढं नयनै: स्रवज्जला
हृष्यत्त्वचो रुद्धगिरो ययुर्मुदम् ॥ १४ ॥
anyonya-sandarśana-harṣa-raṁhasā
protphulla-hṛd-vaktra-saroruha-śriyaḥ
āśliṣya gāḍhaṁ nayanaiḥ sravaj-jalā
hṛṣyat-tvaco ruddha-giro yayur mudam
Synonyms
anyonya — of each other; sandarśana — from the seeing; harṣa — of the joy; raṁhasā — by the impulse; protphulla — blooming; hṛt — of their hearts; vaktra — and faces; saroruha — of the lotuses; śriyaḥ — whose beauty; āśliṣya — embracing; gāḍham — tightly; nayanaiḥ — from their eyes; sravat — pouring; jalāḥ — water (tears); hṛṣyat — erupting with hair standing on end; tvacaḥ — whose skin; ruddha — choked; giraḥ — whose speech; yayuḥ — they experienced; mudam — delight.

Translation
As the great joy of seeing one another made the lotuses of their hearts and faces bloom with fresh beauty, the men embraced one another enthusiastically. With tears pouring from their eyes, the hair on their bodies standing on end and their voices choked up, they all felt intense bliss.

Text 15
स्‍त्रियश्च संवीक्ष्य मिथोऽतिसौहृद-
स्मितामलापाङ्गद‍ृशोऽभिरेभिरे ।
स्तनै: स्तनान् कुङ्कुमपङ्करूषितान्
निहत्य दोर्भि: प्रणयाश्रुलोचना: ॥ १५ ॥
striyaś ca saṁvīkṣya mitho ’ti-sauhṛda-
smitāmalāpāṅga-dṛśo ’bhirebhire
stanaiḥ stanān kuṅkuma-paṅka-rūṣitān
nihatya dorbhiḥ praṇayāśru-locanāḥ
Synonyms
striyaḥ — the women; ca — and; saṁvīkṣya — seeing; mithaḥ — one another; ati — extreme; sauhṛda — with friendly affection; smita — smiling; amala — pure; apāṅga — exhibiting glances; dṛśaḥ — whose eyes; abhirebhire — they embraced; stanaiḥ — with breasts; stanān — breasts; kuṅkuma — of saffron; paṅka — with paste; rūṣitān — smeared; nihatya — pressing; dorbhiḥ — with their arms; praṇaya — of love; aśru — tears; locanāḥ — in whose eyes.

Translation
The women glanced at one another with pure smiles of loving friendship. And when they embraced, their breasts, smeared with saffron paste, pressed against one another as their eyes filled with tears of affection.

Text 16
ततोऽभिवाद्य ते वृद्धान् यविष्ठैरभिवादिता: ।
स्वागतं कुशलं पृष्ट्वा चक्रु: कृष्णकथा मिथ: ॥ १६ ॥
tato ’bhivādya te vṛddhān
yaviṣṭhair abhivāditāḥ
sv-āgataṁ kuśalaṁ pṛṣṭvā
cakruḥ kṛṣṇa-kathā mithaḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; abhivādya — offering obeisances; te — they; vṛddhān — to their elders; yaviṣṭhaiḥ — by their younger relatives; abhivāditāḥ — offered obeisances; su-āgatam — comfortable arrival; kuśalam — and well-being; pṛṣṭvā — inquiring about; cakruḥ — they made; kṛṣṇa — about Kṛṣṇa; kathāḥ — conversation; mithaḥ — among one another.

Translation
They all then offered obeisances to their elders and received respect in turn from their younger relatives. After inquiring from one another about the comfort of their trip and their well-being, they proceeded to talk about Kṛṣṇa.

Text 17
पृथा भ्रातॄन् स्वसृर्वीक्ष्य तत्पुत्रान् पितरावपि ।
भ्रातॄपत्नीर्मुकुन्दं च जहौ सङ्कथया शुच: ॥ १७ ॥
pṛthā bhrātṝn svasṝr vīkṣya
tat-putrān pitarāv api
bhrātṛ-patnīr mukundaṁ ca
jahau saṅkathayā śucaḥ
Synonyms
pṛthā — Kuntī; bhrātṝn — her brothers; svasṝḥ — and sisters; vīkṣya — seeing; tat — their; putrān — children; pitarau — her parents; api — also; bhrātṛ — of her brothers; patnīḥ — the wives; mukundam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; ca — also; jahau — she gave up; saṅkathayā — while talking; śucaḥ — her sorrow.

Translation
Queen Kuntī met with her brothers and sisters and their children, and also with her parents, her brothers’ wives and Lord Mukunda. While talking with them she forgot her sorrow.

Text 18
कुन्त्युवाच
आर्य भ्रातरहं मन्ये आत्मानमकृताशिषम् ।
यद् वा आपत्सु मद्वार्तां नानुस्मरथ सत्तमा: ॥ १८ ॥
kunty uvāca
ārya bhrātar ahaṁ manye
ātmānam akṛtāśiṣam
yad vā āpatsu mad-vārtāṁ
nānusmaratha sattamāḥ
Synonyms
kuntī uvāca — Queen Kuntī said; ārya — O respectable one; bhrātaḥ — O brother; aham — I; manye — think; ātmānam — myself; akṛta — having failed to achieve; āśiṣam — my desires; yat — since; vai — indeed; āpatsu — in times of danger; mat — to me; vārtām — what occurred; na anusmaratha — all of you do not remember; sat-tamāḥ — most saintly.

Translation
Queen Kuntī said: My dear, respectable brother, I feel that my desires have been frustrated, because although all of you are most saintly, you forgot me during my calamities.

Text 19
सुहृदो ज्ञातय: पुत्रा भ्रातर: पितरावपि ।
नानुस्मरन्ति स्वजनं यस्य दैवमदक्षिणम् ॥ १९ ॥
suhṛdo jñātayaḥ putrā
bhrātaraḥ pitarāv api
nānusmaranti sva-janaṁ
yasya daivam adakṣiṇam
Synonyms
suhṛdaḥ — friends; jñātayaḥ — and relatives; putrāḥ — sons; bhrātaraḥ — brothers; pitarau — parents; api — even; na anusmaranti — do not remember; sva-janam — a dear one; yasya — whose; daivam — Providence; adakṣiṇam — unfavorable.

Translation
Friends and family members — even children, brothers and parents — forget a dear one whom Providence no longer favors.

Text 20
श्रीवसुदेव उवाच
अम्ब मास्मानसूयेथा दैवक्रीडनकान् नरान् ।
ईशस्य हि वशे लोक: कुरुते कार्यतेऽथ वा ॥ २० ॥
śrī-vasudeva uvāca
amba māsmān asūyethā
daiva-krīḍanakān narān
īśasya hi vaśe lokaḥ
kurute kāryate ’tha vā
Synonyms
śrī-vasudevaḥ uvāca — Śrī Vasudeva said; amba — my dear sister; mā — please do not; asmān — with us; asūyethāḥ — be angry; daiva — of fate; krīḍanakān — the playthings; narān — men; īśasya — of the Supreme Lord; hi — indeed; vaśe — under the control; lokaḥ — a person; kurute — acts on his own; kāryate — is made to act by others; atha vā — or else.

Translation
Śrī Vasudeva said: Dear sister, please do not be angry with us. We are only ordinary men, playthings of fate. Indeed, whether a person acts on his own or is forced by others, he is always under the Supreme Lord’s control.

Text 21
कंसप्रतापिता: सर्वे वयं याता दिशं दिशम् ।
एतर्ह्येव पुन: स्थानं दैवेनासादिता: स्वस: ॥ २१ ॥
kaṁsa-pratāpitāḥ sarve
vayaṁ yātā diśaṁ diśam
etarhy eva punaḥ sthānaṁ
daivenāsāditāḥ svasaḥ
Synonyms
kaṁsa — by Kaṁsa; pratāpitāḥ — severely troubled; sarve — all; vayam — we; yātāḥ — went away; diśam diśam — in various directions; etarhi eva — just now; punaḥ — again; sthānam — to our proper places; daivena — by Providence; āsāditāḥ — brought; svasaḥ — O sister.

Translation
Harassed by Kaṁsa, we all fled in various directions, but by the grace of Providence we have now finally been able to return to our homes, my dear sister.

Text 22
श्रीशुक उवाच
वसुदेवोग्रसेनाद्यैर्यदुभिस्तेऽर्चिता नृपा: ।
आसन्नच्युतसन्दर्शपरमानन्दनिर्वृता: ॥ २२ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
vasudevograsenādyair
yadubhis te ’rcitā nṛpāḥ
āsann acyuta-sandarśa-
paramānanda-nirvṛtāḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; vasudeva-ugrasena-ādyaiḥ — headed by Vasudeva and Ugrasena; yadubhiḥ — by the Yādavas; te — they; arcitāḥ — honored; nṛpāḥ — the kings; āsan — became; acyuta — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; sandarśa — by the seeing; parama — supreme; ānanda — in ecstasy; nirvṛtāḥ — pacified.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Vasudeva, Ugrasena and the other Yadus honored the various kings, who became supremely blissful and content upon seeing Lord Acyuta.

Texts 23-26
भीष्मो द्रोणोऽम्बिकापुत्रो गान्धारी ससुता तथा ।
सदारा: पाण्डवा: कुन्ती सञ्जयो विदुर: कृप: ॥ २३ ॥
कुन्तीभोजो विराटश्च भीष्मको नग्नजिन्महान् ।
पुरुजिद्‌द्रुपद: शल्यो धृष्टकेतु: सकाशिराट् ॥ २४ ॥
दमघोषो विशालाक्षो मैथिलो मद्रकेकयौ ।
युधामन्यु: सुशर्मा च ससुता बाह्लिकादय: ॥ २५ ॥
राजानो ये च राजेन्द्र युधिष्ठिरमनुव्रता: ।
श्रीनिकेतं वपु: शौरे: सस्‍त्रीकं वीक्ष्य विस्मिता: ॥ २६ ॥
bhīṣmo droṇo ’mbikā-putro
gāndhārī sa-sutā tathā
sa-dārāḥ pāṇḍavāḥ kuntī
sañjayo viduraḥ kṛpaḥ
kuntībhojo virāṭaś ca
bhīṣmako nagnajin mahān
purujid drupadaḥ śalyo
dhṛṣṭaketuḥ sa kāśi-rāṭ
damaghoṣo viśālākṣo
maithilo madra-kekayau
yudhāmanyuḥ suśarmā ca
sa-sutā bāhlikādayaḥ
rājāno ye ca rājendra
yudhiṣṭhiram anuvratāḥ
śrī-niketaṁ vapuḥ śaureḥ
sa-strīkaṁ vīkṣya vismitāḥ
Synonyms
bhīṣmaḥ droṇaḥ ambikā-putraḥ — Bhīsma, Droṇa and the son of Ambikā (Dhṛtarāṣṭra); gāndhārī — Gāndhārī; sa — together with; sutāḥ — her sons; tathā — also; sa-dārāḥ — with their wives; pāṇḍavāḥ — the sons of Pāṇḍu; kuntī — Kuntī; sañjayaḥ viduraḥ kṛpaḥ — Sañjaya, Vidura and Kṛpa; kuntībhojaḥ virāṭaḥ ca — Kuntībhoja and Virāṭa; bhīṣmakaḥ — Bhīṣmaka; nagnajit — Nagnajit; mahān — the great; purujit drupadaḥ śalyaḥ — Purujit, Drupada and Śalya; dhṛṣṭaketuḥ — Dhṛṣṭaketu; saḥ — he; kāśi-rāṭ — the King of Kāsi; damaghoṣaḥ viśālākṣaḥ — Damaghoṣa and Viśālākṣa; maithilaḥ — the King of Mithilā; madra-kekayau — the kings of Madra and Kekaya; yudhāmanyuḥ suśarmā ca — Yudhāmanyu and Suśarmā; sa-sutāḥ — with their sons; bāhlika-ādayaḥ — Bāhlika and others; rājānaḥ — kings; ye — who; ca — and; rāja-indra — O best of kings (Parīkṣit); yudhiṣṭhiram — Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira; anuvratāḥ — following; śrī — of opulence and beauty; niketam — the abode; vapuḥ — the personal form; śaureḥ — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; sa-stṛīkam — along with His wives; vīkṣya — seeing; vismitāḥ — amazed.

Translation
All the royalty present, including Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Gāndhārī and her sons, the Pāṇḍavas and their wives, Kuntī, Sañjaya, Vidura, Kṛpācārya, Kuntībhoja, Virāṭa, Bhīṣmaka, the great Nagnajit, Purujit, Drupada, Śalya, Dhṛṣṭaketu, Kāśirāja, Damaghoṣa, Viśālākṣa, Maithila, Madra, Kekaya, Yudhāmanyu, Suśarmā, Bāhlika with his associates and their sons, and the many other kings subservient to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira — all of them, O best of kings, were simply amazed to see the transcendental form of Lord Kṛṣṇa, the abode of all opulence and beauty, standing before them with His consorts.

Text 27
अथ ते रामकृष्णाभ्यां सम्यक् प्राप्तसमर्हणा: ।
प्रशशंसुर्मुदा युक्ता वृष्णीन् कृष्णपरिग्रहान् ॥ २७ ॥
atha te rāma-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ
samyak prāpta-samarhaṇāḥ
praśaśaṁsur mudā yuktā
vṛṣṇīn kṛṣṇa-parigrahān
Synonyms
atha — then; te — they; rāma-kṛṣṇābhyām — by Balarāma and Kṛṣṇa; samyak — properly; prāpta — having received; samarhaṇāḥ — appropriate tokens of honor; praśaśaṁsuḥ — enthusiastically praised; mudā — with joy; yuktāḥ — filled; vṛṣṇīn — the Vṛṣnis; kṛṣṇa — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; parigrahān — the personal associates.

Translation
After Lord Balarāma and Lord Kṛṣṇa had liberally honored them, with great joy and enthusiasm these kings began to praise the members of the Vṛṣṇi clan, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s personal associates.

Text 28
अहो भोजपते यूयं जन्मभाजो नृणामिह ।
यत् पश्यथासकृत् कृष्णं दुर्दर्शमपि योगिनाम् ॥ २८ ॥
aho bhoja-pate yūyaṁ
janma-bhājo nṛṇām iha
yat paśyathāsakṛt kṛṣṇaṁ
durdarśam api yoginām
Synonyms
aho — ah; bhoja-pate — O master of the Bhojas, Ugrasena; yūyam — you; janma-bhājaḥ — having taken a worthwhile birth; nṛṇām — among men; iha — in this world; yat — because; paśyatha — you see; asakṛt — repeatedly; kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; durdarśam — rarely seen; api — even; yoginām — by great mystics.

Translation
[The kings said:] O King of the Bhojas, you alone among men have achieved a truly exalted birth, for you continually behold Lord Kṛṣṇa, who is rarely visible even to great yogīs.

Texts 29-30
यद्विश्रुति: श्रुतिनुतेदमलं पुनाति
पादावनेजनपयश्च वचश्च शास्‍त्रम् ।
भू: कालभर्जितभगापि यदङ्‍‍घ्रिपद्म-
स्पर्शोत्थशक्तिरभिवर्षति नोऽखिलार्थान् ॥ २९ ॥
तद्दर्शनस्पर्शनानुपथप्रजल्प-
शय्यासनाशनसयौनसपिण्डबन्ध: ।
येषां गृहे निरयवर्त्मनि वर्ततां व:
स्वर्गापवर्गविरम: स्वयमास विष्णु: ॥ ३० ॥
yad-viśrutiḥ śruti-nutedam alaṁ punāti
pādāvanejana-payaś ca vacaś ca śāstram
bhūḥ kāla-bharjita-bhagāpi yad-aṅghri-padma-
sparśottha-śaktir abhivarṣati no ’khilārthān
tad-darśana-sparśanānupatha-prajalpa-
śayyāsanāśana-sayauna-sapiṇḍa-bandhaḥ
yeṣāṁ gṛhe niraya-vartmani vartatāṁ vaḥ
svargāpavarga-viramaḥ svayam āsa viṣṇuḥ
Synonyms
yat — whose; viśrutiḥ — fame; śruti — by the Vedas; nutā — vibrated; idam — this (universe); alam — thoroughly; punāti — purifies; pāda — whose feet; avanejana — washing; payaḥ — the water; ca — and; vacaḥ — words; ca — and; śāstram — the revealed scriptures; bhūḥ — the earth; kāla — by time; bharjita — ravaged; bhagā — whose good fortune; api — even; yat — whose; aṅghri — of the feet; padma — lotuslike; sparśa — by the touch; uttha — wakened; śaktiḥ — whose energy; abhivarṣati — abundantly rains; naḥ — upon us; akhila — all; arthān — objects of desire; tat — Him; darśana — with seeing; sparśana — touching; anupatha — walking alongside; prajalpa — conversing with; śayyā — lying down to take rest; āsana — sitting; aśana — eating; sa-yauna — in relationships through marriage; sa-piṇḍa — and in blood relationships; bandhaḥ — connections; yeṣām — in whose; gṛhe — family life; niraya — of hell; vartmani — upon the path; vartatām — who travel; vaḥ — your; svarga — of (desire for attaining) heaven; apavarga — and liberation; viramaḥ — the (cause of) cessation; svayam — in person; āsa — has been present; viṣṇuḥ — the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu.

Translation
His fame, as broadcast by the Vedas, the water that has washed His feet, and the words He speaks in the form of the revealed scriptures — these thoroughly purify this universe. Although the earth’s good fortune was ravaged by time, the touch of His lotus feet has revitalized her, and thus she is raining down on us the fulfillment of all our desires. The same Lord Viṣṇu who makes one forget the goals of heaven and liberation has now entered into marital and blood relationships with you, who otherwise travel on the hellish path of family life. Indeed, in these relationships you see and touch Him directly, walk beside Him, converse with Him, and together with Him lie down to rest, sit at ease and take your meals.

Text 31
श्रीशुक उवाच
नन्दस्तत्र यदून् प्राप्तान् ज्ञात्वा कृष्णपुरोगमान् ।
तत्रागमद् वृतो गोपैरन:स्थार्थैर्दिद‍ृक्षया ॥ ३१ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
nandas tatra yadūn prāptān
jñātvā kṛṣṇa-purogamān
tatrāgamad vṛto gopair
anaḥ-sthārthair didṛkṣayā
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; nandaḥ — Nanda Mahārāja; tatra — there; yadūn — the Yadus; prāptān — arrived; jñātvā — finding out; kṛṣṇa — Lord Kṛṣṇa; puraḥ-gamān — keeping in front; tatra — there; agamat — he went; vṛtaḥ — accompanied; gopaiḥ — by the cowherds; anaḥ — on their wagons; stha — placed; arthaiḥ — whose possessions; didṛkṣayā — wanting to see.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When Nanda Mahārāja learned that the Yadus had arrived, led by Kṛṣṇa, he immediately went to see them. The cowherds accompanied him, their various possessions loaded on their wagons.

Text 32
तं द‍ृष्ट्वा वृष्णयो हृष्टास्तन्व: प्राणमिवोत्थिता: ।
परिषस्वजिरे गाढं चिरदर्शनकातरा: ॥ ३२ ॥
taṁ dṛṣṭvā vṛṣṇayo hṛṣṭās
tanvaḥ prāṇam ivotthitāḥ
pariṣasvajire gāḍhaṁ
cira-darśana-kātarāḥ
Synonyms
tam — him, Nanda; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; vṛṣṇayaḥ — the Vṛṣṇis; hṛṣṭāḥ — delighted; tanvaḥ — living bodies; prāṇam — their vital air; iva — as if; utthitāḥ — rising; pariṣaśvajire — they embraced him; gāḍham — firmly; cira — after a long time; darśana — in seeing; kātarāḥ — agitated.

Translation
Seeing Nanda, the Vṛṣṇis were delighted and stood up like dead bodies coming back to life. Having felt much distress at not seeing him for so long, they held him in a tight embrace.

Text 33
वसुदेव: परिष्वज्य सम्प्रीत: प्रेमविह्वल: ।
स्मरन् कंसकृतान् क्लेशान् पुत्रन्यासं च गोकुले ॥ ३३ ॥
vasudevaḥ pariṣvajya
samprītaḥ prema-vihvalaḥ
smaran kaṁsa-kṛtān kleśān
putra-nyāsaṁ ca gokule
Synonyms
vasudevaḥ — Vasudeva; pariṣvajya — embracing (Nanda Mahārāja); samprītaḥ — overjoyed; prema — due to love; vihvalaḥ — beside himself; smaran — remembering; kaṁsa-kṛtān — created by Kaṁsa; kleśān — the troubles; putra — of his sons; nyāsam — the leaving; ca — and; gokule — in Gokula.

Translation
Vasudeva embraced Nanda Mahārāja with great joy. Beside himself with ecstatic love, Vasudeva remembered the troubles Kaṁsa had caused him, forcing him to leave his sons in Gokula for Their safety.

Text 34
कृष्णरामौ परिष्वज्य पितरावभिवाद्य च ।
न किञ्चनोचतु: प्रेम्णा साश्रुकण्ठौ कुरूद्वह ॥ ३४ ॥
kṛṣṇa-rāmau pariṣvajya
pitarāv abhivādya ca
na kiñcanocatuḥ premṇā
sāśru-kaṇṭhau kurūdvaha
Synonyms
kṛṣṇa-rāmau — Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma; pariṣvajya — embracing; pitarau — Their parents; abhivādya — offering respects; ca — and; na kiñcana — nothing; ūcatuḥ — said; premṇā — with love; sa-aśru — full of tears; kaṇṭhau — whose throats; kuru-udvaha — O most heroic of the Kurus.

Translation
O hero of the Kurus, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma embraced Their foster parents and bowed down to them, but Their throats were so choked up with tears of love that the two Lords could say nothing.

Text 35
तावात्मासनमारोप्य बाहुभ्यां परिरभ्य च ।
यशोदा च महाभागा सुतौ विजहतु: शुच: ॥ ३५ ॥
tāv ātmāsanam āropya
bāhubhyāṁ parirabhya ca
yaśodā ca mahā-bhāgā
sutau vijahatuḥ śucaḥ
Synonyms
tau — the two of Them; ātma-āsanam — onto their laps; āropya — raising; bāhubhyām — with their arms; parirabhya — embracing; ca — and; yaśodā — mother Yaśodā; ca — also; mahā-bhāgā — saintly; sutau — their sons; vijahatuḥ — they gave up; śucaḥ — their sorrow.

Translation
Raising their two sons onto their laps and holding Them in their arms, Nanda and saintly mother Yaśodā forgot their sorrow.

Text 36
रोहिणी देवकी चाथ परिष्वज्य व्रजेश्वरीम् ।
स्मरन्त्यौ तत्कृतां मैत्रीं बाष्पकण्ठ्यौ समूचतु: ॥ ३६ ॥
rohiṇī devakī cātha
pariṣvajya vrajeśvarīm
smarantyau tat-kṛtāṁ maitrīṁ
bāṣpa-kaṇṭhyau samūcatuḥ
Synonyms
rohiṇī — Rohiṇī; devakī — Devakī; ca — and; atha — next; pariṣvajya — embracing; vraja-īśvarīm — the Queen of Vraja (Yaśodā); smarantyau — remembering; tat — by her; kṛtam — done; maitṛīm — friendship; bāṣpa — tears; kaṇṭhyau — in whose throats; samūcatuḥ — they addressed her.

Translation
Then Rohiṇī and Devakī both embraced the Queen of Vraja, remembering the faithful friendship she had shown them. Their throats choking with tears, they addressed her as follows.

Text 37
का विस्मरेत वां मैत्रीमनिवृत्तां व्रजेश्वरि ।
अवाप्याप्यैन्द्रमैश्वर्यं यस्या नेह प्रतिक्रिया ॥ ३७ ॥
kā vismareta vāṁ maitrīm
anivṛttāṁ vrajeśvari
avāpyāpy aindram aiśvaryaṁ
yasyā neha pratikriyā
Synonyms
kā — what woman; vismareta — can forget; vām — of you two (Yaśodā and Nanda); maitrīm — the friendship; anivṛttām — unceasing; vraja-īśvari — O Queen of Vraja; avāpya — obtaining; api — even; aindram — of Indra; aiśvaryam — opulence; yasyāḥ — for which; na — not; iha — in this world; prati-kriyā — repayment.

Translation
[Rohiṇī and Devakī said:] What woman could forget the unceasing friendship you and Nanda have shown us, dear Queen of Vraja? There is no way to repay you in this world, even with the wealth of Indra.

Text 38
एतावद‍ृष्टपितरौ युवयो: स्म पित्रो:
सम्प्रीणनाभ्युदयपोषणपालनानि ।
प्राप्योषतुर्भवति पक्ष्म ह यद्वदक्ष्णो-
र्न्यस्तावकुत्रचभयौ न सतां पर: स्व: ॥ ३८ ॥
etāv adṛṣṭa-pitarau yuvayoḥ sma pitroḥ
samprīṇanābhyudaya-poṣaṇa-pālanāni
prāpyoṣatur bhavati pakṣma ha yadvad akṣṇor
nyastāv akutra ca bhayau na satāṁ paraḥ svaḥ
Synonyms
etau — these two; adṛṣṭa — not having seen; pitarau — Their parents; yuvayoḥ — of you two; sma — indeed; pitroḥ — the parents; samprīṇana — coddling; abhyudaya — bringing up; poṣaṇa — nourishment; pālanāni — and protection; prāpya — receiving; ūṣatuḥ — They resided; bhavati — my good lady; pakṣma — eyelids; ha — indeed; yadvat — just as; akṣṇoḥ — of the eyes; nyastau — place in custody; akutra — nowhere; ca — and; bhayau — whose fear; na — not; satām — for saintly persons; paraḥ — other; svaḥ — own.

Translation
Before these two boys had ever seen Their real parents, you acted as Their parents and gave Them all affectionate care, training, nourishment and protection. They were never afraid, good lady, because you protected Them just as eyelids protect the eyes. Indeed, saintly persons like you never discriminate between outsiders and their own kin.

Text 39
श्रीशुक उवाच
गोप्यश्च कृष्णमुपलभ्य चिरादभीष्टं
यत्प्रेक्षणे द‍ृशिषु पक्ष्मकृतं शपन्ति ।
द‍ृग्भिर्हृदीकृतमलं परिरभ्य सर्वा-
स्तद्भ‍ावमापुरपि नित्ययुजां दुरापम् ॥ ३९ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
gopyaś ca kṛṣṇam upalabhya cirād abhīṣṭaṁ
yat-prekṣaṇe dṛśiṣu pakṣma-kṛtaṁ śapanti
dṛgbhir hṛdī-kṛtam alaṁ parirabhya sarvās
tad-bhāvam āpur api nitya-yujāṁ durāpam
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; gopyaḥ — the young cowherd women; ca — and; kṛṣṇam — Kṛṣṇa; upalabhya — sighting; cirāt — after a long time; abhīṣṭam — their object of desire; yat — whom; prekṣaṇe — while seeing; dṛśiṣu — on their eyes; pakṣma — of lids; kṛtam — the maker; śapanti — they would curse; dṛgbhiḥ — with their eyes; hṛdī-kṛtam — taken into their hearts; alam — to their satisfaction; parirabhya — embracing; sarvāḥ — all of them; tat — in Him; bhāvam — ecstatic absorption; āpuḥ — attained; api — even though; nitya — constantly; yujām — for those who engage in yogic discipline; durāpam — difficult to attain.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: While gazing at their beloved Kṛṣṇa, the young gopīs used to condemn the creator of their eyelids, [which would momentarily block their vision of Him]. Now, seeing Kṛṣṇa again after such a long separation, with their eyes they took Him into their hearts, and there they embraced Him to their full satisfaction. In this way they became totally absorbed in ecstatic meditation on Him, although those who constantly practice mystic yoga find such absorption difficult to achieve.

Text 40
भगवांस्तास्तथाभूता विविक्त उपसङ्गत: ।
आश्लिष्यानामयं पृष्ट्वा प्रहसन्निदमब्रवीत् ॥ ४० ॥
bhagavāṁs tās tathā-bhūtā
vivikta upasaṅgataḥ
āśliṣyānāmayaṁ pṛṣṭvā
prahasann idam abravīt
Synonyms
bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; tāḥ — them; tathā-bhūtāḥ — being in such a state; vivikte — in a secluded place; upasaṅgataḥ — going up to; āśliṣya — embracing; anāmayam — health; pṛṣṭvā — asking about; prahasan — laughed; idam — this; abravīt — said.

Translation
The Supreme Lord approached the gopīs in a secluded place as they stood in their ecstatic trance. After embracing each of them and inquiring about their well-being, He laughed and spoke as follows.

Text 41
अपि स्मरथ न: सख्य: स्वानामर्थचिकीर्षया ।
गतांश्चिरायिताञ्छत्रुपक्षक्षपणचेतस: ॥ ४१ ॥
api smaratha naḥ sakhyaḥ
svānām artha-cikīrṣayā
gatāṁś cirāyitāñ chatru-
pakṣa-kṣapaṇa-cetasaḥ
Synonyms
api — whether; smaratha — you remember; naḥ — Us; sakhyaḥ — girlfriends; svānām — of dear ones; artha — the purposes; cikīrṣayā — with the desire of executing; gatān — gone away; cirāyitān — having remained long; śatru — of Our enemies; pakṣa — the party; kṣapaṇa — to destroy; cetasaḥ — whose intent.

Translation
[Lord Kṛṣṇa said:] My dear girlfriends, do you still remember Me? It was for My relatives’ sake that I stayed away so long, intent on destroying My enemies.

Text 42
अप्यवध्यायथास्मान् स्विदकृतज्ञाविशङ्कया ।
नूनं भूतानि भगवान् युनक्ति वियुनक्ति च ॥ ४२ ॥
apy avadhyāyathāsmān svid
akṛta-jñāviśaṅkayā
nūnaṁ bhūtāni bhagavān
yunakti viyunakti ca
Synonyms
api — also; avadhyāyatha — you hold in contempt; asmān — Us; svit — perhaps; akṛta-jña — as being ungrateful; āviśaṅkayā — with the suspicion; nūnam — indeed; bhūtāni — living beings; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; yunakti — joins; viyunakti — separates; ca — and.

Translation
Do you perhaps think I’m ungrateful and thus hold Me in contempt? After all, it is the Supreme Lord who brings living beings together and then separates them.

Text 43
वायुर्यथा घनानीकं तृणं तूलं रजांसि च ।
संयोज्याक्षिपते भूयस्तथा भूतानि भूतकृत् ॥ ४३ ॥
vāyur yathā ghanānīkaṁ
tṛṇaṁ tūlaṁ rajāṁsi ca
saṁyojyākṣipate bhūyas
tathā bhūtāni bhūta-kṛt
Synonyms
vāyuḥ — the wind; yathā — as; ghana — of clouds; anīkam — groups; tṛṇam — grass; tūlam — cotton; rajāṁsi — dust; ca — and; saṁyojya — bringing together; ākṣipate — throws apart; bhūyaḥ — once again; tathā — so; bhūtāni — living beings; bhūta — of living beings; kṛt — the creator.

Translation
Just as the wind brings together masses of clouds, blades of grass, wisps of cotton and particles of dust, only to scatter them all again, so the creator deals with His created beings in the same way.

Text 44
मयि भक्तिर्हि भूतानाममृतत्वाय कल्पते ।
दिष्‍ट्या यदासीन्मत्स्‍नेहो भवतीनां मदापन: ॥ ४४ ॥
mayi bhaktir hi bhūtānām
amṛtatvāya kalpate
diṣṭyā yad āsīn mat-sneho
bhavatīnāṁ mad-āpanaḥ
Synonyms
mayi — to Me; bhaktiḥ — devotional service; hi — indeed; bhūtānām — for living beings; amṛtatvāya — to immortality; kalpate — leads; diṣṭyā — by good fortune; yat — which; āsīt — has developed; mat — for Me; snehaḥ — the love; bhavatīnām — on the part of your good selves; mat — Me; āpanaḥ — which is the cause of obtaining.

Translation
Rendering devotional service to Me qualifies any living being for eternal life. But by your good fortune you have developed a special loving attitude toward Me, by which you have obtained Me.

Text 45
अहं हि सर्वभूतानामादिरन्तोऽन्तरं बहि: ।
भौतिकानां यथा खं वार्भूर्वायुर्ज्योतिरङ्गना: ॥ ४५ ॥
ahaṁ hi sarva-bhūtānām
ādir anto ’ntaraṁ bahiḥ
bhautikānāṁ yathā khaṁ vār
bhūr vāyur jyotir aṅganāḥ
Synonyms
aham — I; hi — indeed; sarva — all; bhūtānām — of created beings; ādiḥ — the beginning; antaḥ — the end; antaram — inside; bahiḥ — outside; bhautikānām — of material things; yathā — as; kham — ether; vāḥ — water; bhūḥ — earth; vāyuḥ — air; jyotiḥ — and fire; aṅganāḥ — O ladies.

Translation
Dear ladies, I am the beginning and end of all created beings and exist both within and without them, just as the elements ether, water, earth, air and fire are the beginning and end of all material objects and exist both within and without them.

Text 46
एवं ह्येतानि भूतानि भूतेष्वात्मात्मना तत: ।
उभयं मय्यथ परे पश्यताभातमक्षरे ॥ ४६ ॥
evaṁ hy etāni bhūtāni
bhūteṣv ātmātmanā tataḥ
ubhayaṁ mayy atha pare
paśyatābhātam akṣare
Synonyms
evam — in this manner; hi — indeed; etāni — these; bhūtāni — material entities; bhūteṣu — within the elements of creation; ātmā — the self; ātmanā — in its own true identity; tataḥ — pervasive; ubhayam — both; mayi — within Me; atha — that is to say; pare — within the Supreme Truth; paśyata — you should see; ābhātam — manifested; akṣare — within the imperishable.

Translation
In this way all created things reside within the basic elements of creation, while the spirit souls pervade the creation, remaining in their own true identity. You should see both of these — the material creation and the self — as manifest within Me, the imperishable Supreme Truth.

Text 47
श्रीशुक उवाच
अध्यात्मशिक्षया गोप्य एवं कृष्णेन शिक्षिता: ।
तदनुस्मरणध्वस्तजीवकोशास्तमध्यगन् ॥ ४७ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
adhyātma-śikṣayā gopya
evaṁ kṛṣṇena śikṣitāḥ
tad-anusmaraṇa-dhvasta-
jīva-kośās tam adhyagan
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; adhyātma — about the soul; śikṣayā — with instruction; gopyaḥ — the gopīs; evam — thus; kṛṣṇena — by Kṛṣṇa; śikṣitāḥ — taught; tat — on Him; anusmaraṇa — by constant meditation; dhvasta — eradicated; jīva-kośāḥ — the subtle covering of the soul (false ego); tam — Him; adhyagan — they came to understand.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Having thus been instructed by Kṛṣṇa in spiritual matters, the gopīs were freed of all tinges of false ego because of their incessant meditation upon Him. And with their deepening absorption in Him, they came to understand Him fully.

Text 48
आहुश्च ते नलिननाभ पदारविन्दं
योगेश्वरैर्हृदि विचिन्त्यमगाधबोधै: ।
संसारकूपपतितोत्तरणावलम्बं
गेहं जुषामपि मनस्युदियात् सदा न: ॥ ४८ ॥
āhuś ca te nalina-nābha padāravindaṁ
yogeśvarair hṛdi vicintyam agādha-bodhaiḥ saṁsāra-kūpa-patitottaraṇāvalambaṁ
gehaṁ juṣām api manasy udiyāt sadā naḥ
Synonyms
āhuḥ — the gopīs said; ca — and; te — Your; nalina-nabha — O Lord, whose navel is just like a lotus flower; pada-aravindam — lotus feet; yoga-īśvaraiḥ — by the great mystic yogīs; hṛdi — within the heart; vicintyam — to be meditated upon; agādha-bodhaiḥ — who were highly learned philosophers; saṁsāra-kūpa — the dark well of material existence; patita — of those fallen; uttaraṇa — of deliverers; avalambam — the only shelter; geham — family affairs; juṣām — of those engaged; api — though; manasi — in the minds; udiyāt — let be awakened; sadā — always; naḥ — our.

Translation
The gopīs spoke thus: Dear Lord, whose navel is just like a lotus flower, Your lotus feet are the only shelter for those who have fallen into the deep well of material existence. Your feet are worshiped and meditated upon by great mystic yogīs and highly learned philosophers. We wish that these lotus feet may also be awakened within our hearts, although we are only ordinary persons engaged in household affairs.