Text 1
श्रीराजोवाच
देवासुरमनुष्येषु ये भजन्त्यशिवं शिवम् ।
प्रायस्ते धनिनो भोजा न तु लक्ष्म्या: पतिं हरिम् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-rājovāca
devāsura-manuṣyesu
ye bhajanty aśivaṁ śivam
prāyas te dhanino bhojā
na tu lakṣmyāḥ patiṁ harim
Synonyms
śrī-rājā uvāca — the King (Parīkṣit) said; deva — among demigods; asura — demons; manuṣyeṣu — and humans; ye — who; bhajanti — worship; aśivam — austere; śivam — Lord Śiva; prāyaḥ — usually; te — they; dhaninaḥ — rich; bhojāḥ — enjoyers of sense gratification; na — not; tu — however; lakṣmyāḥ — of the goddess of fortune; patim — the husband; harim — Lord Hari.

Translation
King Parīkṣit said: Those demigods, demons and humans who worship Lord Śiva, a strict renunciant, usually enjoy wealth and sense gratification, while the worshipers of the Supreme Lord Hari, the husband of the goddess of fortune, do not.

Text 2
एतद् वेदितुमिच्छाम: सन्देहोऽत्र महान् हि न: ।
विरुद्धशीलयो: प्रभ्वोर्विरुद्धा भजतां गति: ॥ २ ॥
etad veditum icchāmaḥ
sandeho ’tra mahān hi naḥ
viruddha-śīlayoḥ prabhvor
viruddhā bhajatāṁ gatiḥ
Synonyms
etat — this; veditum — to understand; icchāmaḥ — we wish; sandehaḥ — doubt; atra — in this matter; mahān — great; hi — indeed; naḥ — on our part; viruddha — opposite; śīlayoḥ — whose characters; prabhvoḥ — of the two lords; viruddhā — opposite; bhajatām — of their worshipers; gatiḥ — the destinations.

Translation
We wish to properly understand this matter, which greatly puzzles us. Indeed, the results attained by the worshipers of these two lords of opposite characters are contrary to what one would expect.

Text 3
श्रीशुक उवाच
शिव: शक्तियुत: शश्वत् त्रिलिङ्गो गुणसंवृत: ।
वैकारिकस्तैजसश्च तामसश्चेत्यहं त्रिधा ॥ ३ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
śivaḥ śakti-yutaḥ śaśvat
tri-liṅgo guṇa-saṁvṛtaḥ
vaikārikas taijasaś ca
tāmasaś cety ahaṁ tridhā
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śuka said; śivaḥ — Lord Śiva; śakti — with his energy, material nature; yutaḥ — united; śaśvat — always; tri — three; liṅgaḥ — whose manifest features; guṇa — by the modes; saṁvṛtaḥ — prayed to; vaikārikaḥ — false ego in the mode of goodness; taijasaḥ — false ego in the mode of passion; ca — and; tāmasaḥ — false ego in mode of ignorance; ca — and; iti — thus; aham — the principle of material ego; tridhā — threefold.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva said: Lord Śiva is always united with his personal energy, the material nature. Manifesting himself in three features in response to the entreaties of nature’s three modes, he thus embodies the threefold principle of material ego in goodness, passion and ignorance.

Text 4
ततो विकारा अभवन् षोडशामीषु कञ्चन ।
उपधावन् विभूतीनां सर्वासामश्न‍ुते गतिम् ॥ ४ ॥
tato vikārā abhavan
ṣoḍaśāmīṣu kañcana
upadhāvan vibhūtīnāṁ
sarvāsām aśnute gatim
Synonyms
tataḥ — from that (false ego); vikārāḥ — transformations; abhavan — have manifested; ṣoḍaśa — sixteen; amīṣu — among these; kañcana — any; upadhāvan — pursuing; vibhūtīnām — of material assets; sarvāsām — all; aśnute — enjoys; gatim — the acquisition.

Translation
The sixteen elements have evolved as transformations of that false ego. When a devotee of Lord Śiva worships his manifestation in any one of these elements, the devotee obtains all sorts of corresponding enjoyable opulences.

Text 5
हरिर्हि निर्गुण: साक्षात् पुरुष: प्रकृते: पर: ।
स सर्वद‍ृगुपद्रष्टा तं भजन् निर्गुणो भवेत् ॥ ५ ॥
harir hi nirguṇaḥ sākṣāt
puruṣaḥ prakṛteḥ paraḥ
sa sarva-dṛg upadraṣṭā
taṁ bhajan nirguṇo bhavet
Synonyms
hariḥ — the Supreme Lord Hari; hi — indeed; nirguṇaḥ — untouched by the material modes; sākṣāt — absolutely; puruṣaḥ — the Personality of Godhead; prakṛteḥ — to material nature; paraḥ — transcendental; saḥ — He; sarva — everything; dṛk — seeing; upadraṣṭā — the witness; tam — Him; bhajan — by worshiping; nirguṇaḥ — free from the material modes; bhavet — one becomes.

Translation
Lord Hari, however, has no connection with the material modes. He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the all-seeing eternal witness, who is transcendental to material nature. One who worships Him becomes similarly free from the material modes.

Text 6
निवृत्तेष्वश्वमेधेषु राजा युष्मत्पितामह: ।
श‍ृण्वन् भगवतो धर्मानपृच्छदिदमच्युतम् ॥ ६ ॥
nivṛtteṣv aśva-medheṣu
rājā yuṣmat-pitāmahaḥ
śṛṇvan bhagavato dharmān
apṛcchad idam acyutam
Synonyms
nivṛtteṣu — when they were completed; aśva-medheṣu — his performances of the horse sacrifice; rājā — the King (Yudhiṣṭhira); yuṣmat — your (Parīkṣit’s); pitāmahāḥ — grandfather; śṛṇvan — while hearing; bhagavataḥ — from the Supreme Lord (Kṛṣṇa); dharmān — religious principles; apṛcchat — he asked; idam — this; acyutam — of Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Translation
Your grandfather, King Yudhiṣṭhira, after completing his Aśvamedha sacrifices, asked Lord Acyuta this very same question while hearing the Lord’s explanation of religious principles.

Text 7
स आह भगवांस्तस्मै प्रीत: शुश्रूषवे प्रभु: ।
नृणां नि:श्रेयसार्थाय योऽवतीर्णो यदो: कुले ॥ ७ ॥
sa āha bhagavāṁs tasmai
prītaḥ śuśrūṣave prabhuḥ
nṛṇāṁ niḥśreyasārthāya
yo ’vatīrṇo yadoḥ kule
Synonyms
saḥ — He; āha — said; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; tasmai — to him; prītaḥ — pleased; śuśrūṣave — who was eager to hear; prabhuḥ — his master; nṛṇām — of all men; niḥśreyasa — of ultimate benefit; arthāya — for the sake; yaḥ — who; avatīrṇaḥ — descended; yadoḥ — of King Yadu; kule — in the family.

Translation
This question pleased Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the King’s Lord and master, who had descended into the family of Yadu for the purpose of bestowing the highest good on all men. The Lord replied as follows as the King eagerly listened.

Text 8
श्रीभगवानुवाच
यस्याहमनुगृह्णामि हरिष्ये तद्धनं शनै: ।
ततोऽधनं त्यजन्त्यस्य स्वजना दु:खदु:खितम् ॥ ८ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
yasyāham anugṛhṇāmi
hariṣye tad-dhanaṁ śanaiḥ
tato ’dhanaṁ tyajanty asya
svajanā duḥkha-duḥkhitam
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Personality of Godhead said; yasya — whom; aham — I; anugṛhṇāmi — favor; hariṣye — I will take away; tat — his; dhanam — wealth; śanaiḥ — gradually; tataḥ — then; adhanam — poor; tyajanti — abandon; asya — his; sva-janāḥ — relatives and friends; duḥkha-duḥkhitam — who suffers one distress after another.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead said: If I especially favor someone, I gradually deprive him of his wealth. Then the relatives and friends of such a poverty-stricken man abandon him. In this way he suffers one distress after another.

Text 9
स यदा वितथोद्योगो निर्विण्ण: स्याद् धनेहया ।
मत्परै: कृतमैत्रस्य करिष्ये मदनुग्रहम् ॥ ९ ॥
sa yadā vitathodyogo
nirviṇṇaḥ syād dhanehayā
mat-paraiḥ kṛta-maitrasya
kariṣye mad-anugraham
Synonyms
saḥ — he; yadā — when; vitatha — useless; udyogaḥ — his attempt; nirviṇṇaḥ — frustrated; syāt — becomes; dhana — for money; īhayā — with his endeavor; mat — to Me; paraiḥ — with those who are devoted; kṛta — for him who has made; maitrasya — friendship; kariṣye — I will show; mat — My; anugraham — mercy.

Translation
When he becomes frustrated in his attempts to make money and instead befriends My devotees, I bestow My special mercy upon him.

Text 10
तद् ब्रह्म परमं सूक्ष्मं चिन्मात्रं सदनन्तकम् ।
विज्ञायात्मतया धीर: संसारात्परिमुच्यते ॥ १० ॥
tad brahma paramaṁ sūkṣmaṁ
cin-mātraṁ sad anantakam
vijñāyātmatayā dhīraḥ
saṁsārāt parimucyate
Synonyms
tat — that; brahma — impersonal Brahman; paramam — supreme; sūkṣmam — subtle; cit — spirit; mātram — pure; sat — eternal existence; anantakam — without end; vijñāya — understanding with thorough realization; ātmatayā — as one’s true Self; dhīraḥ — sober; saṁsārāt — from material life; parimucyate — one becomes freed.

Translation
A person who has thus become sober fully realizes the Absolute as the highest truth, the most subtle and perfect manifestation of spirit, the transcendental existence without end. In this way realizing that the Supreme Truth is the foundation of his own existence, he is freed from the cycle of material life.

Text 11
अतो मां सुदुराराध्यं हित्वान्यान् भजते जन: ।
ततस्त आशुतोषेभ्यो लब्धराज्यश्रियोद्धता: ।
मत्ता: प्रमत्ता वरदान् विस्मयन्त्यवजानते ॥ ११ ॥
ato māṁ su-durārādhyaṁ
hitvānyān bhajate janaḥ
tatas ta āśu-toṣebhyo
labdha-rājya-śriyoddhatāḥ
mattāḥ pramattā vara-dān
vismayanty avajānate
Synonyms
ataḥ — therefore; mām — Me; su — very; durārādhyam — difficult to worship; hitvā — leaving aside; anyān — others; bhajate — worship; janaḥ — the ordinary populace; tataḥ — consequently; te — they; āśu — quickly; toṣebhyaḥ — from those who are satisfied; labdha — received; rājya — royal; śriyā — by opulence; uddhatāḥ — made arrogant; mattāḥ — intoxicated with pride; pramattāḥ — negligent; vara — of benedictions; dān — the givers; vismayanti — becoming too bold; avajānate — they insult.

Translation
Because I am difficult to worship, people generally avoid Me and instead worship other deities, who are quickly satisfied. When people receive kingly opulences from these deities, they become arrogant, intoxicated with pride and neglectful of their duties. They dare to offend even the demigods who have bestowed benedictions upon them.

Text 12
श्रीशुक उवाच
शापप्रसादयोरीशा ब्रह्मविष्णुशिवादय: ।
सद्य:शापप्रसादोऽङ्ग शिवो ब्रह्मा न चाच्युत: ॥ १२ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
śāpa-prasādayor īśā
brahma-viṣṇu-śivādayaḥ
sadyaḥ śāpa-prasādo ’ṅga
śivo brahmā na cācyutaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; śāpa — in cursing; prasādayoḥ — and showing favor; īśāḥ — capable; brahma-viṣṇu-śiva-ādayaḥ — Brahmā, Viṣṇu, Śiva and others; sadyaḥ — quick; śāpa-prasādaḥ — whose curse and benediction; aṅga — my dear (King Parīkṣit); śivaḥ — Lord Śiva; brahmā — Lord Brahmā; na — not; ca — and; acyutaḥ — Lord Viṣṇu.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Lord Brahmā, Lord Viṣṇu, Lord Śiva and others are able to curse or bless one. Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā are very quick to curse or bestow benedictions, my dear King, but the infallible Supreme Lord is not.

Text 13
अत्र चोदाहरन्तीममितिहासं पुरातनम् ।
वृकासुराय गिरिशो वरं दत्त्वाप सङ्कटम् ॥ १३ ॥
atra codāharantīmam
itihāsaṁ purātanam
vṛkāsurāya giriśo
varaṁ dattvāpa saṅkaṭam
Synonyms
atra — in this regard; ca — and; udāharanti — they relate as an example; imam — the following; itihāsam — historical account; purātanam — ancient; vṛka-asurāya — to the demon Vṛka; giri-śaḥ — Lord Śiva, master of Mount Kailāsa; varam — a choice of benedictions; dattvā — giving; āpa — obtained; saṅkaṭam — a dangerous situation.

Translation
In this connection, an ancient historical account is related concerning how the Lord of Kailāsa Mountain was put into danger by offering a choice of benedictions to the demon Vṛka.

Text 14
वृको नामासुर: पुत्र: शकुने: पथि नारदम् ।
द‍ृष्ट्वाशुतोषं पप्रच्छ देवेषु त्रिषु दुर्मति: ॥ १४ ॥
vṛko nāmāsuraḥ putraḥ
śakuneḥ pathi nāradam
dṛṣṭvāśu-toṣaṁ papraccha
deveṣu triṣu durmatiḥ
Synonyms
vṛkaḥ — Vṛka; nāma — by name; asuraḥ — a demon; putraḥ — a son; śakuneḥ — of Śakuni; pathi — on the road; nāradam — the sage Nārada; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; āśu — quickly; toṣam — pleased; papraccha — he asked about; deveṣu — among the lords; triṣu — three; durmatiḥ — wicked.

Translation
The demon named Vṛka, a son of Śakuni’s, once met Nārada on the road. The wicked fellow asked him which of the three chief gods could be pleased most quickly.

Text 15
स आह देवं गिरिशमुपाधावाशु सिद्ध्यसि ।
योऽल्पाभ्यां गुणदोषाभ्यामाशु तुष्यति कुप्यति ॥ १५ ॥
sa āha devaṁ giriśam
upādhāvāśu siddhyasi
yo ’lpābhyāṁ guṇa-doṣābhyām
āśu tuṣyati kupyati
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Nārada); āha — said; devam — the lord; giriśam — Śiva; upādhāva — you should worship; āśu — quickly; siddhyasi — you will become successful; yaḥ — who; alpābhyām — slight; guṇa — by good qualities; doṣābhyām — and faults; āśu — quickly; tuṣyati — is satisfied; kupyati — is angered.

Translation
Nārada told him: Worship Lord Śiva and you will soon achieve success. He quickly becomes pleased by seeing his worshiper’s slightest good qualities — and quickly angered by seeing his slightest fault.

Text 16
दशास्यबाणयोस्तुष्ट: स्तुवतोर्वन्दिनोरिव ।
ऐश्वर्यमतुलं दत्त्वा तत आप सुसङ्कटम् ॥ १६ ॥
daśāsya-bāṇayos tuṣṭaḥ
stuvator vandinor iva
aiśvaryam atulaṁ dattvā
tata āpa su-saṅkaṭam
Synonyms
daśa-āsya — with ten-headed Rāvaṇa; bāṇayoḥ — and with Bāṇa; tuṣṭaḥ — satisfied; stuvatoḥ — who sang his glories; vandinoḥ iva — like minstrels; aiśvaryam — power; atulam — unequaled; dattvā — giving; tataḥ — then; āpa — he obtained; su — great; saṅkaṭam — difficulty.

Translation
He became pleased with ten-headed Rāvaṇa, and also with Bāṇa, when they each chanted his glories, like bards in a royal court. Lord Śiva then bestowed unprecedented power upon each of them, but in both cases he was consequently beset with great difficulty.

Text 17
इत्यादिष्टस्तमसुर उपाधावत् स्वगात्रत: ।
केदार आत्मक्रव्येण जुह्वानोऽग्निमुखं हरम् ॥ १७ ॥
ity ādiṣṭas tam asura
upādhāvat sva-gātrataḥ
kedāra ātma-kravyeṇa
juhvāno gni-mukhaṁ haram
Synonyms
iti — thus; ādiṣṭaḥ — instructed; tam — him (Lord Śiva); asuraḥ — the demon; upādhāvat — worshiped; sva — his own; gātrataḥ — from the bodily limbs; kedāre — at the holy place Kedāranātha; ātma — his own; kravyeṇa — with the flesh; juhvānaḥ — offering oblations; agni — the fire; mukham — whose mouth; haram — Lord Śiva.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Thus advised, the demon proceeded to worship Lord Śiva at Kedāranātha by taking pieces of flesh from his own body and offering them as oblations into the sacred fire, which is Lord Śiva’s mouth.

Texts 18-19
देवोपलब्धिमप्राप्य निर्वेदात् सप्तमेऽहनि ।
शिरोऽवृश्चत् सुधितिना तत्तीर्थक्लिन्नमूर्धजम् ॥ १८ ॥
तदा महाकारुणिको स धूर्जटि-
र्यथा वयं चाग्निरिवोत्थितोऽनलात् ।
निगृह्य दोर्भ्यां भुजयोर्न्यवारयत्
तत्स्पर्शनाद् भूय उपस्कृताकृति: ॥ १९ ॥
devopalabdhim aprāpya
nirvedāt saptame ’hani
śiro ’vṛścat sudhitinā
tat-tīrtha-klinna-mūrdhajam
tadā mahā-kāruṇiko sa dhūrjaṭir
yathā vayaṁ cāgnir ivotthito ’nalāt
nigṛhya dorbhyāṁ bhujayor nyavārayat
tat-sparśanād bhūya upaskṛtākṛtiḥ
Synonyms
deva — of the lord; upalabdhim — sight; aprāpya — not obtaining; nirvedāt — out of frustration; saptame — on the seventh; ahani — day; śiraḥ — his head; avṛścat — was about to cut off; sudhitinā — with a hatchet; tat — of that (Kedāranātha); tīrtha — in (waters of) the holy place; klinna — having wetted; mūrdha-jam — the hair of his head; tadā — then; mahā — supremely; kāruṇikaḥ — merciful; saḥ — he; dhūrjaṭiḥ — Lord Śiva; yathā — just as; vayam — we; ca — also; agniḥ — the god of fire; iva — appearing like; utthitaḥ — risen; analāt — from the fire; nigṛhya — seizing; dorbhyām — with his arms; bhujayoḥ — his (Vṛka’s) arms; nyavārayat — he stopped him; tat — his (Lord Śiva’s); sparśanāt — by the touch; bhūyaḥ — again; upaskṛta — well formed; ākṛtiḥ — his body.

Translation
Vṛkāsura became frustrated after failing to obtain a vision of the lord. Finally, on the seventh day, after dipping his hair into the holy waters at Kedāranātha and leaving it wet, he took up a hatchet and prepared to cut off his head. But at that very moment the supremely merciful Lord Śiva rose up out of the sacrificial fire, looking like the god of fire himself, and grabbed both arms of the demon to stop him from killing himself, just as we would do. By Lord Śiva’s touch, Vṛkāsura once again became whole.

Text 20
तमाह चाङ्गालमलं वृणीष्व मे
यथाभिकामं वितरामि ते वरम् ।
प्रीयेय तोयेन नृणां प्रपद्यता-
महो त्वयात्मा भृशमर्द्यते वृथा ॥ २० ॥
tam āha cāṅgālam alaṁ vṛṇīṣva me
yathābhikāmaṁ vitarāmi te varam
prīyeya toyena nṛṇāṁ prapadyatām
aho tvayātmā bhṛśam ardyate vṛthā
Synonyms
tam — to him; āha — he (Lord Śiva) said; ca — and; aṅga — my dear; alam alam — enough, enough; vṛṇīṣva — please choose a benediction; me — from me; yathā — howsoever; abhikāmam — you desire; vitarāmi — I will bestow; te — to you; varam — your chosen boon; prīyeya — I become pleased; toyena — with water; nṛṇām — from persons; prapadyatām — who approach me for shelter; aho — ah; tvayā — by you; ātmā — your body; bhṛśam — excessively; ardyate — tormented; vṛthā — in vain.

Translation
Lord Śiva said to him: My friend, please stop, stop! Ask from me whatever you want, and I will bestow that boon upon you. Alas, you have subjected your body to great torment for no reason, since I am pleased with a simple offering of water from those who approach me for shelter.

Text 21
देवं स वव्रे पापीयान् वरं भूतभयावहम् ।
यस्य यस्य करं शीर्ष्णि धास्ये स म्रियतामिति ॥ २१ ॥
devaṁ sa vavre pāpīyān
varaṁ bhūta-bhayāvaham
yasya yasya karaṁ śīrṣṇi
dhāsye sa mriyatām iti
Synonyms
devam — from the lord; saḥ — he; vavre — chose; pāpīyān — the sinful demon; varam — a benediction; bhūta — to all living beings; bhaya — fear; āvaham — bringing; yasya yasya — of whomever; karam — my hand; śīrṣṇi — on the head; dhāsye — I place; saḥ — he; mriyatām — should die; iti — thus.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] The benediction sinful Vṛka chose from the lord would terrify all living beings. Vṛka said, “May death come to whomever I touch upon the head with my hand.”

Text 22
तच्छ्रुत्वा भगवान् रुद्रो दुर्मना इव भारत ।
ॐ इति प्रहसंस्तस्मै ददेऽहेरमृतं यथा ॥ २२ ॥
tac chrutvā bhagavān rudro
durmanā iva bhārata
om iti prahasaṁs tasmai
dade ’her amṛtaṁ yathā
Synonyms
tat — this; śrutvā — hearing; bhagavān rudraḥ — Lord Rudra; durmanāḥ — displeased; iva — as if; bhārata — O descendant of Bharata; om iti — vibrating the sacred syllable om as a sign of assent; prahasan — smiling broadly; tasmai — to him; dade — he gave it; aheḥ — to a snake; amṛtam — nectar; yathā — as.

Translation
Upon hearing this, Lord Rudra seemed somewhat disturbed. Nonetheless, O descendant of Bharata, he vibrated om to signify his assent, granting Vṛka the benediction with an ironic smile, as if giving milk to a poisonous snake.

Text 23
स तद्वरपरीक्षार्थं शम्भोर्मूर्ध्‍नि किलासुर: ।
स्वहस्तं धातुमारेभे सोऽबिभ्यत् स्वकृताच्छिव: ॥ २३ ॥
sa tad-vara-parīkṣārthaṁ
śambhor mūrdhni kilāsuraḥ
sva-hastaṁ dhātum ārebhe
so ’bibhyat sva-kṛtāc chivaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he; tat — his (Lord Śiva’s); vara — the benediction; parīkṣā-artham — in order to test; śambhoḥ — of Lord Śiva; mūrdhni — on the head; kila — indeed; asuraḥ — the demon; sva — his own; hastam — hand; dhātum — to put; ārebhe — he tried; saḥ — he; abibhyat — became afraid; sva — by himself; kṛtāt — because of what had been done; śivaḥ — Lord Śiva.

Translation
To test Lord Śambhu’s benediction, the demon then tried to put his hand on the Lord’s head. Thus Śiva was frightened because of what he himself had done.

Text 24
तेनोपसृष्ट: सन्त्रस्त: पराधावन् सवेपथु: ।
यावदन्तं दिवो भूमे: कष्ठानामुदगादुदक् ॥ २४ ॥
tenopasṛṣṭaḥ santrastaḥ
parādhāvan sa-vepathuḥ
yāvad antaṁ divo bhūmeḥ
kaṣṭhānām udagād udak
Synonyms
tena — by him; upasṛṣṭaḥ — being pursued; santrastaḥ — terrified; parādhāvan — fleeing; sa — with; vepathuḥ — trembling; yāvat — as far as; antam — the ends; divaḥ — of the sky; bhūmeḥ — of the earth; kāṣṭhānām — and of the directions; udagāt — he went swiftly; udak — from the north.

Translation
As the demon pursued him, Lord Śiva fled swiftly from his abode in the north, shaking with terror. He ran as far as the limits of the earth, the sky and the corners of the universe.

Texts 25-26
अजानन्त: प्रतिविधिं तूष्णीमासन् सुरेश्वरा: ।
ततो वैकुण्ठमगमद् भास्वरं तमस: परम् ॥ २५ ॥
यत्र नारायण: साक्षान्न्यासिनां परमो गति: ।
शान्तानां न्यस्तदण्डानां यतो नावर्तते गत: ॥ २६ ॥
ajānantaḥ prati-vidhiṁ
tūṣṇīm āsan sureśvarāḥ
tato vaikuṇṭham agamad
bhāsvaraṁ tamasaḥ param
yatra nārāyaṇaḥ sākṣān
nyāsināṁ paramo gatiḥ
śāntānāṁ nyasta-daṇḍānāṁ
yato nāvartate gataḥ
Synonyms
ajānantaḥ — not knowing; prati-vidhim — counteraction; tūṣṇīm — silent; āsan — remained; sura — of the demigods; īśvarāḥ — the lords; tataḥ — then; vaikuṇṭham — to Vaikuṇṭha, the kingdom of God; agamat — he came; bhāsvaram — luminous; tamasaḥ — darkness; param — beyond; yatra — where; nārāyaṇaḥ — Nārāyaṇa; sākṣāt — directly visible; nyāsinām — of sannyāsīs; paramaḥ — the Supreme Lord; gatiḥ — goal; śāntānām — who are peaceful; nyasta — who have renounced; daṇḍānām — violence; yataḥ — from which; na āvartate — one does not return; gataḥ — having gone.

Translation
The great demigods could only remain silent, not knowing how to counteract the benediction. Then Lord Śiva reached the luminous realm of Vaikuṇṭha, beyond all darkness, where the Supreme Lord Nārāyaṇa is manifest. That realm is the destination of renunciants who have attained peace and given up all violence against other creatures. Going there, one never returns.

Texts 27-28
तं तथाव्यसनं द‍ृष्ट्वा भगवान् वृजिनार्दन: ।
दूरात् प्रत्युदियाद् भूत्वा बटुको योगमायया ॥ २७ ॥
मेखलाजिनदण्डाक्षैस्तेजसाग्निरिव ज्वलन् ।
अभिवादयामास च तं कुशपाणिर्विनीतवत् ॥ २८ ॥
taṁ tathā vyasanaṁ dṛṣṭvā
bhagavān vṛjinārdanaḥ
dūrāt pratyudiyād bhūtvā
baṭuko yoga-māyayā
mekhalājina-daṇḍākṣais
tejasāgnir iva jvalan
abhivādayām āsa ca taṁ
kuśa-pāṇir vinīta-vat
Synonyms
tam — that; tathā — thus; vyasanam — danger; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; vṛjina — of distress; ardanaḥ — the eradicator; dūrāt — from a distance; pratyudiyāt — he came before (Vṛkāsura); bhūtvā — becoming; baṭukaḥ — a young brāhmaṇa student; yoga-māyayā — by the mystic power of His internal energy; mekhala — with a student’s belt; ajina — deerskin; daṇḍa — rod; akṣaiḥ — and prayer beads; tejasā — by His effulgence; agniḥ iva — like fire; jvalan — glowing; abhivādayām āsa — He respectfully greeted; ca — and; tam — him; kuśa-pāṇiḥ — with kuśa grass in His hands; vinīta-vat — in a humble manner.

Translation
The Supreme Lord, who relieves His devotees’ distress, had seen from afar that Lord Śiva was in danger. Thus by His mystic Yoga-māyā potency He assumed the form of a brahmacārī student, with the appropriate belt, deerskin, rod and prayer beads, and came before Vṛkāsura. The Lord’s effulgence glowed brilliantly like fire. Holding kuśa grass in His hand, He humbly greeted the demon.

Text 29
श्रीभगवानुवाच
शाकुनेय भवान् व्यक्तं श्रान्त: किं दूरमागत: ।
क्षणं विश्रम्यतां पुंस आत्मायं सर्वकामधुक् ॥ २९ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
śākuneya bhavān vyaktaṁ
śrāntaḥ kiṁ dūram āgataḥ
kṣaṇaṁ viśramyatāṁ puṁsa
ātmāyaṁ sarva-kāma-dhuk
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Lord said; śākuneya — O son of Śakuni; bhavān — you; vyaktam — evidently; śrāntaḥ — are fatigued; kim — for what reason; dūram — far; āgataḥ — have come; kṣaṇam — for a minute; viśramyatām — please rest; puṁsaḥ — of a person; ātmā — body; ayam — this; sarva — all; kāma — desires; dhuk — bestowing like a cow’s milk.

Translation
The Supreme Lord said: My dear son of Śakuni, you appear tired. Why have you come such a great distance? Please rest for a minute. After all, it is one’s body that fulfills all one’s desires.

Text 30
यदि न: श्रवणायालं युष्मद्‌व्यवसितं विभो ।
भण्यतां प्रायश: पुम्भिर्धृतै: स्वार्थान् समीहते ॥ ३० ॥
yadi naḥ śravaṇāyālaṁ
yuṣmad-vyavasitaṁ vibho
bhaṇyatāṁ prāyaśaḥ pumbhir
dhṛtaiḥ svārthān samīhate
Synonyms
yadi — if; naḥ — Our; śravaṇāya — for the hearing; alam — suitable; yuṣmat — your; vyavasitam — intention; vibho — O powerful one; bhaṇyatām — please tell; prāyaśaḥ — usually; pumbhiḥ — with persons; dhṛtaiḥ — taken help of; sva — one’s own; arthān — purposes; samīhate — one accomplishes.

Translation
O mighty one, please tell Us what you intend to do, if We are qualified to hear it. Usually one accomplishes his purposes by taking help from others.

Text 31
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं भगवता पृष्टो वचसामृतवर्षिणा ।
गतक्लमोऽब्रवीत्तस्मै यथापूर्वमनुष्ठितम् ॥ ३१ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ bhagavatā pṛṣṭo
vacasāmṛta-varṣiṇā
gata-klamo ’bravīt tasmai
yathā-pūrvam anuṣṭhitam
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — thus; bhagavatā — by the Supreme Lord; pṛṣṭaḥ — questioned; vacasā — with words; amṛta — nectar; varṣiṇā — which rained; gata — gone; klamaḥ — his fatigue; abravīt — he said; tasmai — to Him; yathā — as; pūrvam — before; anuṣṭhitam — executed.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus questioned by the Personality of Godhead in language that poured down upon him like sweet nectar, Vṛka felt relieved of his fatigue. He described to the Lord everything he had done.

Text 32
श्रीभगवानुवाच
एवं चेत्तर्हि तद्वाक्यं न वयं श्रद्दधीमहि ।
यो दक्षशापात् पैशाच्यं प्राप्त: प्रेतपिशाचराट् ॥ ३२ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
evaṁ cet tarhi tad-vākyaṁ
na vayaṁ śraddadhīmahi
yo dakṣa-śāpāt paiśācyaṁ
prāptaḥ preta-piśāca-rāṭ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Lord said; evam — such; cet — if; tarhi — then; tat — his; vākyam — in the statements; na — not; vayam — We; śraddadhīmahi — can place faith; yaḥ — who; dakṣa-śāpāt — by the curse of Dakṣa Prajāpati; paiśācyam — the qualities of the Piśācas (a class of carnivorous demons); prāptaḥ — obtained; preta-piśāca — of the Pretas (ghosts) and Piśācas; rāṭ — the king.

Translation
The Supreme Lord said: If this is the case, We cannot believe what Śiva says. Śiva is the same lord of the Pretas and Piśācas whom Dakṣa cursed to become like a carnivorous hobgoblin.

Text 33
यदि वस्तत्र विश्रम्भो दानवेन्द्र जगद्गुरौ ।
तर्ह्यङ्गाशु स्वशिरसि हस्तं न्यस्य प्रतीयताम् ॥ ३३ ॥
yadi vas tatra viśrambho
dānavendra jagad-gurau
tarhy aṅgāśu sva-śirasi
hastaṁ nyasya pratīyatām
Synonyms
yadi — if; vaḥ — your; tatra — in him; viśrambhaḥ — faith; dānava-indra — O best of the demons; jagat — of the universe; gurau — as the spiritual master; tarhi — then; aṅga — My dear friend; āśu — right now; sva — your own; śirasi — on the head; hastam — your hand; nyasya — placing; pratīyatām — just observe.

Translation
O best of the demons, if you have any faith in him because he is the spiritual master of the universe, then without delay put your hand on your head and see what happens.

Text 34
यद्यसत्यं वच: शम्भो: कथञ्चिद् दानवर्षभ ।
तदैनं जह्यसद्वाचं न यद वक्तानृतं पुन: ॥ ३४ ॥
yady asatyaṁ vacaḥ śambhoḥ
kathañcid dānavarṣabha
tadainaṁ jahy asad-vācaṁ
na yad vaktānṛtaṁ punaḥ
Synonyms
yadi — if; asatyam — untrue; vacaḥ — the words; śambhoḥ — of Lord Śiva; kathañcit — in any way; dānava-ṛṣabha — O best of the demons; tadā — then; enam — him; jahi — please kill; asat — untrue; vācam — whose words; na — not; yat — so that; vaktā — he may speak; anṛtam — what is false; punaḥ — again.

Translation
If the words of Lord Śambhu prove untrue in any way, O best of the demons, then kill the liar so he may never lie again.

Text 35
इत्थं भगवतश्चित्रैर्वचोभि: स सुपेशलै: ।
भिन्नधीर्विस्मृत: शीर्ष्णि स्वहस्तं कुमतिर्न्यधात् ॥ ३५ ॥
itthaṁ bhagavataś citrair
vacobhiḥ sa su-peśalaiḥ
bhinna-dhīr vismṛtaḥ śīrṣṇi
sva-hastaṁ kumatir nyadhāt
Synonyms
ittham — in this manner; bhagavataḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; citraiḥ — wonderful; vacobhiḥ — by the words; saḥ — he (Vṛka); su — very; peśalaiḥ — clever; bhinna — bewildered; dhīḥ — his mind; vismṛtaḥ — forgetting; śīrṣṇi — on his head; sva — his own; hastam — hand; ku-matiḥ — foolish; nyadhāt — placed.

Translation
[Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued:] Thus bewildered by the Personality of Godhead’s enchanting, artful words, foolish Vṛka, without realizing what he was doing, placed his hand on his head.

Text 36
अथापतद् भिन्नशिरा: वज्राहत इव क्षणात् ।
जयशब्दो नम:शब्द: साधुशब्दोऽभवद् दिवि ॥ ३६ ॥
athāpatad bhinna-śirāḥ
vajrāhata iva kṣaṇāt
jaya-śabdo namaḥ-śabdaḥ
sādhu-śabdo ’bhavad divi
Synonyms
atha — then; apatat — he fell down; bhinna — shattered; śirāḥ — his head; vajra — by a lightning bolt; āhataḥ — struck; iva — as if; kṣaṇāt — in a fraction of a second; jaya — “victory!”; śabdaḥ — the sound; namaḥ — “homage!”; śabdaḥ — the sound; sādhu — “well done!”; śabdaḥ — the sound; abhavat — happened; divi — in the sky.

Translation
Instantly his head shattered as if struck by a lightning bolt, and the demon fell down dead. From the sky were heard cries of “Victory!” “Obeisances!” and “Well done!”

Text 37
मुमुचु: पुष्पवर्षाणि हते पापे वृकासुरे ।
देवर्षिपितृगन्धर्वा मोचित: सङ्कटाच्छिव: ॥ ३७ ॥
mumucuḥ puṣpa-varṣāṇi
hate pāpe vṛkāsure
devarṣi-pitṛ-gandharvā
mocitaḥ saṅkaṭāc chivaḥ
Synonyms
mumucuḥ — they released; puṣpa — of flowers; varṣāṇi — rain; hate — having been killed; pāpe — the sinful; vṛka-asure — demon Vṛka; deva-ṛṣi — the celestial sages; pitṛ — departed forefathers; gandharvāḥ — and singers of heaven; mocitaḥ — freed; saṅkaṭāt — from danger; śivaḥ — Lord Śiva.

Translation
The celestial sages, Pitās and Gandharvas rained down flowers to celebrate the killing of sinful Vṛkāsura. Now Lord Śiva was out of danger.

Texts 38-39
मुक्तं गिरिशमभ्याह भगवान् पुरुषोत्तम: ।
अहो देव महादेव पापोऽयं स्वेन पाप्मना ॥ ३८ ॥
हत: को नु महत्स्वीश जन्तुर्वै कृतकिल्बिष: ।
क्षेमी स्यात् किमु विश्वेशे कृतागस्को जगद्गुरौ ॥ ३९ ॥
muktaṁ giriśam abhyāha
bhagavān puruṣottamaḥ
aho deva mahā-deva
pāpo ’yaṁ svena pāpmanā
hataḥ ko nu mahatsv īśa
jantur vai kṛta-kilbiṣaḥ
kṣemī syāt kim u viśveśe
kṛtāgasko jagad-gurau
Synonyms
muktam — delivered; giriśam — Lord Śiva; abhyāha — addressed; bhagavān puruṣa-uttamaḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead (Nārāyaṇa); aho — ah; deva — My dear lord; mahā-deva — Śiva; pāpaḥ — sinful; ayam — this person; svena — by his own; pāpmanā — sins; hataḥ — killed; kaḥ — what; nu — indeed; mahatsu — toward elevated saints; īśa — O master; jantuḥ — living being; vai — indeed; kṛta — having done; kilbiṣaḥ — offense; kṣemī — fortunate; syāt — can be; kim u — what to speak, moreover; viśva — of the universe; īśe — against the lord (you); kṛta-āgaskaḥ — having committed offense; jagat — of the universe; gurau — the spiritual master.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead then addressed Lord Giriśa, who was now out of danger: “Just see, O Mahādeva, My lord, how this wicked man has been killed by his own sinful reactions. Indeed, what living being can hope for good fortune if he offends exalted saints, what to speak of offending the lord and spiritual master of the universe?”

Text 40
य एवमव्याकृतशक्त्युदन्वत:
परस्य साक्षात् परमात्मनो हरे: ।
गिरित्रमोक्षं कथयेच्छृणोति वा
विमुच्यते संसृतिभिस्तथारिभि: ॥ ४० ॥
ya evam avyākṛta-śakty-udanvataḥ
parasya sākṣāt paramātmano hareḥ
giritra-mokṣaṁ kathayec chṛṇoti vā
vimucyate saṁsṛtibhis tathāribhiḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — whoever; evam — thus; avyākṛta — inconceivable; śakti — of energies; udanvataḥ — of the ocean; parasya — the Supreme; sākṣāt — personally manifest; parama-ātmanaḥ — of the Supersoul; hareḥ — Lord Hari; giritra — of Lord Śiva; mokṣam — the saving; kathayet — recites; śṛṇoti — hears; vā — or; vimucyate — is freed; saṁsṛtibhiḥ — from repeated births and deaths; tathā — as well as; aribhiḥ — from enemies.

Translation
Lord Hari is the directly manifest Absolute Truth, the Supreme Soul and unlimited ocean of inconceivable energies. Anyone who recites or hears this pastime of His saving Lord Śiva will be freed from all enemies and the repetition of birth and death.