Text 1
श्रीभगवानुवाच
जितेन्द्रियस्य युक्तस्य जितश्वासस्य योगिन: ।
मयि धारयतश्चेत उपतिष्ठन्ति सिद्धय: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
jitendriyasya yuktasya
jita-śvāsasya yoginaḥ
mayi dhārayataś ceta
upatiṣṭhanti siddhayaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; jita-indriyasya — of one who has conquered his senses; yuktasya — who has steadied the mind; jita-śvāsasya — and conquered his breathing system; yoginaḥ — of such a yogī; mayi — in Me; dhārayataḥ — fixing; cetaḥ — his consciousness; upatiṣṭhanti — appear; siddhayaḥ — the mystic perfections of yoga.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, the mystic perfections of yoga are acquired by a yogī who has conquered his senses, steadied his mind, conquered the breathing process and fixed his mind on Me.

Text 2
श्रीउद्धव उवाच
कया धारणया कास्वित् कथं वा सिद्धिरच्युत ।
कति वा सिद्धयो ब्रूहि योगिनां सिद्धिदो भवान् ॥ २ ॥
śrī-uddhava uvāca
kayā dhāraṇayā kā svit
kathaṁ vā siddhir acyuta
kati vā siddhayo brūhi
yogināṁ siddhi-do bhavān
Synonyms
śrī-uddhavaḥ uvāca — Śrī Uddhava said; kayā — by what; dhāraṇayā — process of meditation; kā svit — which indeed; katham — in what manner; vā — or; siddhiḥ — mystic perfection; acyuta — My dear Lord; kati — how many; vā — or; siddhayaḥ — perfections; brūhi — please speak; yoginām — of all yogīs; siddhi-daḥ — the giver of mystic perfections; bhavān — You.

Translation
Śrī Uddhava said: My dear Lord Acyuta, by what process can mystic perfection be achieved, and what is the nature of such perfection? How many mystic perfections are there? Please explain these things to me. Indeed, You are the bestower of all mystic perfections.

Text 3
श्रीभगवानुवाच
सिद्धयोऽष्टादश प्रोक्ता धारणा योगपारगै: ।
तासामष्टौ मत्प्रधाना दशैव गुणहेतव: ॥ ३ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
siddhayo ’ṣṭādaśa proktā
dhāraṇā yoga-pāra-gaiḥ
tāsām aṣṭau mat-pradhānā
daśaiva guṇa-hetavaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; siddhayaḥ — mystic perfections; aṣṭādaśa — eighteen; proktāḥ — are declared; dhāraṇāḥ — meditations; yoga — of yoga; pāra-gaiḥ — by the masters; tāsām — of the eighteen; aṣṭau — eight; mat-pradhānāḥ — have their shelter in Me; daśa — ten; eva — indeed; guṇa-hetavaḥ — are manifested from the material mode of goodness.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: The masters of the yoga system have declared that there are eighteen types of mystic perfection and meditation, of which eight are primary, having their shelter in Me, and ten are secondary, appearing from the material mode of goodness.

Texts 4-5
अणिमा महिमा मूर्तेर्लघिमा प्राप्तिरिन्द्रियै: ।
प्राकाम्यं श्रुतद‍ृष्टेषु शक्तिप्रेरणमीशिता ॥ ४ ॥
गुणेष्वसङ्गो वशिता यत्कामस्तदवस्यति ।
एता मे सिद्धय: सौम्य अष्टावौत्पत्तिका मता: ॥ ५ ॥
aṇimā mahimā mūrter
laghimā prāptir indriyaiḥ
prākāmyaṁ śruta-dṛṣṭeṣu
śakti-preraṇam īśitā
guṇeṣv asaṅgo vaśitā
yat-kāmas tad avasyati
etā me siddhayaḥ saumya
aṣṭāv autpattikā matāḥ
Synonyms
aṇimā — the perfection of becoming smaller than the smallest; mahimā — becoming greater than the greatest; mūrteḥ — of the body; laghimā — becoming lighter than the lightest; prāptiḥ — acquisition; indriyaiḥ — by the senses; prākāmyam — obtaining or performing whatever one desires; śruta — things invisible,, about which one only hears; dṛṣṭeṣu — and things visible; śakti-preraṇam — manipulating the subpotencies of māyā; īśitā — the perfection of controlling; guṇeṣu — in the modes of material nature; asaṅgaḥ — being unobstructed; vaśitā — the power to bring others under control; yat — whatever; kāmaḥ — desire (there may be); tat — that; avasyati — one can obtain; etāḥ — these; me — My (potencies); siddhayaḥ — mystic perfections; saumya — O gentle Uddhava; aṣṭau — eight; autpattikāḥ — natural and unexcelled; matāḥ — understood to be.

Translation
Among the eight primary mystic perfections, the three by which one transforms one’s own body are aṇimā, becoming smaller than the smallest; mahimā, becoming greater than the greatest; and laghimā, becoming lighter than the lightest. Through the perfection of prāpti one acquires whatever one desires, and through prākāmya-siddhi one experiences any enjoyable object, either in this world or the next. Through īśitā-siddhi one can manipulate the subpotencies of māyā, and through the controlling potency called vaśitā-siddhi one is unimpeded by the three modes of nature. One who has acquired kāmāvasāyitā-siddhi can obtain anything from anywhere, to the highest possible limit. My dear gentle Uddhava, these eight mystic perfections are considered to be naturally existing and unexcelled within this world.

Texts 6-7
अनूर्मिमत्त्वं देहेऽस्मिन् दूरश्रवणदर्शनम् ।
मनोजव: कामरूपं परकायप्रवेशनम् ॥ ६ ॥
स्वच्छन्दमृत्युर्देवानां सहक्रीडानुदर्शनम् ।
यथासङ्कल्पसंसिद्धिराज्ञाप्रतिहता गति: ॥ ७ ॥
anūrmimattvaṁ dehe ’smin
dūra-śravaṇa-darśanam
mano-javaḥ kāma-rūpaṁ
para-kāya-praveśanam
svacchanda-mṛtyur devānāṁ
saha-krīḍānudarśanam
yathā-saṅkalpa-saṁsiddhir
ājñāpratihatā gatiḥ
Synonyms
anūrmi-mattvam — being undisturbed by hunger, thirst, etc.; dehe asmin — in this body; dūra — things very far away; śravaṇa — hearing; darśanam — and seeing; manaḥ-javaḥ — moving the body at the speed of the mind; kāma-rūpam — assuming any body that one desires; para-kāya — the bodies of others; praveśanam — entering; sva-chanda — according to one’s own desire; mṛtyuḥ — dying; devānām — of the demigods; saha — together with (the celestial girls); krīḍā — the sporting pastimes; anudarśanam — witnessing; yathā — according to; saṅkalpa — one’s determination; saṁsiddhiḥ — perfect accomplishment; ājñā — order; apratihatā — unimpeded; gatiḥ — whose progress.

Translation
The ten secondary mystic perfections arising from the modes of nature are the powers of freeing oneself from hunger and thirst and other bodily disturbances, hearing and seeing things far away, moving the body at the speed of the mind, assuming any form one desires, entering the bodies of others, dying when one desires, witnessing the pastimes between the demigods and the celestial girls called Apsarās, completely executing one’s determination and giving orders whose fulfillment is unimpeded.

Texts 8-9
त्रिकालज्ञत्वमद्वन्द्वं परचित्ताद्यभिज्ञता ।
अग्‍न्यर्काम्बुविषादीनां प्रतिष्टम्भोऽपराजय: ॥ ८ ॥
एताश्चोद्देशत: प्रोक्ता योगधारणसिद्धय: ।
यया धारणया या स्याद् यथा वा स्यान्निबोध मे ॥ ९ ॥
tri-kāla-jñatvam advandvaṁ
para-cittādy-abhijñatā
agny-arkāmbu-viṣādīnāṁ
pratiṣṭambho ’parājayaḥ
etāś coddeśataḥ proktā
yoga-dhāraṇa-siddhayaḥ
yayā dhāraṇayā yā syād
yathā vā syān nibodha me
Synonyms
tri-kāla-jñatvam — the perfection of knowing past, present and future; advandvam — being unaffected by dualities such as heat and cold; para — of others; citta — the mind; ādi — and so on; abhijñatā — knowing; agni — of fire; arka — the sun; ambu — water; viṣa — of poison; ādīnām — and so on; pratiṣṭambhaḥ — checking the potency; aparājayaḥ — not being conquered by others; etāḥ — these; ca — also; uddeśataḥ — merely by mentioning their names and characteristics; proktāḥ — are described; yoga — of the yoga system; dhāraṇa — of meditation; siddhayaḥ — perfections; yayā — by which; dhāraṇayā — meditation; yā — which (perfection); syāt — may occur; yathā — by which means; vā — or; syāt — may occur; nibodha — please learn; me — from Me.

Translation
The power to know past, present and future; tolerance of heat, cold and other dualities; knowing the minds of others; checking the influence of fire, sun, water, poison, and so on; and remaining unconquered by others — these constitute five perfections of the mystic process of yoga and meditation. I am simply listing these here according to their names and characteristics. Now please learn from Me how specific mystic perfections arise from specific meditations and also of the particular processes involved.

Text 10
भूतसूक्ष्मात्मनि मयि तन्मात्रं धारयेन्मन: ।
अणिमानमवाप्नोति तन्मात्रोपासको मम ॥ १० ॥
bhūta-sūkṣmātmani mayi
tan-mātraṁ dhārayen manaḥ
aṇimānam avāpnoti
tan-mātropāsako mama
Synonyms
bhūta-sūkṣma — of the subtle elements; ātmani — in the soul; mayi — in Me; tat-mātram — on the subtle, elemental forms of perception; dhārayet — one should concentrate; manaḥ — the mind; aṇimānam — the mystic perfection called aṇimā; avāpnoti — obtains; tat-mātra — in the subtle elements; upāsakaḥ — the worshiper; mama — My.

Translation
One who worships Me in My atomic form pervading all subtle elements, fixing his mind on that alone, obtains the mystic perfection called aṇimā.

Text 11
महत्तत्त्वात्मनि मयि यथासंस्थं मनो दधत् ।
महिमानमवाप्नोति भूतानां च पृथक् पृथक् ॥ ११ ॥
mahat-tattvātmani mayi
yathā-saṁsthaṁ mano dadhat
mahimānam avāpnoti
bhūtānāṁ ca pṛthak pṛthak
Synonyms
mahat-tattva — of the total material energy; ātmani — in the Soul; mayi — in Me; yathā — according to; saṁstham — the particular situation; manaḥ — the mind; dadhat — fixing; mahimānam — the mystic perfection called mahimā; avāpnoti — one achieves; bhūtānām — of the material elements; ca — also; pṛthak pṛthak — each one individually.

Translation
One who absorbs his mind in the particular form of the mahat-tattva and thus meditates upon Me as the Supreme Soul of the total material existence achieves the mystic perfection called mahimā. By further absorbing the mind in the situation of each individual element such as the sky, air, fire, and so on, one progressively acquires the greatness of each material element.

Text 12
परमाणुमये चित्तं भूतानां मयि रञ्जयन् ।
कालसूक्ष्मार्थतां योगी लघिमानमवाप्नुयात् ॥ १२ ॥
paramāṇu-maye cittaṁ
bhūtānāṁ mayi rañjayan
kāla-sūkṣmārthatāṁ yogī
laghimānam avāpnuyāt
Synonyms
parama-aṇu-maye — in the form of atoms; cittam — his consciousness; bhūtānām — of the material elements; mayi — in Me; rañjayan — attaching; kāla — of time; sūkṣma — subtle; arthatām — being the substance; yogī — the yogī; laghimānam — the mystic perfection laghimā; avāpnuyāt — may obtain.

Translation
I exist within everything, and I am therefore the essence of the atomic constituents of material elements. By attaching his mind to Me in this form, the yogī may achieve the perfection called laghimā, by which he realizes the subtle atomic substance of time.

Text 13
धारयन् मय्यहंतत्त्वे मनो वैकारिकेऽखिलम् ।
सर्वेन्द्रियाणामात्मत्वं प्राप्तिं प्राप्नोति मन्मना: ॥ १३ ॥
dhārayan mayy ahaṁ-tattve
mano vaikārike ’khilam
sarvendriyāṇām ātmatvaṁ
prāptiṁ prāpnoti man-manāḥ
Synonyms
dhārayan — concentrating; mayi — in Me; aham-tattve — within the element of false ego; manaḥ — the mind; vaikārike — in that which is produced from the mode of goodness; akhilam — completely; sarva — of all living entities; indriyāṇām — of the senses; ātmatvam — proprietorship; prāptim — the mystic perfection of acquisition; prāpnoti — obtains; mat-manāḥ — the yogī whose mind is fixed in Me.

Translation
Fixing his mind completely in Me within the element of false ego generated from the mode of goodness, the yogī obtains the power of mystic acquisition, by which he becomes the proprietor of the senses of all living entities. He obtains such perfection because his mind is absorbed in Me.

Text 14
महत्यात्मनि य: सूत्रे धारयेन्मयि मानसम् ।
प्राकाम्यं पारमेष्ठ्यं मे विन्दतेऽव्यक्तजन्मन: ॥ १४ ॥
mahaty ātmani yaḥ sūtre
dhārayen mayi mānasam
prākāmyaṁ pārameṣṭhyaṁ me
vindate ’vyakta-janmanaḥ
Synonyms
mahati — in the mahat-tattva; ātmani — in the Supersoul; yaḥ — one who; sūtre — characterized by the chain of fruitive activities; dhārayet — should concentrate; mayi — in Me; mānasam — the mental activities; prākāmyam — the mystic perfection called prākāmya; pārameṣṭhyam — most excellent; me — from Me; vindate — obtains or enjoys; avyakta-janmanaḥ — from Him whose appearance in this world cannot be materially perceived.

Translation
One who concentrates all mental activities in Me as the Supersoul of that phase of the mahat-tattva which manifests the chain of fruitive activities obtains from Me, whose appearance is beyond material perception, the most excellent mystic perfection called prākāmya.

Text 15
विष्णौ त्र्यधीश्वरे चित्तं धारयेत् कालविग्रहे ।
स ईशित्वमवाप्नोति क्षेत्रज्ञक्षेत्रचोदनाम् ॥ १५ ॥
viṣṇau try-adhīśvare cittaṁ
dhārayet kāla-vigrahe
sa īśitvam avāpnoti
kṣetrajña-kṣetra-codanām
Synonyms
viṣṇau — in Lord Viṣṇu, the Supersoul; tri-adhīśvare — the supreme controller of māyā, which consists of three modes of nature; cittam — the consciousness; dhārayet — one concentrates; kāla — of time, the prime mover; vigrahe — in the form; saḥ — he, the yogī; īśitvam — the mystic perfection of controlling; avāpnoti — obtains; kṣetra-jña — the conscious living entity; kṣetra — and the body with its designations; codanām — impelling.

Translation
One who places his consciousness on Viṣṇu, the Supersoul, the prime mover and Supreme Lord of the external energy consisting of three modes, obtains the mystic perfection of controlling other conditioned souls, their material bodies and their bodily designations.

Text 16
नारायणे तुरीयाख्ये भगवच्छब्दशब्दिते ।
मनो मय्यादधद् योगी मद्धर्मा वशितामियात् ॥ १६ ॥
nārāyaṇe turīyākhye
bhagavac-chabda-śabdite
mano mayy ādadhad yogī
mad-dharmā vaśitām iyāt
Synonyms
nārāyaṇe — in the Supreme Lord, Nārāyaṇa; turīya-ākhye — known as the fourth, beyond the three modes of material nature; bhagavat — full of all opulences; śabda-śabdite — known by the word; manaḥ — the mind; mayi — in Me; ādadhat — placing; yogī — the yogī; mat-dharmā — being endowed with My nature; vaśitām — the mystic opulence called vaśitā; iyāt — may obtain.

Translation
The yogī who places his mind in My form of Nārāyaṇa, known as the fourth factor, full of all opulences, becomes endowed with My nature and thus obtains the mystic perfection called vaśitā.

Text 17
निर्गुणे ब्रह्मणि मयि धारयन् विशदं मन: ।
परमानन्दमाप्नोति यत्र कामोऽवसीयते ॥ १७ ॥
nirguṇe brahmaṇi mayi
dhārayan viśadaṁ manaḥ
paramānandam āpnoti
yatra kāmo ’vasīyate
Synonyms
nirguṇe — without qualities; brahmaṇi — in Brahman; mayi — in Me; dhārayan — concentrating; viśadam — pure; manaḥ — the mind; parama-ānandam — the greatest happiness; āpnoti — obtains; yatra — wherein; kāmaḥ — desire; avasīyate — is completely fulfilled.

Translation
One who fixes his pure mind on Me in My manifestation as the impersonal Brahman obtains the greatest happiness, wherein all his desires are completely fulfilled.

Text 18
श्वेतद्वीपपतौ चित्तं शुद्धे धर्ममये मयि ।
धारयञ्छ्वेततां याति षडूर्मिरहितो नर: ॥ १८ ॥
śvetadvīpa-patau cittaṁ
śuddhe dharma-maye mayi
dhārayañ chvetatāṁ yāti
ṣaḍ-ūrmi-rahito naraḥ
Synonyms
śveta-dvīpa — of the white island, the abode of Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu; patau — in the Lord; cittam — consciousness; śuddhe — in the personification of goodness; dharma-maye — in He who is always situated in piety; mayi — in Me; dhārayan — concentrating; śvetatām — pure existence; yāti — obtains; ṣaṭ-ūrmi — the six waves of material disturbance; rahitaḥ — freed from; naraḥ — a person.

Translation
A human being who concentrates on Me as the upholder of religious principles, the personification of purity and the Lord of Śvetadvīpa obtains the pure existence in which he is freed from the six waves of material disturbance, namely hunger, thirst, decay, death, grief and illusion.

Text 19
मय्याकाशात्मनि प्राणे मनसा घोषमुद्वहन् ।
तत्रोपलब्धा भूतानां हंसो वाच: श‍ृणोत्यसौ ॥ १९ ॥
mayy ākāśātmani prāṇe
manasā ghoṣam udvahan
tatropalabdhā bhūtānāṁ
haṁso vācaḥ śṛṇoty asau
Synonyms
mayi — in Me; ākāśa-ātmani — in the personification of the sky; prāṇe — in the life air; manasā — with the mind; ghoṣam — the transcendental sound; udvahan — concentrating on; tatra — there in the sky; upalabdhāḥ — perceived; bhūtānām — of all living entities; haṁsaḥ — the purified living entity; vācaḥ — words or speaking; śṛṇoti — hears; asau — he.

Translation
That purified living entity who fixes his mind on the extraordinary sound vibrations occurring within Me as the personified sky and total life air is then able to perceive within the sky the speaking of all living entities.

Text 20
चक्षुस्त्वष्टरि संयोज्य त्वष्टारमपि चक्षुषि ।
मां तत्र मनसा ध्यायन् विश्वं पश्यति दूरत: ॥ २० ॥
cakṣus tvaṣṭari saṁyojya
tvaṣṭāram api cakṣuṣi
māṁ tatra manasā dhyāyan
viśvaṁ paśyati dūrataḥ
Synonyms
cakṣuḥ — the eyes; tvaṣṭari — in the sun; saṁyojya — merging; tvaṣṭāram — the sun; api — also; cakṣuṣi — in one’s eyes; mām — Me; tatra — there, in the mutual merging of sun and eye; manasā — with the mind; dhyāyan — meditating; viśvam — everything; paśyati — he sees; dūrataḥ — far away.

Translation
Merging one’s sight into the sun planet and then the sun planet into one’s eyes, one should meditate on Me as existing within the combination of sun and vision; thus one acquires the power to see any distant thing.

Text 21
मनो मयि सुसंयोज्य देहं तदनुवायुना ।
मद्धारणानुभावेन तत्रात्मा यत्र वै मन: ॥ २१ ॥
mano mayi su-saṁyojya
dehaṁ tad-anuvāyunā
mad-dhāraṇānubhāvena
tatrātmā yatra vai manaḥ
Synonyms
manaḥ — the mind; mayi — in Me; su-saṁyojya — completely absorbing; deham — the material body; tat — the mind; anu-vāyunā — by the wind that follows; mat-dhāraṇā — of meditation in Me; anubhāvena — by the potency; tatra — there; ātmā — the material body (goes); yatra — wherever; vai — certainly; manaḥ — the mind (goes).

Translation
The yogī who completely absorbs his mind in Me, and who then makes use of the wind that follows the mind to absorb the material body in Me, obtains through the potency of meditation on Me the mystic perfection by which his body immediately follows his mind wherever it goes.

Text 22
यदा मन उपादाय यद् यद् रूपं बुभूषति ।
तत्तद् भवेन्मनोरूपं मद्योगबलमाश्रय: ॥ २२ ॥
yadā mana upādāya
yad yad rūpaṁ bubhūṣati
tat tad bhaven mano-rūpaṁ
mad-yoga-balam āśrayaḥ
Synonyms
yadā — when; manaḥ — the mind; upādāya — applying; yat yat — whatever; rūpam — form; bubhūṣati — one desires to assume; tat tat — that very form; bhavet — may appear; manaḥ-rūpam — the form desired by the mind; mat-yoga-balam — My inconceivable mystic potency, by which I manifest innumerable forms; āśrayaḥ — being the shelter.

Translation
When the yogī, applying his mind in a certain way, desires to assume a particular form, that very form immediately appears. Such perfection is possible by absorbing the mind in the shelter of My inconceivable mystic potency, by which I assume innumerable forms.

Text 23
परकायं विशन् सिद्ध आत्मानं तत्र भावयेत् ।
पिण्डं हित्वा विशेत् प्राणो वायुभूत: षडङ्‍‍घ्रिवत् ॥ २३ ॥
para-kāyaṁ viśan siddha
ātmānaṁ tatra bhāvayet
piṇḍaṁ hitvā viśet prāṇo
vāyu-bhūtaḥ ṣaḍaṅghri-vat
Synonyms
para — of another; kāyam — the body; viśan — desiring to enter; siddhaḥ — one perfected in yoga practice; ātmānam — oneself; tatra — in that body; bhāvayet — imagines; piṇḍam — one’s own gross body; hitvā — giving up; viśet — one should enter; prāṇaḥ — in the subtle body; vāyu-bhūtaḥ — becoming just like the wind; ṣaṭ-aṅghri-vat — like the bee, who easily moves from one flower to another.

Translation
When a perfect yogī desires to enter another’s body, he should meditate upon himself within the other body, and then, giving up his own gross body, he should enter the other’s body through the pathways of air, as easily as a bee leaves one flower and flies into another.

Text 24
पार्ष्ण्यापीड्य गुदं प्राणं हृदुर:कण्ठमूर्धसु ।
आरोप्य ब्रह्मरन्ध्रेण ब्रह्म नीत्वोत्सृजेत्तनुम् ॥ २४ ॥
pārṣṇyāpīḍya gudaṁ prāṇaṁ
hṛd-uraḥ-kaṇṭha-mūrdhasu
āropya brahma-randhreṇa
brahma nītvotsṛjet tanum
Synonyms
pārṣṇyā — with the heel of the foot; āpīḍya — blocking; gudam — the anus; prāṇam — the vital air carrying the living entity; hṛt — from the heart; uraḥ — to the chest; kaṇṭha — to the neck; mūrdhasu — and to the head; āropya — placing; brahma-randhreṇa — by the spiritual seat at the top of the head; brahma — to the spiritual world or impersonal Brahman (or any other destination one has selected); nītvā — leading (the soul); utsṛjet — one should give up; tanum — the material body.

Translation
The yogī who has achieved the mystic perfection called svacchanda-mṛtyu blocks the anus with the heel of the foot and then lifts the soul from the heart to the chest, to the neck and finally to the head. Situated within the brahma-randhra, the yogī then gives up his material body and guides the spirit soul to the selected destination.

Text 25
विहरिष्यन् सुराक्रीडे मत्स्थं सत्त्वं विभावयेत् ।
विमानेनोपतिष्ठन्ति सत्त्ववृत्ती: सुरस्‍त्रिय: ॥ २५ ॥
vihariṣyan surākrīḍe
mat-sthaṁ sattvaṁ vibhāvayet
vimānenopatiṣṭhanti
sattva-vṛttīḥ sura-striyaḥ
Synonyms
vihariṣyan — desiring to enjoy; sura — of the demigods; ākrīḍe — in the pleasure gardens; mat — in Me; stham — situated; sattvam — the mode of goodness; vibhāvayet — one should meditate on; vimānena — by airplane; upatiṣṭhanti — they arrive; sattva — in the mode of goodness; vṛttīḥ — appearing; sura — of the demigods; striyaḥ — the women.

Translation
The yogī who desires to enjoy in the pleasure gardens of the demigods should meditate on the purified mode of goodness, which is situated within Me, and then the heavenly women, generated from the mode of goodness, will approach him in airplanes.

Text 26
यथा सङ्कल्पयेद् बुद्ध्या यदा वा मत्पर: पुमान् ।
मयि सत्ये मनो युञ्जंस्तथा तत् समुपाश्न‍ुते ॥ २६ ॥
yathā saṅkalpayed buddhyā
yadā vā mat-paraḥ pumān
mayi satye mano yuñjaṁs
tathā tat samupāśnute
Synonyms
yathā — by which means; saṅkalpayet — one may determine or resolve; buddhyā — by the mind; yadā — when; vā — or; mat-paraḥ — having faith in Me; pumān — the yogī; mayi — in Me; satye — whose desire always becomes truth; manaḥ — the mind; yuñjan — absorbing; tathā — by that means; tat — that very purpose; samupāśnute — he obtains.

Translation
A yogī who has faith in Me, absorbing his mind in Me and knowing that My purpose is always fulfilled, will always achieve his purpose by the very means he has determined to follow.

Text 27
यो वै मद्भ‍ावमापन्न ईशितुर्वशितु: पुमान् ।
कुतश्चिन्न विहन्येत तस्य चाज्ञा यथा मम ॥ २७ ॥
yo vai mad-bhāvam āpanna
īśitur vaśituḥ pumān
kutaścin na vihanyeta
tasya cājñā yathā mama
Synonyms
yaḥ — one who (a yogī); vai — indeed; mat — from Me; bhāvam — nature; āpannaḥ — achieved; īśituḥ — from the supreme ruler; vaśituḥ — the supreme controller; pumān — a person (yogī); kutaścit — in any way; na vihanyeta — cannot be frustrated; tasya — his; ca — also; ājñā — order, command; yathā — just as; mama — Mine.

Translation
A person who perfectly meditates on Me acquires My nature of being the supreme ruler and controller. His order, like Mine, can never be frustrated by any means.

Text 28
मद्भ‍क्त्या शुद्धसत्त्वस्य योगिनो धारणाविद: ।
तस्य त्रैकालिकी बुद्धिर्जन्ममृत्यूपबृंहिता ॥ २८ ॥
mad-bhaktyā śuddha-sattvasya
yogino dhāraṇā-vidaḥ
tasya trai-kālikī buddhir
janma-mṛtyūpabṛṁhitā
Synonyms
mat-bhaktyā — by devotion to Me; śuddha-sattvasya — of one whose existence is purified; yoginaḥ — of a yogī; dhāraṇā-viduḥ — who knows the process of meditation; tasya — of him; trai-kālikī — functioning in three phases of time, namely past, present and future; buddhiḥ — intelligence; janma-mṛtyu — birth and death; upabṛṁhitā — including.

Translation
A yogī who has purified his existence by devotion to Me and who thus expertly knows the process of meditation obtains knowledge of past, present and future. He can therefore see the birth and death of himself and others.

Text 29
अग्‍न्यादिभिर्न हन्येत मुनेर्योगमयं वपु: ।
मद्योगशान्तचित्तस्य यादसामुदकं यथा ॥ २९ ॥
agny-ādibhir na hanyeta
muner yoga-mayaṁ vapuḥ
mad-yoga-śānta-cittasya
yādasām udakaṁ yathā
Synonyms
agni — by fire; ādibhiḥ — and so on (sun, water, poison, etc.); na — not; hanyeta — can be injured; muneḥ — of a wise yogī; yoga-mayam — fully cultivated in yoga science; vapuḥ — the body; mat-yoga — by devotional connection with Me; śānta — pacified; cittasya — whose consciousness; yādasām — of the aquatics; udakam — water; yathā — just as.

Translation
Just as the bodies of aquatics cannot be injured by water, similarly, the body of a yogī whose consciousness is pacified by devotion to Me and who is fully developed in yoga science cannot be injured by fire, sun, water, poison, and so forth.

Text 30
मद्विभूतीरभिध्यायन् श्रीवत्सास्‍त्रविभूषिता: ।
ध्वजातपत्रव्यजनै: स भवेदपराजित: ॥ ३० ॥
mad-vibhūtīr abhidhyāyan
śrīvatsāstra-vibhūṣitāḥ
dhvajātapatra-vyajanaiḥ
sa bhaved aparājitaḥ
Synonyms
mat — My; vibhūtīḥ — opulent incarnations; abhidhyāyan — meditating upon; śrīvatsa — with the Lord’s Śrīvatsa opulence; astra — and weapons; vibhūṣitāḥ — decorated; dhvaja — with flags; ātapatra — with ceremonial umbrellas; vyajanaiḥ — and different types of fans; saḥ — he, the devotee-yogī; bhavet — becomes; aparājitaḥ — unconquerable by others.

Translation
My devotee becomes unconquerable by meditating on My opulent incarnations, which are decorated with Śrīvatsa and various weapons and are endowed with imperial paraphernalia such as flags, ornamental umbrellas and fans.

Text 31
उपासकस्य मामेवं योगधारणया मुने: ।
सिद्धय: पूर्वकथिता उपतिष्ठन्त्यशेषत: ॥ ३१ ॥
upāsakasya mām evaṁ
yoga-dhāraṇayā muneḥ
siddhayaḥ pūrva-kathitā
upatiṣṭhanty aśeṣataḥ
Synonyms
upāsakasya — of one who is worshiping; mām — Me; evam — thus; yoga-dhāraṇayā — by the process of mystic meditation; muneḥ — of a learned person; siddhayaḥ — the mystic perfections; pūrva — previously; kathitāḥ — described; upatiṣṭhanti — approach; aśeṣataḥ — in all respects.

Translation
A learned devotee who worships Me through yoga meditation certainly obtains in all respects the mystic perfections that I have described.

Text 32
जितेन्द्रियस्य दान्तस्य जितश्वासात्मनो मुने: ।
मद्धारणां धारयत: का सा सिद्धि: सुदुर्लभा ॥ ३२ ॥
jitendriyasya dāntasya
jita-śvāsātmano muneḥ
mad-dhāraṇāṁ dhārayataḥ
kā sā siddhiḥ su-durlabhā
Synonyms
jita-indriyasya — of one who has conquered his senses; dāntasya — who is disciplined and self-controlled; jita-śvāsa — who has conquered his breathing; ātmanaḥ — and conquered the mind; muneḥ — of such a sage; mat — in Me; dhāraṇām — meditation; dhārayataḥ — who is conducting; kā — what is; sā — that; siddhiḥ — perfection; su-durlabhā — which is very difficult to achieve.

Translation
For a sage who has conquered his senses, breathing and mind, who is self-controlled and always absorbed in meditation on Me, what mystic perfection could possibly be difficult to achieve?

Text 33
अन्तरायान् वदन्त्येता युञ्जतो योगमुत्तमम् ।
मया सम्पद्यमानस्य कालक्षपणहेतव: ॥ ३३ ॥
antarāyān vadanty etā
yuñjato yogam uttamam
mayā sampadyamānasya
kāla-kṣapaṇa-hetavaḥ
Synonyms
antarāyān — impediments; vadanti — they say; etāḥ — these mystic perfections; yuñjataḥ — of one engaging in; yogam — connection with the Absolute; uttamam — the supreme stage; mayā — with Me; sampadyamānasya — of one who is becoming completely opulent; kāla — of time; kṣapaṇa — of the interruption, waste; hetavaḥ — causes.

Translation
Learned experts in devotional service state that the mystic perfections of yoga that I have mentioned are actually impediments and are a waste of time for one who is practicing the supreme yoga, by which one achieves all perfection in life directly from Me.

Text 34
जन्मौषधितपोमन्त्रैर्यावतीरिह सिद्धय: ।
योगेनाप्नोति ता: सर्वा नान्यैर्योगगतिं व्रजेत् ॥ ३४ ॥
janmauṣadhi-tapo-mantrair
yāvatīr iha siddhayaḥ
yogenāpnoti tāḥ sarvā
nānyair yoga-gatiṁ vrajet
Synonyms
janma — by birth; auṣadhi — herbs; tapaḥ — austerities; mantraiḥ — and by mantras; yāvatīḥ — as many as there are; iha — in this world; siddhayaḥ — perfections; yogena — by devotional service to Me; āpnoti — one obtains; tāḥ — those; sarvāḥ — all of them; na — not; anyaiḥ — by other methods; yoga-gatim — the actual perfection of yoga; vrajet — one can achieve.

Translation
Whatever mystic perfections can be achieved by good birth, herbs, austerities and mantras can all be achieved by devotional service to Me; indeed, one cannot achieve the actual perfection of yoga by any other means.

Text 35
सर्वासामपि सिद्धीनां हेतु: पतिरहं प्रभु: ।
अहं योगस्य साङ्ख्यस्य धर्मस्य ब्रह्मवादिनाम् ॥ ३५ ॥
sarvāsām api siddhīnāṁ
hetuḥ patir ahaṁ prabhuḥ
ahaṁ yogasya sāṅkhyasya
dharmasya brahma-vādinām
Synonyms
sarvāsām — of all of them; api — indeed; siddhīnām — of the mystic perfections; hetuḥ — the cause; patiḥ — the protector; aham — I am; prabhuḥ — the Lord; aham — I; yogasya — of unalloyed meditation on Me; sāṅkhyasya — of analytic knowledge; dharmasya — of work executed without personal desire; brahma-vādinām — of the learned community of Vedic teachers.

Translation
My dear Uddhava, I am the cause, the protector and the Lord of all mystic perfections, of the yoga system, of analytic knowledge, of pure activity and of the community of learned Vedic teachers.

Text 36
अहमात्मान्तरो बाह्योऽनावृत: सर्वदेहिनाम् ।
यथा भूतानि भूतेषु बहिरन्त: स्वयं तथा ॥ ३६ ॥
aham ātmāntaro bāhyo
’nāvṛtaḥ sarva-dehinām
yathā bhūtāni bhūteṣu
bahir antaḥ svayaṁ tathā
Synonyms
aham — I; ātmā — the Supreme Lord; āntaraḥ — existing within as the Supersoul; bāhyaḥ — existing externally in My all-pervading feature; anāvṛtaḥ — uncovered; sarva-dehinām — of all living entities; yathā — just as; bhūtāni — the material elements; bhūteṣu — among living entities; bahiḥ — externally; antaḥ — internally; svayam — Myself; tathā — in the same way.

Translation
Just as the same material elements exist within and outside of all material bodies, similarly, I cannot be covered by anything else. I exist within everything as the Supersoul and outside of everything in My all-pervading feature.