Text 1
श्रीउद्धव उवाच
त्वं ब्रह्म परमं साक्षादनाद्यन्तमपावृतम् ।
सर्वेषामपि भावानां त्राणस्थित्यप्ययोद्भ‍व: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-uddhava uvāca
tvaṁ brahma paramaṁ sākṣād
anādy-antam apāvṛtam
sarveṣām api bhāvānāṁ
trāṇa-sthity-apyayodbhavaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-uddhavaḥ uvāca — Śrī Uddhava said; tvam — You are; brahma — the greatest; paramam — the supreme; sākṣāt — Himself; anādi — without beginning; antam — without end; apāvṛtam — unlimited by anything else; sarveṣām — of all; api — indeed; bhāvānām — things which exist; trāṇa — the protector; sthiti — the life-giver; apyaya — the destruction; udbhavaḥ — and the creation.

Translation
Śrī Uddhava said: My dear Lord, You are beginningless and endless, the Absolute Truth Himself, unlimited by anything else. You are the protector and life-giver, the destruction and creation of all things that exist.

Text 2
उच्चावचेषु भूतेषु दुर्ज्ञेयमकृतात्मभि: ।
उपासते त्वां भगवन् याथातथ्येन ब्राह्मणा: ॥ २ ॥
uccāvaceṣu bhūteṣu
durjñeyam akṛtātmabhiḥ
upāsate tvāṁ bhagavan
yāthā-tathyena brāhmaṇāḥ
Synonyms
ucca — in the superior; avaceṣu — and the inferior; bhūteṣu — created objects and entities; durjñeyam — hard to understand; akṛta-ātmabhiḥ — by the impious; upāsate — they worship; tvām — You; bhagavan — my dear Lord; yāthā-tathyena — in truth; brāhmaṇāḥ — those dedicated to the Vedic conclusion.

Translation
My dear Lord, although it is difficult for the impious to understand that You are situated in all superior and inferior creations, those brāhmaṇas who are actual knowers of the Vedic conclusion worship You in truth.

Text 3
येषु येषु च भूतेषु भक्त्या त्वां परमर्षय: ।
उपासीना: प्रपद्यन्ते संसिद्धिं तद् वदस्व मे ॥ ३ ॥
yeṣu yeṣu ca bhūteṣu
bhaktyā tvāṁ paramarṣayaḥ
upāsīnāḥ prapadyante
saṁsiddhiṁ tad vadasva me
Synonyms
yeṣu yeṣu — in which various; ca — also; bhūteṣu — forms; bhaktyā — with devotion; tvām — You; parama-ṛṣayaḥ — the great sages; upāsīnāḥ — worshiping; prapadyante — achieve; saṁsiddhim — perfection; tat — that; vadasva — please speak; me — to me.

Translation
Please tell me of the perfections that great sages achieve by worshiping You with devotion. Also, kindly explain which of Your different forms they worship.

Text 4
गूढश्चरसि भूतात्मा भूतानां भूतभावन ।
न त्वां पश्यन्ति भूतानि पश्यन्तं मोहितानि ते ॥ ४ ॥
gūḍhaś carasi bhūtātmā
bhūtānāṁ bhūta-bhāvana
na tvāṁ paśyanti bhūtāni
paśyantaṁ mohitāni te
Synonyms
gūḍhaḥ — hidden; carasi — You are engaged; bhūta-ātmā — the Supersoul; bhūtānām — of the living entities; bhūta-bhāvana — O maintainer of all living beings; na — not; tvām — You; paśyanti — they see; bhūtāni — living entities; paśyantam — who are seeing; mohitāni — bewildered; te — by You.

Translation
O my Lord, maintainer of all, although You are the Supersoul of the living entities, You remain hidden. Thus being bewildered by You, the living entities cannot see You, although You are seeing them.

Text 5
या: काश्च भूमौ दिवि वै रसायां
विभूतयो दिक्षु महाविभूते ।
ता मह्यमाख्याह्यनुभावितास्ते
नमामि ते तीर्थपदाङ्‍‍घ्रिपद्मम् ॥ ५ ॥
yāḥ kāś ca bhūmau divi vai rasāyāṁ
vibhūtayo dikṣu mahā-vibhūte
tā mahyam ākhyāhy anubhāvitās te
namāmi te tīrtha-padāṅghri-padmam
Synonyms
yāḥ kāḥ — whatever; ca — also; bhūmau — on the earth; divi — in heaven; vai — indeed; rasāyām — in hell; vibhūtayaḥ — potencies; dikṣu — in all directions; mahā-vibhūte — O supremely potent; tāḥ — those; mahyam — unto me; ākhyāhi — please explain; anubhāvitāḥ — manifested; te — by You; namāmi — I offer my humble obeisances; te — Your; tīrtha-pada — the abode of all holy places; aṅghri-padmam — at the lotus feet.

Translation
O supremely potent Lord, please explain to me Your innumerable potencies, which You manifest on the earth, in heaven, in hell and indeed in all directions. I offer my humble obeisances at Your lotus feet, which are the shelter of all holy places.

Text 6
श्रीभगवानुवाच
एवमेतदहं पृष्ट: प्रश्न‍ं प्रश्न‍‍विदां वर ।
युयुत्सुना विनशने सपत्नैरर्जुनेन वै ॥ ६ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
evam etad ahaṁ pṛṣṭaḥ
praśnaṁ praśna-vidāṁ vara
yuyutsunā vinaśane
sapatnair arjunena vai
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; evam — thus; etat — this; aham — I; pṛṣṭaḥ — was asked; praśnam — the question or topic; praśna-vidām — of those who know how to inquire; vara — you who are the best; yuyutsunā — by him who desired to fight; vinaśane — in the Battle of Kurukṣetra; sapatnaiḥ — with his rivals or enemies; arjunena — by Arjuna; vai — indeed.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O best of those who know how to inquire, on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra, Arjuna, desiring to fight with his rivals, asked Me the same question that you are now posing.

Text 7
ज्ञात्वा ज्ञातिवधं गर्ह्यमधर्मं राज्यहेतुकम् ।
ततो निवृत्तो हन्ताहं हतोऽयमिति लौकिक: ॥ ७ ॥
jñātvā jñāti-vadhaṁ garhyam
adharmaṁ rājya-hetukam
tato nivṛtto hantāhaṁ
hato ’yam iti laukikaḥ
Synonyms
jñātvā — being aware; jñāti — of his relatives; vadham — the killing; garhyam — abominable; adharmam — irreligion; rājya — to acquire a kingdom; hetukam — having as the motive; tataḥ — from such activity; nivṛttaḥ — retired; haratā — the killer; aham — I am; hataḥ — killed; ayam — this group of relatives; iti — thus; laukikaḥ — mundane.

Translation
On the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra Arjuna thought that killing his relatives would be an abominable, irreligious activity, motivated only by his desire to acquire a kingdom. He therefore desisted from the battle, thinking, “I would be the killer of my relatives. They would be destroyed.” Thus Arjuna was afflicted with mundane consciousness.

Text 8
स तदा पुरुषव्याघ्रो युक्त्या मे प्रतिबोधित: ।
अभ्यभाषत मामेवं यथा त्वं रणमूर्धनि ॥ ८ ॥
sa tadā puruṣa-vyāghro
yuktyā me pratibodhitaḥ
abhyabhāṣata mām evaṁ
yathā tvaṁ raṇa-mūrdhani
Synonyms
saḥ — he; tadā — at that time; puruṣa-vyāghraḥ — the tiger among men; yuktyā — by logical argument; me — by Me; pratibodhitaḥ — enlightened in real knowledge; abhyabhāṣata — addressed questions; mām — to Me; evam — thus; yathā — just as; tvam — you; raṇa — of the battle; mūrdhani — in the front.

Translation
At that time I enlightened Arjuna, the tiger among men, with logical arguments, and thus in the front of the battle Arjuna addressed Me with questions in the same way that you are now inquiring.

Text 9
अहमात्मोद्धवामीषां भूतानां सुहृदीश्वर: ।
अहं सर्वाणि भूतानि तेषां स्थित्युद्भ‍वाप्यय: ॥ ९ ॥
aham ātmoddhavāmīṣāṁ
bhūtānāṁ suhṛd īśvaraḥ
ahaṁ sarvāṇi bhūtāni
teṣāṁ sthity-udbhavāpyayaḥ
Synonyms
aham — I am; ātmā — the Supersoul; uddhava — O Uddhava; amīṣām — of these; bhūtānām — living entities; su-hṛt — the well-wisher; īśvaraḥ — the supreme controller; aham — I am; sarvāṇi bhūtāni — all entities; teṣām — of them; sthiti — the maintenance; udbhava — creation; apyayaḥ — and annihilation.

Translation
My dear Uddhava, I am the Supersoul of all living entities, and therefore I am naturally their well-wisher and supreme controller. Being the creator, maintainer and annihilator of all entities, I am not different from them.

Text 10
अहं गतिर्गतिमतां काल: कलयतामहम् ।
गुणानां चाप्यहं साम्यं गुणिन्यौत्पत्तिको गुण: ॥ १० ॥
ahaṁ gatir gatimatāṁ
kālaḥ kalayatām aham
gunāṇāṁ cāpy ahaṁ sāmyaṁ
guṇiny autpattiko guṇaḥ
Synonyms
aham — I am; gatiḥ — the ultimate goal; gati-matām — of those who seek progress; kālaḥ — time; kalayatām — of those who exert control; aham — I am; gunāṇām — of the modes of material nature; ca — also; api — even; aham — I am; sāmyam — material equilibrium; guṇini — in the pious; autpattikaḥ — natural; guṇaḥ — virtue.

Translation
I am the ultimate goal of all those seeking progress, and I am time among those who exert control. I am the equilibrium of the modes of material nature, and I am natural virtue among the pious.

Text 11
गुणिनामप्यहं सूत्रं महतां च महानहम् ।
सूक्ष्माणामप्यहं जीवो दुर्जयानामहं मन: ॥ ११ ॥
guṇinām apy ahaṁ sūtraṁ
mahatāṁ ca mahān aham
sūkṣmāṇām apy ahaṁ jīvo
durjayānām ahaṁ manaḥ
Synonyms
guṇinām — among things possessing qualities; api — indeed; aham — I am; sūtram — the primary sūtra-tattva; mahatām — among great things; ca — also; mahān — the total material manifestation; aham — I am; sūkṣmāṇām — among subtle things; api — indeed; aham — I am; jīvaḥ — the spirit soul; durjayānām — among things difficult to conquer; aham — I am; manaḥ — the mind.

Translation
Among things possessing qualities I am the primary manifestation of nature, and among great things I am the total material creation. Among subtle things I am the spirit soul, and of things that are difficult to conquer I am the mind.

Text 12
हिरण्यगर्भो वेदानां मन्त्राणां प्रणवस्‍त्रिवृत् ।
अक्षराणामकारोऽस्मि पदानिच्छन्दसामहम् ॥ १२ ॥
hiraṇyagarbho vedānāṁ
mantrāṇāṁ praṇavas tri-vṛt
akṣarāṇām a-kāro ’smi
padāni cchandasām aham
Synonyms
hiraṇya-garbhaḥ — Lord Brahmā; vedānām — of the Vedas; mantrāṇām — of mantras; praṇavaḥ — the oṁkāra; tri-vṛt — consisting of three letters; akṣarāṇām — of letters; a-kāraḥ — the first letter, a; asmi — I am; padāni — the three-line Gāyatrī mantra; chandasām — among sacred meters; aham — I am.

Translation
Among the Vedas I am their original teacher, Lord Brahmā, and of all mantras I am the three-lettered oṁkāra. Among letters I am the first letter, “a,” and among sacred meters I am the Gāyatrī mantra.

Text 13
इन्द्रोऽहं सर्वदेवानां वसूनामस्मि हव्यवाट् ।
आदित्यानामहं विष्णू रुद्राणां नीललोहित: ॥ १३ ॥
indro ’haṁ sarva-devānāṁ
vasūnām asmi havya-vāṭ
ādityānām ahaṁ viṣṇū
rudrāṇāṁ nīla-lohitaḥ
Synonyms
indraḥ — Lord Indra; aham — I am; sarva-devānām — among the demigods; vasūnām — among the Vasus; asmi — I am; havya-vāṭ — the carrier of oblations, the fire-god Agni; ādityānām — among the sons of Aditi; aham — I am; viṣṇuḥ — Viṣṇu; rudrāṇām — among the Rudras; nīla-lohitaḥ — Lord Śiva.

Translation
Among the demigods I am Indra, and among the Vasus I am Agni, the god of fire. I am Viṣṇu among the sons of Aditi, and among the Rudras I am Lord Śiva.

Text 14
ब्रह्मर्षीणां भृगुरहं राजर्षीणामहं मनु: ।
देवर्षीणां नारदोऽहं हविर्धान्यस्मि धेनुषु ॥ १४ ॥
brahmarṣīṇāṁ bhṛgur ahaṁ
rājarṣīṇām ahaṁ manuḥ
devarṣīṇāṁ nārado ’haṁ
havirdhāny asmi dhenuṣu
Synonyms
brahma-ṛṣīṇām — among the saintly brāhmaṇas; bhṛguḥ — Bhṛgu Muni; aham — I am; rāja-ṛṣīṇām — among the saintly kings; aham — I am; manuḥ — Manu; deva-ṛṣīṇām — among the saintly demigods; nāradaḥ — Nārada Muni; aham — I am; havirdhānī — Kāmadhenu; asmi — I am; dhenuṣu — among cows.

Translation
Among saintly brāhmaṇas I am Bhṛgu Muni, and I am Manu among saintly kings. I am Nārada Muni among saintly demigods, and I am Kāmadhenu among cows.

Text 15
सिद्धेश्वराणां कपिल: सुपर्णोऽहं पतत्रिणाम् ।
प्रजापतीनां दक्षोऽहं पितृणामहमर्यमा ॥ १५ ॥
siddheśvarāṇāṁ kapilaḥ
suparṇo ’haṁ patatriṇām
prajāpatīnāṁ dakṣo ’haṁ
pitṝṇām aham aryamā
Synonyms
siddha-īśvarāṇām — among perfected beings; kapilaḥ — I am Lord Kapila; suparṇaḥ — Garuḍa; aham — I am; patatriṇām — among birds; prajāpatīnām — among the progenitors of mankind; dakṣaḥ — Dakṣa; aham — I am; pitṝṇām — among the forefathers; aham — I am; aryamā — Aryamā.

Translation
I am Lord Kapila among perfected beings and Garuḍa among birds. I am Dakṣa among the progenitors of mankind, and I am Aryamā among the forefathers.

Text 16
मां विद्ध्युद्धव दैत्यानां प्रह्लादमसुरेश्वरम् ।
सोमं नक्षत्रौषधीनां धनेशं यक्षरक्षसाम् ॥ १६ ॥
māṁ viddhy uddhava daityānāṁ
prahlādam asureśvaram
somaṁ nakṣatrauṣadhīnāṁ
dhaneśaṁ yakṣa-rakṣasām
Synonyms
mām — Me; viddhi — you should know; uddhava — My dear Uddhava; daityānām — among the sons of Diti, the demons; prahlādam — Prahlāda Mahārāja; asura-īśvaram — the lord of the asuras; somam — the moon; nakṣatra-oṣadhīnām — among the stars and herbs; dhana-īśam — the lord of wealth, Kuvera; yakṣa-rakṣasām — among the Yakṣas and Rākṣasas.

Translation
My dear Uddhava, among the demoniac sons of Diti know Me to be Prahlāda Mahārāja, the saintly lord of the asuras. Among the stars and herbs I am their lord, Candra (the moon), and among Yakṣas and Rākṣasas I am the lord of wealth, Kuvera.

Text 17
ऐरावतं गजेन्द्राणां यादसां वरुणं प्रभुम् ।
तपतां द्युमतां सूर्यं मनुष्याणां च भूपतिम् ॥ १७ ॥
airāvataṁ gajendrāṇāṁ
yādasāṁ varuṇaṁ prabhum
tapatāṁ dyumatāṁ sūryaṁ
manuṣyāṇāṁ ca bhū-patim
Synonyms
airāvatam — the elephant Airāvata; gaja-indrāṇām — among lordly elephants; yādasām — among aquatics; varuṇam — Varuṇa; prabhum — the lord of seas; tapatām — among things that heat; dyu-matām — among things that illuminate; sūryam — I am the sun; manuṣyāṇām — among human beings; ca — also; bhū-patim — the king.

Translation
I am Airāvata among lordly elephants, and among aquatics I am Varuṇa, the lord of the seas. Among all things that heat and illuminate I am the sun, and among human beings I am the king.

Text 18
उच्चै:श्रवास्तुरङ्गाणां धातूनामस्मि काञ्चनम् ।
यम: संयमतां चाहम् सर्पाणामस्मि वासुकि: ॥ १८ ॥
uccaiḥśravās turaṅgāṇāṁ
dhātūnām asmi kāñcanam
yamaḥ saṁyamatāṁ cāham
sarpāṇām asmi vāsukiḥ
Synonyms
uccaiḥśravāḥ — the horse Uccaiḥśravā; turaṅgāṇām — among horses; dhātūnām — among metals; asmi — I am; kāñcanam — gold; yamaḥ — Yamarāja; saṁyamatām — among those who punish and suppress; ca — also; aham — I; sarpāṇām — among serpents; asmi — am; vāsukiḥ — Vāsuki.

Translation
Among horses I am Uccaiḥśravā, and I am gold among metals. I am Yamarāja among those who suppress and punish, and among serpents I am Vāsuki.

Text 19
नागेन्द्राणामनन्तोऽहं मृगेन्द्र: श‍ृङ्गिदंष्ट्रिणाम् ।
आश्रमाणामहं तुर्यो वर्णानां प्रथमोऽनघ ॥ १९ ॥
nāgendrāṇām ananto ’haṁ
mṛgendraḥ śṛṅgi-daṁṣṭriṇām
āśramāṇām ahaṁ turyo
varṇānāṁ prathamo ’nagha
Synonyms
nāga-indrāṇām — among the best of many-hooded snakes; anantaḥ — Anantadeva; aham — I am; mṛga-indraḥ — the lion; śṛṅgi-daṁṣṭriṇām — among animals with sharp horns or teeth; āśramāṇām — among the four social orders of life; aham — I am; turyaḥ — the fourth, sannyāsa; varṇānām — among the four occupational orders; prathamaḥ — the first, the brāhmaṇas; anagha — O sinless one.

Translation
O sinless Uddhava, among the best of snakes I am Anantadeva, and among those animals with sharp horns or teeth I am the lion. Among the social orders I am the fourth, or the renounced order of life, and among the occupational divisions I am the first, the brāhmaṇas.

Text 20
तीर्थानां स्रोतसां गङ्गा समुद्र: सरसामहम् ।
आयुधानां धनुरहं त्रिपुरघ्नो धनुष्मताम् ॥ २० ॥
tīrthānāṁ srotasāṁ gaṅgā
samudraḥ sarasām aham
āyudhānāṁ dhanur ahaṁ
tripura-ghno dhanuṣmatām
Synonyms
tirthānām — among holy places; srotasām — among flowing things; gaṅgā — the sacred Ganges; samudraḥ — the ocean; sarasām — among steady bodies of water; aham — I am; āyudhānām — among weapons; dhanuḥ — the bow; aham — I am; tri-pura-ghnaḥ — Lord Śiva; dhanuḥ-matām — among those who wield the bow.

Translation
Among sacred and flowing things I am the holy Ganges, and among steady bodies of water I am the ocean. Among weapons I am the bow, and of the wielders of weapons I am Lord Śiva.

Text 21
धिष्ण्यानामस्म्यहं मेरुर्गहनानां हिमालय: ।
वनस्पतीनामश्वत्थ ओषधीनामहं यव: ॥ २१ ॥
dhiṣṇyānām asmy ahaṁ merur
gahanānāṁ himālayaḥ
vanaspatīnām aśvattha
oṣadhīnām ahaṁ yavaḥ
Synonyms
dhiṣṇyānām — residences; asmi — am; aham — I; meruḥ — Mount Sumeru; gahanānām — of impervious places; himālayaḥ — the Himālayas; vanaspatīnām — among trees; aśvatthaḥ — banyan tree; oṣadhīnām — among plants; aham — I; yavaḥ — barley.

Translation
Among residences I am Mount Sumeru, and of impervious places I am the Himālayas. Among trees I am the holy fig tree, and among plants I am those that bear grains.

Text 22
पुरोधसां वसिष्ठोऽहं ब्रह्मिष्ठानां बृहस्पति: ।
स्कन्दोऽहं सर्वसेनान्यामग्रण्यां भगवानज: ॥ २२ ॥
purodhasāṁ vasiṣṭho ’haṁ
brahmiṣṭhānāṁ bṛhaspatiḥ
skando ’haṁ sarva-senānyām
agraṇyāṁ bhagavān ajaḥ
Synonyms
purodhasām — among priests; vasiṣṭhaḥ — Vasiṣṭha Muni; aham — I am; brahmiṣṭhānām — among those fixed in the Vedic conclusion and purpose; bṛhaspatiḥ — Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods; skandaḥ — Kārtikeya; aham — I am; sarva-senānyām — among all military leaders; agraṇyām — among those advancing in pious life; bhagavān — the great personality; ajaḥ — Lord Brahmā.

Translation
Among priests I am Vasiṣṭha Muni, and among those highly situated in Vedic culture I am Bṛhaspati. I am Kārtikeya among great military leaders, and among those advancing in superior ways of life I am the great personality Lord Brahmā.

Text 23
यज्ञानां ब्रह्मयज्ञोऽहं व्रतानामविहिंसनम् ।
वाय्वग्‍न्यर्काम्बुवागात्मा शुचीनामप्यहं शुचि: ॥ २३ ॥
yajñānāṁ brahma-yajño ’haṁ
vratānām avihiṁsanam
vāyv-agny-arkāmbu-vāg-ātmā
śucīnām apy ahaṁ śuciḥ
Synonyms
yajñānām — of sacrifices; brahma-yajñaḥ — study of the Veda; aham — I am; vratānām — of vows; avihiṁsanam — nonviolence; vāyu — wind; agni — fire; arka — the sun; ambu — water; vāk — and speech; ātmā — personified; śucīnām — of all purifiers; api — indeed; aham — I am; śuciḥ — pure.

Translation
Among sacrifices I am study of the Veda, and I am nonviolence among vows. Among all things that purify I am the wind, fire, the sun, water and speech.

Text 24
योगानामात्मसंरोधो मन्त्रोऽस्मि विजिगीषताम् ।
आन्वीक्षिकी कौशलानां विकल्प: ख्यातिवादिनाम् ॥ २४ ॥
yogānām ātma-saṁrodho
mantro ’smi vijigīṣatām
ānvīkṣikī kauśalānāṁ
vikalpaḥ khyāti-vādinām
Synonyms
yogānām — among the eight stages of yoga practice (aṣṭāṅga); ātma-saṁrodhaḥ — the ultimate stage, samādhi, in which the soul is completely separated from illusion; mantraḥ — prudent political counsel; asmi — I am; vijigīṣatām — among those desiring victory; ānvīkṣikī — spiritual science, by which one can distinguish between matter and spirit; kauśalānām — among all processes of expert discrimination; vikalpaḥ — diversity of perception; khyāti-vādinām — among the speculative philosophers.

Translation
Among the eight progressive states of yoga I am the final stage, samādhi, in which the soul is completely separated from illusion. Among those desiring victory I am prudent political counsel, and among processes of expert discrimination I am the science of the soul, by which one distinguishes spirit from matter. Among all speculative philosophers I am diversity of perception.

Text 25
स्‍त्रीणां तु शतरूपाहं पुंसां स्वायम्भुवो मनु: ।
नारायणो मुनीनां च कुमारो ब्रह्मचारिणाम् ॥ २५ ॥
strīṇāṁ tu śatarūpāhaṁ
puṁsāṁ svāyambhuvo manuḥ
nārāyaṇo munīnāṁ ca
kumāro brahmacāriṇām
Synonyms
strīṇām — among ladies; tu — indeed; śatarūpā — Śatarūpā; aham — I am; puṁsām — among male personalities; svāyambhuvaḥ manuḥ — the great prajāpati Svāyambhuva Manu; nārāyaṇaḥ — the sage Nārāyaṇa; munīnām — among saintly sages; ca — also; kumāraḥ — Sanat-kumāra; brahmacāriṇām — among brahmacārīs.

Translation
Among ladies I am Śatarūpā, and among male personalities I am her husband, Svāyambhuva Manu. I am Nārāyaṇa among the sages and Sanat-kumāra among brahmacārīs.

Text 26
धर्माणामस्मि संन्यास: क्षेमाणामबहिर्मति: ।
गुह्यानां सुनृतं मौनं मिथुनानामजस्त्वहम् ॥ २६ ॥
dharmāṇām asmi sannyāsaḥ
kṣemāṇām abahir-matiḥ
guhyānāṁ su-nṛtaṁ maunaṁ
mithunānām ajas tv aham
Synonyms
dharmāṇām — among religious principles; asmi — I am; sannyāsaḥ — renunciation; kṣemāṇām — among all types of security; abahiḥ-matiḥ — awareness within (of the eternal soul); guhyānām — of secrets; sunṛtam — pleasant speech; maunam — silence; mithunānām — of sexual pairs; ajaḥ — Brahmā, the original prajāpati; tu — indeed; aham — I am.

Translation
Among religious principles I am renunciation, and of all types of security I am consciousness of the eternal soul within. Of secrets I am pleasant speech and silence, and among sexual pairs I am Brahmā.

Text 27
संवत्सरोऽस्म्यनिमिषामृतूनां मधुमाधवौ ।
मासानां मार्गशीर्षोऽहं नक्षत्राणां तथाभिजित् ॥ २७ ॥
saṁvatsaro ’smy animiṣām
ṛtūnāṁ madhu-mādhavau
māsānāṁ mārgaśīrṣo ’haṁ
nakṣatrāṇāṁ tathābhijit
Synonyms
saṁvatsaraḥ — the year; asmi — I am; animiṣām — among the vigilant cycles of time; ṛtūnām — among seasons; madhu-mādhavau — spring; māsānām — among months; mārgaśīrṣaḥ — Mārgaśīrṣa (November-December); aham — I am; nakṣatrāṇām — among asterisms; tathā — similarly; abhijit — Abhijit.

Translation
Among the vigilant cycles of time I am the year, and among seasons I am spring. Among months I am Mārgaśīrṣa, and among lunar houses I am the auspicious Abhijit.

Text 28
अहं युगानां च कृतं धीराणां देवलोऽसित: ।
द्वैपायनोऽस्मि व्यासानां कवीनां काव्य आत्मवान् ॥ २८ ॥
ahaṁ yugānāṁ ca kṛtaṁ
dhīrāṇāṁ devalo ’sitaḥ
dvaipāyano ’smi vyāsānāṁ
kavīnāṁ kāvya ātmavān
Synonyms
aham — I am; yugānām — among ages; ca — also; kṛtam — Satya-yuga; dhīrāṇām — among steady sages; devalaḥ — Devala; asitaḥ — Asita; dvaipāyanaḥ — Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana; asmi — I am; vyāsānām — among the editors of the Vedas; kavīnām — among learned scholars; kāvyaḥ — Śukrācārya; ātma-vān — learned in spiritual science.

Translation
Among ages I am the Satya-yuga, the age of truth, and among steady sages I am Devala and Asita. Among those who have divided the Vedas I am Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vedavyāsa, and among learned scholars I am Śukrācārya, the knower of spiritual science.

Text 29
वासुदेवो भगवतां त्वं तु भागवतेष्वहम् ।
किम्पुरुषाणां हनुमान् विद्याध्राणां सुदर्शन: ॥ २९ ॥
vāsudevo bhagavatāṁ
tvaṁ tu bhāgavateṣv aham
kimpuruṣānāṁ hanumān
vidyādhrāṇāṁ sudarśanaḥ
Synonyms
vāsudevaḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhagavatām — of those entitled to the name Bhagavān; tvam — you; tu — indeed; bhāgavateṣu — among My devotees; aham — I am; kimpuruṣāṇām — among the Kimpuruṣas; hanumān — Hanumān; vidyādhrāṇām — among the Vidyādharas; sudarśanaḥ — Sudarśana.

Translation
Among those entitled to the name Bhagavān I am Vāsudeva, and indeed, you, Uddhava, represent Me among the devotees. I am Hanumān among the Kimpuruṣas, and among the Vidyādharas I am Sudarśana.

Text 30
रत्नानां पद्मरागोऽस्मि पद्मकोश: सुपेशसाम् ।
कुशोऽस्मि दर्भजातीनां गव्यमाज्यं हवि:ष्वहम् ॥ ३० ॥
ratnānāṁ padma-rāgo ’smi
padma-kośaḥ su-peśasām
kuśo ’smi darbha-jātīnāṁ
gavyam ājyaṁ haviḥṣv aham
Synonyms
ratnānām — of jewels; padma-rāgaḥ — the ruby; asmi — I am; padma-kośaḥ — the lotus cup; su-peśasām — among beautiful things; kuśaḥ — the sacred kuśa grass; asmi — I am; darbha-jātīnām — among all types of grass; gavyam — cow products; ājyam — offering of ghee; haviḥṣu — among oblations; aham — I am.

Translation
Among jewels I am the ruby, and among beautiful things I am the lotus cup. Among all types of grass I am the sacred kuśa, and of oblations I am ghee and other ingredients obtained from the cow.

Text 31
व्यवसायिनामहं लक्ष्मी: कितवानां छलग्रह: ।
तितिक्षास्मि तितिक्षूणां सत्त्वं सत्त्ववतामहम् ॥ ३१ ॥
vyavasāyinām ahaṁ lakṣmīḥ
kitavānāṁ chala-grahaḥ
titikṣāsmi titikṣūṇāṁ
sattvaṁ sattvavatām aham
Synonyms
vyavasāyinām — of the enterprising; aham — I am; lakṣmīḥ — fortune; kitavānām — of cheaters; chala-grahaḥ — the gambling; titikṣā — the forgiveness; asmi — I am; titikṣūṇām — among the tolerant; sattvam — the goodness; sattva-vatām — among those in the mode of goodness; aham — I am.

Translation
Among the enterprising I am fortune, and among the cheaters I am gambling. I am the forgiveness of the tolerant and the good qualities of those in the mode of goodness.

Text 32
ओज: सहो बलवतां कर्माहं विद्धि सात्वताम् ।
सात्वतां नवमूर्तीनामादिमूर्तिरहं परा ॥ ३२ ॥
ojaḥ saho balavatāṁ
karmāhaṁ viddhi sātvatām
sātvatāṁ nava-mūrtīnām
ādi-mūrtir ahaṁ parā
Synonyms
ojaḥ — the sensory strength; sahaḥ — and mental strength; balavatām — of the strong; karma — the devotional activities; aham — I am; viddhi — please know; sātvatām — among the devotees; sātvatām — among those devotees; nava-mūrtīnām — who worship Me in nine forms; ādi-mūrtiḥ — the original form, Vāsudeva; aham — I am; parā — the Supreme.

Translation
Of the powerful I am bodily and mental strength, and I am the devotional activities of My devotees. My devotees worship Me in nine different forms, among which I am the original and primary Vāsudeva.

Text 33
विश्वावसु: पूर्वचित्तिर्गन्धर्वाप्सरसामहम् ।
भूधराणामहं स्थैर्यं गन्धमात्रमहं भुव: ॥ ३३ ॥
viśvāvasuḥ pūrvacittir
gandharvāpsarasām aham
bhūdharāṇām ahaṁ sthairyaṁ
gandha-mātram ahaṁ bhuvaḥ
Synonyms
viśvāvasuḥ — Viśvāvasu; pūrvacittiḥ — Pūrvacitti; gandharva-apsarasām — among the Gandharvas and Apsarās; aham — I am; bhūdharāṇām — of the mountains; aham — I am; sthairyam — the steadiness; gandha-mātram — the perception of aroma; aham — I am; bhuvaḥ — of the earth.

Translation
Among the Gandharvas I am Viśvāvasu, and I am Pūrvacitti among the heavenly Apsaras. I am the steadiness of mountains and the fragrant aroma of the earth.

Text 34
अपां रसश्च परमस्तेजिष्ठानां विभावसु: ।
प्रभा सूर्येन्दुताराणां शब्दोऽहं नभस: पर: ॥ ३४ ॥
apāṁ rasaś ca paramas
tejiṣṭhānāṁ vibhāvasuḥ
prabhā sūryendu-tārāṇāṁ
śabdo ’haṁ nabhasaḥ paraḥ
Synonyms
apām — of water; rasaḥ — the taste; ca — also; paramaḥ — excellent; tejiṣṭhānām — among most brilliant things; vibhāvasuḥ — the sun; prabhā — the effulgence; sūrya — of the sun; indu — the moon; tārāṇām — and the stars; śabdaḥ — the sound vibration; aham — I am; nabhasaḥ — of the sky; paraḥ — transcendental.

Translation
I am the sweet taste of water, and among brilliant things I am the sun. I am the effulgence of the sun, moon and stars, and I am the transcendental sound that vibrates in the sky.

Text 35
ब्रह्मण्यानां बलिरहं वीराणामहमर्जुन: ।
भूतानां स्थितिरुत्पत्तिरहं वै प्रतिसङ्क्रम: ॥ ३५ ॥
brahmaṇyānāṁ balir ahaṁ
vīrāṇām aham arjunaḥ
bhūtānāṁ sthitir utpattir
ahaṁ vai pratisaṅkramaḥ
Synonyms
brahmaṇyānām — of those dedicated to brahminical culture; baliḥ — Bali Mahārāja, the son of Virocana; aham — I am; vīrāṇām — of heroes; aham — I am; arjunaḥ — Arjuna; bhūtānām — of all living beings; sthitiḥ — the maintenance; utpattiḥ — the creation; aham — I am; vai — indeed; pratisaṅkramaḥ — the annihilation.

Translation
Among those dedicated to brahminical culture I am Bali Mahārāja, the son of Virocana, and I am Arjuna among heroes. Indeed, I am the creation, maintenance and annihilation of all living entities.

Text 36
गत्युक्त्युत्सर्गोपादानमानन्दस्पर्शलक्षणम् ।
आस्वादश्रुत्यवघ्राणमहं सर्वेन्द्रियेन्द्रियम् ॥ ३६ ॥
gaty-ukty-utsargopādānam
ānanda-sparśa-lakṣanam
āsvāda-śruty-avaghrāṇam
ahaṁ sarvendriyendriyam
Synonyms
gati — movement of the legs (walking, running, etc.); ukti — speech; utsarga — evacuation; upādānam — accepting with the hands; ānanda — the material pleasure of the sex organs; sparśa — touch; lakṣaṇam — sight; āsvāda — taste; śruti — hearing; avaghrāṇam — smell; aham — I am; sarva-indriya — of all the senses; indriyam — the potency to experience their objects.

Translation
I am the functions of the five working senses — the legs, speech, anus, hands and sex organs — as well as those of the five knowledge-acquiring senses — touch, sight, taste, hearing and smell. I am also the potency by which each of the senses experiences its particular sense object.

Text 37
पृथिवी वायुराकाश आपो ज्योतिरहं महान् ।
विकार: पुरुषोऽव्यक्तं रज: सत्त्वं तम: परम् ।
अहमेतत्प्रसङ्ख्यानं ज्ञानं तत्त्वविनिश्चय: ॥ ३७ ॥
pṛthivī vāyur ākāśa
āpo jyotir ahaṁ mahān
vikāraḥ puruṣo ’vyaktaṁ
rajaḥ sattvaṁ tamaḥ param
aham etat prasaṅkhyānaṁ
jñānaṁ tattva-viniścayaḥ
Synonyms
pṛthivī — the subtle form of earth, aroma; vāyuḥ — the subtle form of air, touch; ākāśaḥ — the subtle form of sky, sound; āpaḥ — the subtle form of water, taste; jyotiḥ — the subtle form of fire, form; aham — false ego; mahān — the mahat-tattva; vikāraḥ — the sixteen elements (earth, water, fire, air and sky, the five working senses, the five knowledge-acquiring senses and the mind); puruṣaḥ — the living entity; avyaktam — material nature, prakṛti; rajaḥ — the mode of passion; sattvam — the mode of goodness; tamaḥ — the mode of ignorance; param — the Supreme Lord; aham — I am; etat — this; prasaṅkhyānam — all that has been enumerated; jñānam — knowledge of the above-mentioned elements by individual symptoms; tattva-viniścayaḥ — steady conviction, which is the fruit of knowledge.

Translation
I am form, taste, aroma, touch and sound; false ego; the mahat-tattva; earth, water, fire, air and sky; the living entity; material nature; the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance; and the transcendental Lord. All these items, along with knowledge of their individual symptoms and the steady conviction that results from this knowledge, represent Me.

Text 38
मयेश्वरेण जीवेन गुणेन गुणिना विना ।
सर्वात्मनापि सर्वेण न भावो विद्यते क्व‍‍चित् ॥ ३८ ॥
mayeśvareṇa jīvena
guṇena guṇinā vinā
sarvātmanāpi sarveṇa
na bhāvo vidyate kvacit
Synonyms
mayā — Me; īśvareṇa — the Supreme Lord; jīvena — the living entity; guṇena — the modes of nature; guṇinā — the mahat-tattva; vinā — without; sarva-ātmanā — the soul of all that exists; api — indeed; sarveṇa — everything; na — not; bhāvaḥ — existence; vidyate — there is; kvacit — whatsoever.

Translation
As the Supreme Lord I am the basis of the living entity, of the modes of nature and of the mahat-tattva. Thus I am everything, and nothing whatsoever can exist without Me.

Text 39
सङ्ख्यानं परमाणूनां कालेन क्रियते मया ।
न तथा मे विभूतीनां सृजतोऽण्डानि कोटिश: ॥ ३९ ॥
saṅkhyānaṁ paramāṇūnāṁ
kālena kriyate mayā
na tathā me vibhūtīnāṁ
sṛjato ’ṇḍāni koṭiśaḥ
Synonyms
saṅkhyānam — counting; parama-aṇūnām — of the atoms; kālena — after some time; kriyate — is done; mayā — by Me; na — not; tathā — in the same way; me — of Me; vibhūtīnām — of the opulences; sṛjataḥ — who am creating; aṇḍāni — universes; koṭiśaḥ — by the innumerable millions.

Translation
Even though over a period of time I might count all the atoms of the universe, I could not count all of My opulences which I manifest within innumerable universes.

Text 40
तेज: श्री: कीर्तिरैश्वर्यं ह्रीस्त्याग: सौभगं भग: ।
वीर्यं तितिक्षा विज्ञानं यत्र यत्र स मेंऽशक: ॥ ४० ॥
tejaḥ śrīḥ kīrtir aiśvaryaṁ
hrīs tyāgaḥ saubhagaṁ bhagaḥ
vīryaṁ titikṣā vijñānaṁ
yatra yatra sa me ’ṁśakaḥ
Synonyms
tejaḥ — power; śrīḥ — beautiful, valuable things; kīrtiḥ — fame; aiśvaryam — opulence; hrīḥ — humility; tyāgaḥ — renunciation; saubhagam — that which pleases the mind and senses; bhagaḥ — good fortune; vīryam — strength; titikṣā — tolerance; vijñānam — spiritual knowledge; yatra yatra — wherever; saḥ — this; me — My; aṁśakaḥ — expansion.

Translation
Whatever power, beauty, fame, opulence, humility, renunciation, mental pleasure, fortune, strength, tolerance or spiritual knowledge there may be is simply an expansion of My opulence.

Text 41
एतास्ते कीर्तिता: सर्वा: सङ्‍क्षेपेण विभूतय: ।
मनोविकारा एवैते यथा वाचाभिधीयते ॥ ४१ ॥
etās te kīrtitāḥ sarvāḥ
saṅkṣepeṇa vibhūtayaḥ
mano-vikārā evaite
yathā vācābhidhīyate
Synonyms
etāḥ — these; te — to you; kīrtitāḥ — described; sarvāḥ — all; saṅkṣepeṇa — briefly; vibhūtayaḥ — spiritual opulences; manaḥ — of the mind; vikārāḥ — transformations; eva — indeed; ete — these; yathā — accordingly; vācā — by words; abhidhīyate — each is described.

Translation
I have briefly described to you all My spiritual opulences and also the extraordinary material features of My creation, which are perceived by the mind and defined in different ways according to circumstances.

Text 42
वाचं यच्छ मनो यच्छ प्राणान् यच्छेन्द्रियाणि च ।
आत्मानमात्मना यच्छ न भूय: कल्पसेऽध्वने ॥ ४२ ॥
vācaṁ yaccha mano yaccha
prāṇān yacchedriyāṇi ca
ātmānam ātmanā yaccha
na bhūyaḥ kalpase ’dhvane
Synonyms
vācam — speech; yaccha — control; manaḥ — the mind; yaccha — control; prāṇān — your breathing; yaccha — control; indriyāṇi — the senses; ca — also; ātmānam — the intelligence; ātmanā — by purified intelligence; yaccha — control; na — never; bhūyaḥ — again; kalpase — you will fall; adhvane — on the path of material existence.

Translation
Therefore, control your speaking, subdue the mind, conquer the life air, regulate the senses and through purified intelligence bring your rational faculties under control. In this way you will never again fall onto the path of material existence.

Text 43
यो वै वाङ्‍मनसी सम्यगसंयच्छन् धिया यति: ।
तस्य व्रतं तपो दानं स्रवत्यामघटाम्बुवत् ॥ ४३ ॥
yo vai vāṅ-manasī saṁyag
asaṁyacchan dhiyā yatiḥ
tasya vrataṁ tapo dānaṁ
sravaty āma-ghaṭāmbu-vat
Synonyms
yaḥ — one who; vai — certainly; vāk-manasī — the speech and mind; saṁyak — completely; asaṁyacchan — not controlling; dhiyā — by intelligence; yatiḥ — a transcendentalist; tasya — his; vratam — vows; tapaḥ — austerities; dānam — charity; sravati — run out; āma — unbaked; ghaṭa — in a pot; ambu-vat — like water.

Translation
A transcendentalist who does not completely control his words and mind by superior intelligence will find that his spiritual vows, austerities and charity flow away just as water flows out of an unbaked clay pot.

Text 44
तस्माद्वचोमन:प्राणान् नियच्छेन्मत्परायण: ।
मद्भ‍‍क्तियुक्तया बुद्ध्या तत: परिसमाप्यते ॥ ४४ ॥
tasmād vaco manaḥ prāṇān
niyacchen mat-parāyaṇaḥ
mad-bhakti-yuktayā buddhyā
tataḥ parisamāpyate
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; vacaḥ — words; manaḥ — the mind; prāṇān — the life airs; niyacchet — one should control; mat-parāyaṇaḥ — who is devoted to Me; mat — unto Me; bhakti — with devotion; yuktayā — endowed; buddhyā — by such intelligence; tataḥ — thus; parisamāpyate — one fulfills the mission of life.

Translation
Being surrendered to Me, one should control the speech, mind and life air, and then through loving devotional intelligence one will completely fulfill the mission of life.