Texts 1-2
श्रीउद्धव उवाच
यस्त्वयाभिहित: पूर्वं धर्मस्त्वद्भ‍‍क्तिलक्षण: ।
वर्णाश्रमाचारवतां सर्वेषां द्विपदामपि ॥ १ ॥
यथानुष्ठीयमानेन त्वयि भक्तिर्नृणां भवेत् ।
स्वधर्मेणारविन्दाक्ष तन् ममाख्यातुमर्हसि ॥ २ ॥
śrī-uddhava uvāca
yas tvayābhihitaḥ pūrvaṁ
dharmas tvad-bhakti-lakṣaṇaḥ
varṇāśramācāravatāṁ
sarveṣāṁ dvi-padām api
yathānuṣṭhīyamānena
tvayi bhaktir nṛṇāṁ bhavet
sva-dharmeṇāravindākṣa
tan mamākhyātum arhasi
Synonyms
śrī-uddhavaḥ uvāca — Śrī Uddhava said; yaḥ — which; tvayā — by You; abhihitaḥ — described; pūrvam — previously; dharmaḥ — religious principles; tvat-bhakti-lakṣaṇaḥ — characterized by devotional service to Your Lordship; varṇa-āśrama — of the varṇāśrama system; ācāravatām — of the faithful followers; sarveṣām — of all; dvi-padām — of ordinary human beings (who do not follow the varṇāśrama system); api — even; yathā — according to; anuṣṭhīyamānena — the process being executed; tvayi — in You; bhaktiḥ — loving service; nṛṇām — of human beings; bhavet — may be; sva-dharmeṇa — by one’s own occupational duty; aravinda-akṣa — O lotus-eyed one; tat — that; mama — to me; ākhyātum — to explain; arhasi — You ought.

Translation
Śrī Uddhava said: My dear Lord, previously You described the principles of devotional service that are to be practiced by followers of the varṇāśrama system and even ordinary, unregulated human beings. My dear lotus-eyed Lord, now please explain to me how all human beings can achieve loving service unto You by the execution of their prescribed duties.

Texts 3-4
पुरा किल महाबाहो धर्मं परमकं प्रभो ।
यत्तेन हंसरूपेण ब्रह्मणेऽभ्यात्थ माधव ॥ ३ ॥
स इदानीं सुमहता कालेनामित्रकर्शन ।
न प्रायो भविता मर्त्यलोके प्रागनुशासित: ॥ ४ ॥
purā kila mahā-bāho
dharmaṁ paramakaṁ prabho
yat tena haṁsa-rūpeṇa
brahmaṇe ’bhyāttha mādhava
sa idānīṁ su-mahatā
kālenāmitra-karśana
na prāyo bhavitā martya-
loke prāg anuśāsitaḥ
Synonyms
purā — previously; kila — indeed; mahā-bāho — O mighty-armed one; dharmam — religious principles; paramakam — bringing the greatest happiness; prabho — my Lord; yat — which; tena — by that; haṁsa-rūpeṇa — in the form of Lord Haṁsa; brahmaṇe — unto Lord Brahmā; abhyāttha — You spoke; mādhava — my dear Mādhava; saḥ — that (knowledge of religious principles); idānīm — presently; su-mahatā — after very long; kālena — time; amitra-karśana — O subduer of the enemy; na — not; prāyaḥ — generally; bhavitā — will exist; martya-loke — in human society; prāk — previously; anuśāsitaḥ — instructed.

Translation
My dear Lord, O mighty-armed one, previously in Your form of Lord Haṁsa You spoke to Lord Brahmā those religious principles that bring supreme happiness to the practitioner. My dear Mādhava, now much time has passed, and that which You previously instructed will soon practically cease to exist, O subduer of the enemy.

Texts 5-6
वक्ता कर्ताविता नान्यो धर्मस्याच्युत ते भुवि ।
सभायामपि वैरिञ्च्यां यत्र मूर्तिधरा: कला: ॥ ५ ॥
कर्त्रावित्रा प्रवक्त्रा च भवता मधुसूदन ।
त्यक्ते महीतले देव विनष्टं क: प्रवक्ष्यति ॥ ६ ॥
vaktā kartāvitā nānyo
dharmasyācyuta te bhuvi
sabhāyām api vairiñcyāṁ
yatra mūrti-dharāḥ kalāḥ
kartrāvitrā pravaktrā ca
bhavatā madhusūdana
tyakte mahī-tale deva
vinaṣṭaṁ kaḥ pravakṣyati
Synonyms
vaktā — speaker; kartā — creator; avitā — protector; na — not; anyaḥ — any other; dharmasya — of supreme religious principles; acyuta — my dear Acyuta; te — than You; bhuvi — on the earth; sabhāyām — in the assembly; api — even; vairiñcyām — of Lord Brahmā; yatra — wherein; mūrti-dharāḥ — in the personified form; kalāḥ — the Vedas; kartrā — by the creator; avitrā — by the protector; pravaktrā — by the speaker; ca — also; bhavatā — by Your Lordship; madhusūdana — my dear Madhusūdana; tyakte — when it is abandoned; mahī-tale — the earth; deva — my dear Lord; vinaṣṭam — those lost principles of religion; kaḥ — who; pravakṣyati — will speak.

Translation
My dear Lord Acyuta, there is no speaker, creator and protector of supreme religious principles other than Your Lordship, either on the earth or even in the assembly of Lord Brahmā, where the personified Vedas reside. Thus, my dear Lord Madhusūdana, when You, who are the very creator, protector and speaker of spiritual knowledge, abandon the earth, who will again speak this lost knowledge?

Text 7
तत्त्वं न: सर्वधर्मज्ञ धर्मस्त्वद्भ‍‍क्तिलक्षण: ।
यथा यस्य विधीयेत तथा वर्णय मे प्रभो ॥ ७ ॥
tat tvaṁ naḥ sarva-dharma-jña
dharmas tvad-bhakti-lakṣaṇaḥ
yathā yasya vidhīyeta
tathā varṇaya me prabho
Synonyms
tat — therefore; tvam — You; naḥ — among us (human beings); sarva-dharma-jña — O supreme knower of religious principles; dharmaḥ — the spiritual path; tvat-bhakti — by loving service to You; lakṣaṇaḥ — characterized; yathā — in which way; yasya — of whom; vidhīyeta — may be executed; tathā — in that way; varṇaya — please describe; me — unto me; prabho — my Lord.

Translation
Therefore, my Lord, since You are the knower of all religious principles, please describe to me the human beings who may execute the path of loving service to You and how such service is to be rendered.

Text 8
श्रीशुक उवाच
इत्थं स्वभृत्यमुख्येन पृष्ट: स भगवान् हरि: ।
प्रीत: क्षेमाय मर्त्यानां धर्मानाह सनातनान् ॥ ८ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
itthaṁ sva-bhṛtya-mukhyena
pṛṣṭaḥ sa bhagavān hariḥ
prītaḥ kṣemāya martyānāṁ
dharmān āha sanātanān
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ittham — thus; sva-bhṛtya-mukhyena — by the best of His devotees; pṛṣṭaḥ — questioned; saḥ — He; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hariḥ — Śrī Kṛṣṇa; prītaḥ — being pleased; kṣemāya — for the highest welfare; martyānām — of all conditioned souls; dharmān — religious principles; āha — spoke; sanātanān — eternal.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Śrī Uddhava, the best of devotees, thus inquired from the Lord. Hearing his question, the Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, was pleased and for the welfare of all conditioned souls spoke those religious principles that are eternal.

Text 9
श्रीभगवानुवाच
धर्म्य एष तव प्रश्न‍ो नै:श्रेयसकरो नृणाम् ।
वर्णाश्रमाचारवतां तमुद्धव निबोध मे ॥ ९ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
dharmya eṣa tava praśno
naiḥśreyasa-karo nṛṇām
varṇāśramācāravatāṁ
tam uddhava nibodha me
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; dharmyaḥ — faithful to religious principles; eṣaḥ — this; tava — your; praśnaḥ — question; naiḥśreyasa-karaḥ — the cause of pure devotional service; nṛṇām — for ordinary human beings; varṇa-āśrama — the varṇāśrama system; ācāra-vatām — for those who faithfully follow; tam — those highest religious principles; uddhava — My dear Uddhava; nibodha — please learn; me — from Me.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, your question is faithful to religious principles and thus gives rise to the highest perfection in life, pure devotional service, for both ordinary human beings and the followers of the varṇāśrama system. Now please learn from Me those supreme religious principles.

Text 10
आदौ कृतयुगे वर्णो नृणां हंस इति स्मृत: ।
कृतकृत्या: प्रजा जात्या तस्मात् कृतयुगं विदु: ॥ १० ॥
ādau kṛta-yuge varṇo
nṛṇāṁ haṁsa iti smṛtaḥ
kṛta-kṛtyāḥ prajā jātyā
tasmāt kṛta-yugaṁ viduḥ
Synonyms
ādau — in the beginning (of the millennium); kṛta-yuge — in the Satya-yuga, or age of truth; varṇaḥ — the social class; nṛṇām — of human beings; haṁsaḥ — named haṁsa; iti — thus; smṛtaḥ — well known; kṛta-kṛtyāḥ — perfect in the execution of duties by complete surrender to the Supreme Lord; prajāḥ — the citizens; jātyā — automatically by birth; tasmāt — therefore; kṛta-yugam — Kṛta-yuga, or the age in which all duties are fulfilled; viduḥ — was thus known by the learned.

Translation
In the beginning, in Satya-yuga, there is only one social class, called haṁsa, to which all human beings belong. In that age all people are unalloyed devotees of the Lord from birth, and thus learned scholars call this first age Kṛta-yuga, or the age in which all religious duties are perfectly fulfilled.

Text 11
वेद: प्रणव एवाग्रे धर्मोऽहं वृषरूपधृक् ।
उपासते तपोनिष्ठा हंसं मां मुक्तकिल्बिषा: ॥ ११ ॥
vedaḥ praṇava evāgre
dharmo ’haṁ vṛṣa-rūpa-dhṛk
upāsate tapo-niṣṭhā
haṁsaṁ māṁ mukta-kilbiṣāḥ
Synonyms
vedaḥ — the Veda; praṇavaḥ — the sacred syllable om; eva — indeed; agre — in Satya-yuga; dharmaḥ — the object of mental activities; aham — I; vṛṣa-rūpa-dhṛk — bearing the form of the bull of religion; upāsate — they worship; tapaḥ-niṣṭhāḥ — fixed in austerity; haṁsam — Lord Haṁsa; mām — Me; mukta — freed from; kilbiṣāḥ — all sins.

Translation
In Satya-yuga the undivided Veda is expressed by the syllable om, and I am the only object of mental activities. I become manifest as the four-legged bull of religion, and thus the inhabitants of Satya-yuga, fixed in austerity and free from all sins, worship Me as Lord Haṁsa.

Text 12
त्रेतामुखे महाभाग प्राणान्मे हृदयात्‍त्रयी ।
विद्या प्रादुरभूत्तस्या अहमासं त्रिवृन्मख: ॥ १२ ॥
tretā-mukhe mahā-bhāga
prāṇān me hṛdayāt trayī
vidyā prādurabhūt tasyā
aham āsaṁ tri-vṛn makhaḥ
Synonyms
tretā-mukhe — at the beginning of Tretā-yuga; mahā-bhāga — O greatly fortunate one; prāṇāt — from the abode of prāṇa, or the life air; me — My; hṛdayāt — from the heart; trayī — the threefold; vidyā — Vedic knowledge; prādurabhūt — appeared; tasyāḥ — from that knowledge; aham — I; āsam — appeared; tri-vṛt — in three divisions; makhaḥ — sacrifice.

Translation
O greatly fortunate one, at the beginning of Tretā-yuga Vedic knowledge appeared from My heart, which is the abode of the air of life, in three divisions — as Ṛg, Sāma and Yajur. Then from that knowledge I appeared as threefold sacrifice.

Text 13
विप्रक्षत्रियविट्‍शूद्रा मुखबाहूरुपादजा: ।
वैराजात् पुरुषाज्जाता य आत्माचारलक्षणा: ॥ १३ ॥
vipra-kṣatriya-viṭ-śūdrā
mukha-bāhūru-pāda-jāḥ
vairājāt puruṣāj jātā
ya ātmācāra-lakṣaṇāḥ
Synonyms
vipra — brāhmaṇas; kṣatriya — kṣatriyas, the martial class; viṭ — vaiśyas, mercantile men; śūdrāḥ — śūdras, workers; mukha — from the mouth; bāhu — arms; ūru — thighs; pāda — and legs; jāḥ — born; vairājāt — from the universal form; puruṣāt — from the Personality of Godhead; jātāḥ — generated; ye — who; ātma — personal; ācāra — by activities; lakṣaṇāḥ — recognized.

Translation
In Tretā-yuga the four social orders were manifested from the universal form of the Personality of Godhead. The brāhmaṇas appeared from the Lord’s face, the kṣatriyas from the Lord’s arms, the vaiśyas from the Lord’s thighs and the śūdras from the legs of that mighty form. Each social division was recognized by its particular duties and behavior.

Text 14
गृहाश्रमो जघनतो ब्रह्मचर्यं हृदो मम ।
वक्ष:स्थलाद्वनेवास: संन्यास: शिरसि स्थित: ॥ १४ ॥
gṛhāśramo jaghanato
brahmacaryaṁ hṛdo mama
vakṣaḥ-sthalād vane-vāsaḥ
sannyāsaḥ śirasi sthitaḥ
Synonyms
gṛha-āśramaḥ — married life; jaghanataḥ — from the loins; brahmacaryam — celibate student life; hṛdaḥ — from the heart; mama — My; vakṣaḥ-sthalāt — from the chest; vane — in the forest; vāsaḥ — dwelling; sannyāsaḥ — the renounced order of life; śirasi — in the head; sthitaḥ — situated.

Translation
The married order of life appeared from the loins of My universal form, and the celibate students came from My heart. The forest-dwelling retired order of life appeared from My chest, and the renounced order of life was situated within the head of My universal form.

Text 15
वर्णानामाश्रमाणां च जन्मभूम्यनुसारिणी: ।
आसन् प्रकृतयो नृणां नीचैर्नीचोत्तमोत्तमा: ॥ १५ ॥
varṇānām āśramāṇāṁ ca
janma-bhūmy-anusāriṇīḥ
āsan prakṛtayo nṝnāṁ
nīcair nīcottamottamāḥ
Synonyms
varṇānām — of the occupational divisions; āśramāṇām — of the social divisions; ca — also; janma — of birth; bhūmi — the situation; anusāriṇīḥ — according to; āsan — appeared; prakṛtayaḥ — the natures; nṝṇām — of human beings; nīcaiḥ — by inferior background; nīca — inferior nature; uttama — by superior background; uttamāḥ — superior natures.

Translation
The various occupational and social divisions of human society appeared according to inferior and superior natures manifest in the situation of the individual’s birth.

Text 16
शमो दमस्तप: शौचं सन्तोष: क्षान्तिरार्जवम् ।
मद्भ‍‍क्तिश्च दया सत्यं ब्रह्मप्रकृतयस्त्विमा: ॥ १६ ॥
śamo damas tapaḥ śaucaṁ
santoṣaḥ kṣāntir ārjavam
mad-bhaktiś ca dayā satyaṁ
brahma-prakṛtayas tv imāḥ
Synonyms
śamaḥ — peacefulness; damaḥ — sense control; tapaḥ — austerity; śaucam — cleanliness; santoṣaḥ — full satisfaction; kṣāntiḥ — forgiveness; ārjavam — simplicity and straightforwardness; mat-bhaktiḥ — devotional service unto Me; ca — also; dayā — mercy; satyam — truth; brahma — of the brāhmaṇas; prakṛtayaḥ — the natural qualities; tu — indeed; imāḥ — these.

Translation
Peacefulness, self-control, austerity, cleanliness, satisfaction, tolerance, simple straightforwardness, devotion to Me, mercy and truthfulness are the natural qualities of the brāhmaṇas.

Text 17
तेजो बलं धृति: शौर्यं तितिक्षौदार्यमुद्यम: ।
स्थैर्यं ब्रह्मण्यमैश्वर्यं क्षत्रप्रकृतयस्त्विमा: ॥ १७ ॥
tejo balaṁ dhṛtiḥ śauryaṁ
titikṣaudāryam udyamaḥ
sthairyaṁ brahmanyam aiśvaryaṁ
kṣatra-prakṛtayas tv imāḥ
Synonyms
tejaḥ — dynamic power; balam — bodily strength; dhṛtiḥ — determination; śauryam — heroism; titikṣā — tolerance; audāryam — generosity; udyamaḥ — endeavor; sthairyam — steadiness; brahmaṇyam — being always eager to serve the brāhmaṇas; aiśvaryam — leadership; kṣatra — of the kṣatriyas; prakṛtayaḥ — the natural qualities; tu — indeed; imāḥ — these.

Translation
Dynamic power, bodily strength, determination, heroism, tolerance, generosity, great endeavor, steadiness, devotion to the brāhmaṇas and leadership are the natural qualities of the kṣatriyas.

Text 18
आस्तिक्यं दाननिष्ठा च अदम्भो ब्रह्मसेवनम् ।
अतुष्टिरर्थोपचयैर्वैश्यप्रकृतयस्त्विमा: ॥ १८ ॥
āstikyaṁ dāna-niṣṭhā ca
adambho brahma-sevanam
atuṣṭir arthopacayair
vaiśya-prakṛtayas tv imāḥ
Synonyms
āstikyam — faith in Vedic civilization; dāna-niṣṭhā — dedicated to charity; ca — also; adambhaḥ — being without hypocrisy; brahma-sevanam — service to the brāhmaṇas; atuṣṭiḥ — remaining dissatisfied; artha — of money; upacayaiḥ — by the accumulation; vaiśya — of the vaiśyas; prakṛtayaḥ — the natural qualities; tu — indeed; imāḥ — these.

Translation
Faith in Vedic civilization, dedication to charity, freedom from hypocrisy, service to the brāhmaṇas and perpetually desiring to accumulate more money are the natural qualities of the vaiśyas.

Text 19
शुश्रूषणं द्विजगवां देवानां चाप्यमायया ।
तत्र लब्धेन सन्तोष: शूद्रप्रकृतयस्त्विमा: ॥ १९ ॥
śuśrūṣaṇaṁ dvija-gavāṁ
devānāṁ cāpy amāyayā
tatra labdhena santoṣaḥ
śūdra-prakṛtayas tv imāḥ
Synonyms
śuśrūṣaṇam — service; dvija — of the brāhmaṇas; gavām — of the cows; devānām — of worshipable personalities such as the demigods and the spiritual master; ca — also; api — indeed; amāyayā — without duplicity; tatra — in such service; labdhena — with that which is obtained; santoṣaḥ — complete satisfaction; śūdra — of the śūdras; prakṛtayaḥ — the natural qualities; tu — indeed; imāḥ — these.

Translation
Service without duplicity to the brāhmaṇas, cows, demigods and other worshipable personalities, and complete satisfaction with whatever income is obtained in such service, are the natural qualities of śūdras.

Text 20
अशौचमनृतं स्तेयं नास्तिक्यं शुष्कविग्रह: ।
काम: क्रोधश्च तर्षश्च स भावोऽन्त्यावसायिनाम् ॥ २० ॥
aśaucam anṛtaṁ steyaṁ
nāstikyaṁ śuṣka-vigrahaḥ
kāmaḥ krodhaś ca tarṣaś ca
sa bhāvo ’ntyāvasāyinām
Synonyms
aśaucam — dirtiness; anṛtam — dishonesty; steyam — thievery; nāstikyam — faithlessness; śuṣka-vigrahaḥ — useless quarreling; kāmaḥ — lust; krodhaḥ — anger; ca — also; tarṣaḥ — hankering; ca — also; saḥ — this; bhāvaḥ — the nature; antya — in the lowest position; avasāyinām — of those residing.

Translation
Dirtiness, dishonesty, thievery, faithlessness, useless quarrel, lust, anger and hankering constitute the nature of those in the lowest position outside the varṇāśrama system.

Text 21
अहिंसा सत्यमस्तेयमकामक्रोधलोभता ।
भूतप्रियहितेहा च धर्मोऽयं सार्ववर्णिक: ॥ २१ ॥
ahiṁsā satyam asteyam
akāma-krodha-lobhatā
bhūta-priya-hitehā ca
dharmo ’yaṁ sārva-varṇikaḥ
Synonyms
ahiṁsā — nonviolence; satyam — truthfulness; asteyam — honesty; a-kāma-krodha-lobhatā — being free from lust, anger and greed; bhūta — of all living entities; priya — the happiness; hita — and welfare; īhā — desiring; ca — also; dharmaḥ — duty; ayam — this; sārva-varṇikaḥ — for all members of society.

Translation
Nonviolence, truthfulness, honesty, desire for the happiness and welfare of all others and freedom from lust, anger and greed constitute duties for all members of society.

Text 22
द्वितीयं प्राप्यानुपूर्व्याज्जन्मोपनयनं द्विज: ।
वसन् गुरुकुले दान्तो ब्रह्माधीयीत चाहूत: ॥ २२ ॥
dvitīyaṁ prāpyānupūrvyāj
janmopanayanaṁ dvijaḥ
vasan gurukule dānto
brahmādhīyīta cāhūtaḥ
Synonyms
dvitīyam — second; prāpya — achieving; ānupūrvyāt — by the gradual process of purificatory ceremonies; janma — birth; upanayanam — Gāyatrī initiation; dvijaḥ — a twice-born member of society; vasan — residing; gurukule — in the āśrama of the spiritual master; dāntaḥ — self-controlled; brahma — the Vedic literatures; adhīyīta — should study; ca — and also understand; āhūtaḥ — being summoned by the spiritual master.

Translation
The twice-born member of society achieves second birth through the sequence of purificatory ceremonies culminating in Gāyatrī initiation. Being summoned by the spiritual master, he should reside within the guru’s āśrama and with a self-controlled mind carefully study the Vedic literature.

Text 23
मेखलाजिनदण्डाक्षब्रह्मसूत्रकमण्डलून् ।
जटिलोऽधौतदद्वासोऽरक्तपीठ: कुशान् दधत् ॥ २३ ॥
mekhalājina-daṇḍākṣa-
brahma-sūtra-kamaṇḍalūn
jaṭilo ’dhauta-dad-vāso
’rakta-pīṭhaḥ kuśān dadhat
Synonyms
mekhalā — belt; ajina — deerskin; daṇḍa — staff; akṣa — bead necklace; brahma-sūtra — brāhmaṇa thread; kamaṇḍalūn — and waterpot; jaṭilaḥ — with matted, unruly hair; adhauta — without polishing, bleaching or ironing; dat-vāsaḥ — the teeth and clothes; arakta-pīṭhaḥ — without accepting a luxurious or sensuous seat; kuśān — kuśa grass; dadhat — carrying in his hand.

Translation
The brahmacārī should regularly dress with a belt of straw and deerskin garments. He should wear matted hair, carry a rod and waterpot and be decorated with akṣa beads and a sacred thread. Carrying pure kuśa grass in his hand, he should never accept a luxurious or sensuous sitting place. He should not unnecessarily polish his teeth, nor should he bleach and iron his clothes.

Text 24
स्‍नानभोजनहोमेषु जपोच्चारे च वाग्यत: ।
न च्छिन्द्यान्नखरोमाणि कक्षोपस्थगतान्यपि ॥ २४ ॥
snāna-bhojana-homeṣu
japoccāre ca vāg-yataḥ
na cchindyān nakha-romāṇi
kakṣopastha-gatāny api
Synonyms
snāna — while bathing; bhojana — while eating; homeṣu — and while attending sacrificial performances; japa — while chanting mantras to oneself; uccāre — while passing stool or urine; ca — also; vāk-yataḥ — remaining silent; na — not; chindyāt — should cut; nakha — the nails; romāṇi — or hairs; kakṣa — in the armpits; upastha — pubic; gatāni — including; api — even.

Translation
A brahmacārī should always remain silent while bathing, eating, attending sacrificial performances, chanting japa or passing stool and urine. He should not cut his nails and hair, including the armpit and pubic hair.

Text 25
रेतो नावकिरेज्जातु ब्रह्मव्रतधर: स्वयम् ।
अवकीर्णेऽवगाह्याप्सु यतासुस्‍त्रिपदां जपेत् ॥ २५ ॥
reto nāvakirej jātu
brahma-vrata-dharaḥ svayam
avakīrṇe ’vagāhyāpsu
yatāsus tri-padāṁ japet
Synonyms
retaḥ — semen; na — not; avakiret — should spill out; jātu — ever; brahma-vrata-dharaḥ — one who is maintaining the vow of celibacy, or brahmacarya; svayam — by itself; avakīrṇe — having flowed out; avagāhya — bathing; apsu — in water; yata-asuḥ — controlling the breathing by prāṇāyāma; tri-padām — the Gāyatrī mantra; japet — he should chant.

Translation
One observing the vow of celibate brahmacārī life should never pass semen. If the semen by chance spills out by itself, the brahmacārī should immediately take bath in water, control his breath by prāṇāyāma and chant the Gāyatrī mantra.

Text 26
अग्‍न्यर्काचार्यगोविप्रगुरुवृद्धसुराञ्शुचि: ।
समाहित उपासीत सन्ध्ये द्वे यतवाग् जपन् ॥ २६ ॥
agny-arkācārya-go-vipra-
guru-vṛddha-surāñ śuciḥ
samāhita upāsīta
sandhye dve yata-vāg japan
Synonyms
agni — the fire-god; arka — the sun; ācārya — the ācārya; go — the cows; vipra — the brāhmaṇas; guru — the spiritual master; vṛddha — elder respectable persons; surān — the demigods; śuciḥ — purified; samāhitaḥ — with fixed consciousness; upāsīta — he should worship; sandhye — in the junctions of time; dve — two; yata-vāk — observing silence; japan — silently chanting or murmuring the proper mantras.

Translation
Purified and fixed in consciousness, the brahmacārī should worship the fire-god, sun, ācārya, cows, brāhmaṇas, guru, elderly respectable persons and demigods. He should perform such worship at sunrise and sunset, without speaking but by silently chanting or murmuring the appropriate mantras.

Text 27
आचार्यं मां विजानीयान्नावमन्येत कर्हिचित् ।
न मर्त्यबुद्ध्यासूयेत सर्वदेवमयो गुरु: ॥ २७ ॥
ācāryaṁ māṁ vijānīyān
navamanyeta karhicit
na martya-buddhyāsūyeta
sarva-deva-mayo guruḥ
Synonyms
ācāryam — the spiritual master; mām — Myself; vijānīyāt — one should know; na avamanyeta — one should never disrespect; karhicit — at any time; na — never; martya-buddhyā — with the idea of his being an ordinary man; asūyeta — one should be envious; sarva-deva — of all demigods; mayaḥ — representative; guruḥ — the spiritual master.

Translation
One should know the ācārya as Myself and never disrespect him in any way. One should not envy him, thinking him an ordinary man, for he is the representative of all the demigods.

Text 28
सायं प्रातरुपानीय भैक्ष्यं तस्मै निवेदयेत् ।
यच्चान्यदप्यनुज्ञातमुपयुञ्जीत संयत: ॥ २८ ॥
sāyaṁ prātar upānīya
bhaikṣyaṁ tasmai nivedayet
yac cānyad apy anujñātam
upayuñjīta saṁyataḥ
Synonyms
sāyam — in the evening; prātaḥ — in the morning; upānīya — bringing; bhaikṣyam — food that is collected by begging; tasmai — unto him (the ācārya); nivedayet — one should deliver; yat — that which; ca — also; anyat — other things; api — indeed; anujñātam — that which is permitted; upayuñjīta — one should accept; saṁyataḥ — being fully controlled.

Translation
In the morning and evening one should collect foodstuffs and other articles and deliver them to the spiritual master. Then, being self-controlled, one should accept for oneself that which is allotted by the ācārya.

Text 29
शुश्रूषमाण आचार्यं सदोपासीत नीचवत् ।
यानशय्यासनस्थानैर्नातिदूरे कृताञ्जलि: ॥ २९ ॥
śuśrūṣamāṇa ācāryaṁ
sadopāsīta nīca-vat
yāna-śayyāsana-sthānair
nāti-dūre kṛtāñjaliḥ
Synonyms
śuśrūṣamāṇaḥ — engaged in serving; ācāryam — the bona fide spiritual master; sadā — always; upāsīta — one should worship; nīca-vat — as a humble servant; yāna — by humbly following behind the guru when he is walking; śayyā — by taking rest with the spiritual master; āsana — sitting near the guru to render service; sthānaiḥ — by standing and humbly waiting upon the guru; na — not; ati — very; dūre — far away; kṛta-añjaliḥ — with folded hands.

Translation
While engaged in serving the spiritual master one should remain as a humble servant, and thus when the guru is walking the servant should humbly walk behind. When the guru lies down to sleep, the servant should also lie down nearby, and when the guru has awakened, the servant should sit near him, massaging his lotus feet and rendering other, similar services. When the guru is sitting down on his āsana, the servant should stand nearby with folded hands, awaiting the guru’s order. In this way one should always worship the spiritual master.

Text 30
एवंवृत्तो गुरुकुले वसेद् भोगविवर्जित: ।
विद्या समाप्यते यावद् बिभ्रद् व्रतमखण्डितम् ॥ ३० ॥
evaṁ-vṛtto gurukule
vased bhoga-vivarjitaḥ
vidyā samāpyate yāvad
bibhrad vratam akhaṇḍitam
Synonyms
evam — thus; vṛttaḥ — engaged; gurukule — in the āśrama of the spiritual master; vaset — he should live; bhoga — sense gratification; vivarjitaḥ — freed from; vidyā — Vedic education; samāpyate — is completed; yāvat — until; bibhrat — maintaining; vratam — the vow (of brahmacarya); akhaṇḍitam — unbroken.

Translation
Until the student has completed his Vedic education he should remain engaged in the āśrama of the spiritual master, should remain completely free of material sense gratification and should not break his vow of celibacy [brahmacarya].

Text 31
यद्यसौ छन्दसां लोकमारोक्ष्यन् ब्रह्मविष्टपम् ।
गुरवे विन्यसेद् देहं स्वाध्यायार्थं बृहद्‍व्रत: ॥ ३१ ॥
yady asau chandasāṁ lokam
ārokṣyan brahma-viṣṭapam
gurave vinyased dehaṁ
svādhyāyārthaṁ bṛhad-vrataḥ
Synonyms
yadi — if; asau — that student; chandasām lokam — the Maharloka planet; ārokṣyan — desiring to ascend to; brahma-viṣṭapam — Brahmaloka; gurave — unto the guru; vinyaset — he should offer; deham — his body; sva-adhyāya — of superior Vedic studies; artham — for the purpose; bṛhat-vrataḥ — observing the powerful vow of perpetual celibacy.

Translation
If the brahmacārī student desires to ascend to the Maharloka or Brahmaloka planets, then he should completely surrender his activities to the spiritual master and, observing the powerful vow of perpetual celibacy, dedicate himself to superior Vedic studies.

Text 32
अग्नौ गुरावात्मनि च सर्वभूतेषु मां परम् ।
अपृथग्धीरुपासीत ब्रह्मवर्चस्व्यकल्मष: ॥ ३२ ॥
agnau gurāv ātmani ca
sarva-bhūteṣu māṁ param
apṛthag-dhīr upasīta
brahma-varcasvy akalmaṣaḥ
Synonyms
agnau — in fire; gurau — in the spiritual master; ātmani — in oneself; ca — also; sarva-bhūteṣu — in all living entities; mām — Me; param — the Supreme; apṛthak-dhīḥ — without any concept of duality; upāsīta — one should worship; brahma-varcasvī — possessing Vedic enlightenment; akalmaṣaḥ — sinless.

Translation
Thus enlightened in Vedic knowledge by service to the spiritual master, freed from all sins and duality, one should worship Me as the Supersoul, as I appear within fire, the spiritual master, one’s own self and all living entities.

Text 33
स्‍त्रीणां निरीक्षणस्पर्शसंलापक्ष्वेलनादिकम् ।
प्राणिनो मिथुनीभूतानगृहस्थोऽग्रतस्त्यजेत् ॥ ३३ ॥
strīṇāṁ nirīkṣaṇa-sparśa-
saṁlāpa-kṣvelanādikam
prāṇino mithunī-bhūtān
agṛhastho ’gratas tyajet
Synonyms
strīṇām — in relation to women; nirīkṣaṇa — glancing; sparśa — touching; saṁlāpa — conversing; kṣvelana — joking or sporting; ādikam — and so on; prāṇinaḥ — living entities; mithunī-bhūtān — engaged in sex; agṛha-sthaḥ — a sannyāsī, vānaprastha or brahmacārī; agrataḥ — first of all; tyajet — should give up.

Translation
Those who are not married — sannyāsīs, vānaprasthas and brahmacārīs — should never associate with women by glancing, touching, conversing, joking or sporting. Neither should they ever associate with any living entity engaged in sexual activities.

Texts 34-35
शौचमाचमनं स्‍नानं सन्ध्योपास्तिर्ममार्चनम् ।
तीर्थसेवा जपोऽस्पृश्याभक्ष्यासम्भाष्यवर्जनम् ॥ ३४ ॥
सर्वाश्रमप्रयुक्तोऽयं नियम: कुलनन्दन ।
मद्भ‍ाव: सर्वभूतेषु मनोवाक्कायसंयम: ॥ ३५ ॥
śaucam ācamanaṁ snānaṁ
sandhyopāstir mamārcanam
tīrtha-sevā japo ’spṛśyā-
bhakṣyāsambhāṣya-varjanam
sarvāśrama-prayukto ’yaṁ
niyamaḥ kula-nandana
mad-bhāvaḥ sarva-bhūteṣu
mano-vāk-kāya-saṁyamaḥ
Synonyms
śaucam — cleanliness; ācamanam — purifying the hands with water; snānam — bathing; sandhyā — at sunrise, noon and sunset; upāstiḥ — religious services; mama — of Me; arcanam — worship; tīrtha-sevā — going to holy places; japaḥ — chanting the holy names of the Lord; aspṛśya — which are untouchable; abhakṣya — uneatable; asambhāṣya — or not to be discussed; varjanam — avoidance of things; sarva — for all; āśrama — orders of life; prayuktaḥ — enjoined; ayam — this; niyamaḥ — rule; kula-nandana — My dear Uddhava; mat-bhāvaḥ — perceiving My existence; sarva-bhūteṣu — in all living entities; manaḥ — of the mind; vāk — of words; kāya — of the body; saṁyamaḥ — regulation.

Translation
My dear Uddhava, general cleanliness, washing the hands, bathing, performing religious services at sunrise, noon and sunset, worshiping Me, visiting holy places, chanting japa, avoiding that which is untouchable, uneatable or not to be discussed, and remembering My existence within all living entities as the Supersoul — these principles should be followed by all members of society through regulation of the mind, words and body.

Text 36
एवं बृहद्‍व्रतधरो ब्राह्मणोऽग्निरिव ज्वलन् ।
मद्भ‍क्तस्तीव्रतपसा दग्धकर्माशयोऽमल: ॥ ३६ ॥
evaṁ bṛhad-vrata-dharo
brāhmaṇo ’gnir iva jvalan
mad-bhaktas tīvra-tapasā
dagdha-karmāśayo ’malaḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; bṛhat-vrata — that great vow of perpetual celibacy; dharaḥ — maintaining; brāhmaṇaḥ — a brāhmaṇa; agniḥ — fire; iva — like; jvalan — becoming bright; mat-bhaktaḥ — My devotee; tīvra-tapasā — by intense austerities; dagdha — burned; karma — of fruitive activities; āśayaḥ — the propensity or mentality; amalaḥ — without contamination of material desire.

Translation
A brāhmaṇa observing the great vow of celibacy becomes brilliant like fire and by serious austerity burns to ashes the propensity to perform material activities. Free from the contamination of material desire, he becomes My devotee.

Text 37
अथानन्तरमावेक्ष्यन् यथा जिज्ञासितागम: ।
गुरवे दक्षिणां दत्त्वा स्‍नायाद् गुर्वनुमोदित: ॥ ३७ ॥
athānantaram āvekṣyan
yathā-jijñāsitāgamaḥ
gurave dakṣiṇāṁ dattvā
snāyād gurv-anumoditaḥ
Synonyms
atha — thus; anantaram — after that; āvekṣyan — desiring to enter family life; yathā — properly; jijñāsita — having studied; āgamaḥ — the Vedic literature; gurave — to the spiritual master; dakṣiṇām — remuneration; dattvā — giving; snāyāt — the brahmacārī should cleanse himself, comb his hair, put on nice clothes, etc.; guru — by the spiritual master; anumoditaḥ — permitted.

Translation
A brahmacārī who has completed his Vedic education and desires to enter household life should offer proper remuneration to the spiritual master, bathe, cut his hair, put on proper clothes, and so on. Then, taking permission from the guru, he should go back to his home.

Text 38
गृहं वनं वोपविशेत् प्रव्रजेद् वा द्विजोत्तम: ।
आश्रमादाश्रमं गच्छेन्नान्यथामत्परश्चरेत् ॥ ३८ ॥
gṛhaṁ vanaṁ vopaviśet
pravrajed vā dvijottamaḥ
āśramād āśramaṁ gacchen
nānyathāmat-paraś caret
Synonyms
gṛham — the family home; vanam — the forest; vā — either; upaviśet — one should enter; pravrajet — one should renounce; vā — or; dvija-uttamaḥ — a brāhmaṇa; āśramāt — from one authorized status of life; āśramam — to another authorized status; gacchet — one should go; na — not; anyathā — otherwise; amat-paraḥ — one who is not surrendered to Me; caret — should act.

Translation
A brahmacārī desiring to fulfill his material desires should live at home with his family, and a householder who is eager to purify his consciousness should enter the forest, whereas a purified brāhmaṇa should accept the renounced order of life. One who is not surrendered to Me should move progressively from one āśrama to another, never acting otherwise.

Text 39
गृहार्थी सद‍ृशीं भार्यामुद्वहेदजुगुप्सिताम् ।
यवीयसीं तु वयसा यां सवर्णामनुक्रमात् ॥ ३९ ॥
gṛhārthī sadṛśīṁ bhāryām
udvahed ajugupsitām
yavīyasīṁ tu vayasā
yāṁ sa-varṇām anu kramāt
Synonyms
gṛha — household; arthī — one who desires; sadṛśīm — possessing similar characteristics; bhāryām — a wife; udvahet — one should marry; ajugupsitām — beyond reproach; yavīyasīm — younger; tu — indeed; vayasā — by age; yām — another wife; sa-varṇām — the first wife who is of the same caste; anu — after; kramāt — in succession.

Translation
One who desires to establish family life should marry a wife of his own caste, who is beyond reproach and younger in age. If one desires to accept many wives he must marry them after the first marriage, and each wife should be of a successively lower caste.

Text 40
इज्याध्ययनदानानि सर्वेषां च द्विजन्मनाम् ।
प्रतिग्रहोऽध्यापनं च ब्राह्मणस्यैव याजनम् ॥ ४० ॥
ijyādhyayana-dānāni
sarveṣāṁ ca dvi-janmanām
pratigraho ’dhyāpanaṁ ca
brāhmaṇasyaiva yājanam
Synonyms
ijyā — sacrifice; adhyayana — Vedic study; dānāni — charity; sarveṣām — of all; ca — also; dvi-janmanām — those who are twice-born; pratigrahaḥ — acceptance of charity; adhyāpanam — teaching Vedic knowledge; ca — also; brāhmaṇasya — of the brāhmaṇa; eva — only; yājanam — performing sacrifices for others.

Translation
All twice-born men — brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas and vaiśyas — must perform sacrifice, study the Vedic literature and give charity. Only the brāhmaṇas, however, accept charity, teach the Vedic knowledge and perform sacrifice on behalf of others.

Text 41
प्रतिग्रहं मन्यमानस्तपस्तेजोयशोनुदम् ।
अन्याभ्यामेव जीवेत शिलैर्वा दोषद‍ृक् तयो: ॥ ४१ ॥
pratigrahaṁ manyamānas
tapas-tejo-yaśo-nudam
anyābhyām eva jīveta
śilair vā doṣa-dṛk tayoḥ
Synonyms
pratigraham — accepting charity; manyamānaḥ — considering; tapaḥ — of one’s austerity; tejaḥ — spiritual influence; yaśaḥ — and fame; nudam — destruction; anyābhyām — by the other two (teaching Vedic knowledge and performing sacrifice); eva — indeed; jīveta — a brāhmaṇa should live; śilaiḥ — by collecting rejected grains in the field; vā — or; doṣa — the discrepancy; dṛk — seeing; tayoḥ — of those two.

Translation
A brāhmaṇa who considers that accepting charity from others will destroy his austerity, spiritual influence and fame should maintain himself by the other two brahminical occupations, namely teaching Vedic knowledge and performing sacrifice. If the brāhmaṇa considers that those two occupations also compromise his spiritual position, then he should collect rejected grains in agricultural fields and live without any dependence on others.

Text 42
ब्राह्मणस्य हि देहोऽयं क्षुद्रकामाय नेष्यते ।
कृच्छ्राय तपसे चेह प्रेत्यानन्तसुखाय च ॥ ४२ ॥
brāhmaṇasya hi deho ’yaṁ
kṣudra-kāmāya neṣyate
kṛcchrāya tapase ceha
pretyānanta-sukhāya ca
Synonyms
brāhmaṇasya — of a brāhmaṇa; hi — certainly; dehaḥ — body; ayam — this; kṣudra — insignificant; kāmāya — for sense gratification; na — not; iṣyate — is meant; kṛcchrāya — for difficult; tapase — austerities; ca — also; iha — in this world; pretya — after death; ananta — unlimited; sukhāya — happiness; ca — also.

Translation
The body of a brāhmaṇa is not intended to enjoy insignificant material sense gratification; rather, by accepting difficult austerities in his life, a brāhmaṇa will enjoy unlimited happiness after death.

Text 43
शिलोञ्छवृत्त्या परितुष्टचित्तो
धर्मं महान्तं विरजं जुषाण: ।
मय्यर्पितात्मा गृह एव तिष्ठ-
न्नातिप्रसक्त: समुपैति शान्तिम् ॥ ४३ ॥
śiloñcha-vṛttyā parituṣṭa-citto
dharmaṁ mahāntaṁ virajaṁ juṣāṇaḥ
mayy arpitātmā gṛha eva tiṣṭhan
nāti-prasaktaḥ samupaiti śāntim
Synonyms
śila-uñcha — of gleaning grains; vṛttyā — by the occupation; parituṣṭa — fully satisfied; cittaḥ — whose consciousness; dharmam — religious principles; mahāntam — magnanimous and hospitable; virajam — purified of material desire; juṣāṇaḥ — cultivating; mayi — in Me; arpita — dedicated; ātmā — whose mind; gṛhe — at home; eva — even; tiṣṭhan — remaining; na — not; ati — very; prasaktaḥ — attached; samupaiti — achieves; śāntim — liberation.

Translation
A brāhmaṇa householder should remain satisfied in mind by gleaning rejected grains from agricultural fields and marketplaces. Keeping himself free of personal desire, he should practice magnanimous religious principles, with consciousness absorbed in Me. In this way a brāhmaṇa may stay at home as a householder without very much attachment and thus achieve liberation.

Text 44
समुद्धरन्ति ये विप्रं सीदन्तं मत्परायणम् ।
तानुद्धरिष्ये नचिरादापद्‍भ्यो नौरिवार्णवात् ॥ ४४ ॥
samuddharanti ye vipraṁ
sīdantaṁ mat-parāyaṇam
tān uddhariṣye na cirād
āpadbhyo naur ivārṇavāt
Synonyms
samuddharanti — uplift; ye — those who; vipram — a brāhmaṇa or devotee; sīdantam — suffering (from poverty); mat-parāyaṇam — surrendered to Me; tān — those who have uplifted; uddhariṣye — I will uplift; na cirāt — in the near future; āpadbhyaḥ — from all miseries; nauḥ — a boat; iva — like; arṇavāt — from the ocean.

Translation
Just as a ship rescues those who have fallen into the ocean, similarly, I very quickly rescue from all calamities those persons who uplift brāhmaṇas and devotees suffering in a poverty-stricken condition.

Text 45
सर्वा: समुद्धरेद् राजा पितेव व्यसनात् प्रजा: ।
आत्मानमात्मना धीरो यथा गजपतिर्गजान् ॥ ४५ ॥
sarvāḥ samuddhared rājā
piteva vyasanāt prajāḥ
ātmānam ātmanā dhīro
yathā gaja-patir gajān
Synonyms
sarvāḥ — all; samuddharet — must uplift; rājā — the king; pitā — a father; iva — like; vyasanāt — from difficulties; prajāḥ — the citizens; ātmānam — himself; ātmana — by himself; dhīraḥ — fearless; yathā — just as; gaja-patiḥ — a bull elephant; gajān — the other elephants.

Translation
Just as the chief bull elephant protects all other elephants in his herd and defends himself as well, similarly, a fearless king, just like a father, must save all of the citizens from difficulty and also protect himself.

Text 46
एवंविधो नरपतिर्विमानेनार्कवर्चसा ।
विधूयेहाशुभं कृत्‍स्‍नमिन्द्रेण सह मोदते ॥ ४६ ॥
evaṁ-vidho nara-patir
vimānenārka-varcasā
vidhūyehāśubhaṁ kṛtsnam
indreṇa saha modate
Synonyms
evam-vidhaḥ — thus (protecting himself and the citizens); nara-patiḥ — the king; vimānena — with an airplane; arka-varcasā — as brilliant as the sun; vidhūya — removing; iha — on the earth; aśubham — sins; kṛtsnam — all; indreṇa — Lord Indra; saha — with; modate — he enjoys.

Translation
An earthly king who protects himself and all citizens by removing all sins from his kingdom will certainly enjoy with Lord Indra in airplanes as brilliant as the sun.

Text 47
सीदन् विप्रो वणिग्वृत्त्या पण्यैरेवापदं तरेत् ।
खड्‍गेन वापदाक्रान्तो न श्ववृत्त्या कथञ्चन ॥ ४७ ॥
sīdan vipro vaṇig-vṛttyā
paṇyair evāpadaṁ taret
khaḍgena vāpadākrānto
na śva-vṛttyā kathañcana
Synonyms
sīdan — suffering; vipraḥ — a brāhmaṇa; vaṇik — of a merchant; vṛttyā — by the occupation; paṇyaiḥ — by doing business; eva — indeed; āpadam — suffering; taret — should overcome; khaḍgena — with sword; vā — or; āpadā — by suffering; ākrāntaḥ — afflicted; na — not; śva — of the dog; vṛttyā — by the occupation; kathañcana — by any means.

Translation
If a brāhmaṇa cannot support himself through his regular duties and is thus suffering, he may adopt the occupation of a merchant and overcome his destitute condition by buying and selling material things. If he continues to suffer extreme poverty even as a merchant, then he may adopt the occupation of a kṣatriya, taking sword in hand. But he cannot in any circumstances become like a dog, accepting an ordinary master.

Text 48
वैश्यवृत्त्या तु राजन्यो जीवेन्मृगययापदि ।
चरेद् वा विप्ररूपेण न श्ववृत्त्या कथञ्चन ॥ ४८ ॥
vaiśya-vṛttyā tu rājanyo
jīven mṛgayayāpadi
cared vā vipra-rūpeṇa
na śva-vṛttyā kathañcana
Synonyms
vaiśya — of the mercantile class; vṛttyā — by the occupation; tu — indeed; rājanyaḥ — a king; jīvet — may maintain himself; mṛgayayā — by hunting; āpadi — in an emergency or disastrous situation; caret — may act; vā — or; vipra-rūpeṇa — in the form of a brāhmaṇa; na — never; śva — of the dog; vṛttyā — by the profession; kathañcana — in any circumstance.

Translation
A king or other member of the royal order who cannot maintain himself by his normal occupation may act as a vaiśya, may live by hunting or may act as a brāhmaṇa by teaching others Vedic knowledge. But he may not under any circumstances adopt the profession of a śūdra.

Text 49
शूद्रवृत्तिं भजेद् वैश्य: शूद्र: कारुकटक्रियाम् ।
कृच्छ्रान्मुक्तो न गर्ह्येण वृत्तिं लिप्सेत कर्मणा ॥ ४९ ॥
śūdra-vṛttiṁ bhajed vaiśyaḥ
śūdraḥ kāru-kaṭa-kriyām
kṛcchrān mukto na garhyeṇa
vṛttiṁ lipseta karmaṇā
Synonyms
śūdra — of the śūdras; vṛttim — occupation; bhajet — may accept; vaiśyaḥ — a vaiśya; śūdraḥ — a śūdra; kāru — of the artisan; kaṭa — straw baskets and mats; kriyām — making; kṛcchrāt — from the difficult situation; muktaḥ — freed; na — not; garhyeṇa — by that which is inferior; vṛttim — livelihood; lipseta — one should desire; karmaṇā — by work.

Translation
A vaiśya, or mercantile man, who cannot maintain himself may adopt the occupation of a śūdra, and a śūdra who cannot find a master can engage in simple activities like making baskets and mats of straw. However, all members of society who have adopted inferior occupations in emergency situations must give up those substitute occupations when the difficulties have passed.

Text 50
वेदाध्यायस्वधास्वाहाबल्यन्नाद्यैर्यथोदयम् ।
देवर्षिपितृभूतानि मद्रूपाण्यन्वहं यजेत् ॥ ५० ॥
vedādhyāya-svadhā-svāhā-
baly-annādyair yathodayam
devarṣi-pitṛ-bhūtāni
mad-rūpāṇy anv-ahaṁ yajet
Synonyms
veda-adhyāya — by study of Vedic knowledge; svadhā — by offering the mantra svadhā; svāhā — by offering the mantra svāhā; bali — by token offerings of food; anna-ādyaiḥ — by offering grains, water, etc.; yathā — according to; udayam — one’s prosperity; deva — the demigods; ṛṣi — sages; pitṛ — the forefathers; bhūtāni — and all living entities; mat-rūpāṇi — manifestations of My potency; anu-aham — daily; yajet — one should worship.

Translation
One in the gṛhastha order of life should daily worship the sages by Vedic study, the forefathers by offering the mantra svadhā, the demigods by chanting svāhā, all living entities by offering shares of one’s meals, and human beings by offering grains and water. Thus considering the demigods, sages, forefathers, living entities and human beings to be manifestations of My potency, one should daily perform these five sacrifices.

Text 51
यद‍ृच्छयोपपन्नेन शुक्लेनोपार्जितेन वा ।
धनेनापीडयन् भृत्यान् न्यायेनैवाहरेत् क्रतून् ॥ ५१ ॥
yadṛcchayopapannena
śuklenopārjitena vā
dhanenāpīḍayan bhṛtyān
nyāyenaivāharet kratūn
Synonyms
yadṛcchayā — without endeavor; upapannena — which is acquired; śuklena — by one’s honest occupation; upārjitena — acquired; vā — or; dhanena — with money; apīḍayan — not subjecting to discomfort; bhṛtyān — dependents; nyāyena — properly; eva — indeed; āharet — one should perform; kratūn — sacrifices and other religious ceremonies.

Translation
A householder should comfortably maintain his dependents either with money that comes of its own accord or with that gathered by honest execution of one’s duties. According to one’s means, one should perform sacrifices and other religious ceremonies.

Text 52
कुटुम्बेषु न सज्जेत न प्रमाद्येत् कुटुम्ब्यपि ।
विपश्चिन्नश्वरं पश्येदद‍ृष्टमपि द‍ृष्टवत् ॥ ५२ ॥
kuṭumbeṣu na sajjeta
na pramādyet kuṭumby api
vipaścin naśvaraṁ paśyed
adṛṣṭam api dṛṣṭa-vat
Synonyms
kuṭumbeṣu — to the family members; na — not; sajjeta — one should be attached; na — not; pramādyet — should become crazy; kuṭumbī — having many dependent family members; api — although; vipaścit — a wise person; naśvaram — temporary; paśyet — should see; adṛṣṭam — future rewards such as residence in heaven; api — indeed; dṛṣṭa-vat — just like that which is already experienced.

Translation
A householder taking care of many dependent family members should not become materially attached to them, nor should he become mentally unbalanced, considering himself to be the lord. An intelligent householder should see that all possible future happiness, just like that which he has already experienced, is temporary.

Text 53
पुत्रदाराप्तबन्धूनां सङ्गम: पान्थसङ्गम: ।
अनुदेहं वियन्त्येते स्वप्नो निद्रानुगो यथा ॥ ५३ ॥
putra-dārāpta-bandhūnāṁ
saṅgamaḥ pāntha-saṅgamaḥ
anu-dehaṁ viyanty ete
svapno nidrānugo yathā
Synonyms
putra — of children; dāra — wife; āpta — relatives; bandhūnām — and friends; saṅgamaḥ — the association, living together; pāntha — of travelers; saṅgamaḥ — association; anu-deham — with each change of body; viyanti — they are separated; ete — all these; svapnaḥ — a dream; nidrā — in sleep; anugaḥ — occurring; yathā — just as.

Translation
The association of children, wife, relatives and friends is just like the brief meeting of travelers. With each change of body one is separated from all such associates, just as one loses the objects one possesses in a dream when the dream is over.

Text 54
इत्थं परिमृशन्मुक्तो गृहेष्वतिथिवद् वसन् ।
न गृहैरनुबध्येत निर्ममो निरहङ्कृत: ॥ ५४ ॥
itthaṁ parimṛśan mukto
gṛheṣv atithi-vad vasan
na gṛhair anubadhyeta
nirmamo nirahaṅkṛtaḥ
Synonyms
ittham — thus; parimṛśan — deeply considering; muktaḥ — a liberated soul; gṛheṣu — at home; atithi-vat — just like a guest; vasan — living; na — not; gṛhaiḥ — by the domestic situation; anubadhyeta — should become bound; nirmamaḥ — without any sense of personal proprietorship; nirahaṅkṛtaḥ — without false ego.

Translation
Deeply considering the actual situation, a liberated soul should live at home just like a guest, without any sense of proprietorship or false ego. In this way he will not be bound or entangled by domestic affairs.

Text 55
कर्मभिगृहमेधीयैरिष्ट्वा मामेव भक्तिमान् ।
तिष्ठेद् वनं वोपविशेत् प्रजावान् वा परिव्रजेत् ॥ ५५ ॥
karmabhir gṛha-medhīyair
iṣṭvā mām eva bhaktimān
tiṣṭhed vanaṁ vopaviśet
prajāvān vā parivrajet
Synonyms
karmabhiḥ — by activities; gṛha-medhīyaiḥ — suitable for family life; iṣṭvā — worshiping; mām — Me; eva — indeed; bhakti-mān — being a devotee; tiṣṭhet — one may remain at home; vanam — the forest; vā — or; upaviśet — may enter; prajā-vān — having responsible children; vā — or; parivrajet — may take sannyāsa.

Translation
A householder devotee who worships Me by execution of his family duties may remain at home, go to a holy place or, if he has a responsible son, take sannyāsa.

Text 56
यस्त्वासक्तमतिर्गेहे पुत्रवित्तैषणातुर: ।
स्‍त्रैण: कृपणधीर्मूढो ममाहमिति बध्यते ॥ ५६ ॥
yas tv āsakta-matir gehe
putra-vittaiṣaṇāturaḥ
straiṇaḥ kṛpaṇa-dhīr mūḍho
mamāham iti badhyate
Synonyms
yaḥ — one who; tu — however; āsakta — attached; matiḥ — whose consciousness; gehe — to his home; putra — for children; vitta — and money; eṣaṇa — by ardent desire; āturaḥ — disturbed; straiṇaḥ — lusty to enjoy women; kṛpaṇa — miserly; dhīḥ — whose mentality; mūḍhaḥ — unintelligent; mama — everything is mine; aham — I am everything; iti — thus thinking; badhyate — is bound.

Translation
But a householder whose mind is attached to his home and who is thus disturbed by ardent desires to enjoy his money and children, who is lusty after women, who is possessed of a miserly mentality and who unintelligently thinks, “Everything is mine and I am everything,” is certainly bound in illusion.

Text 57
अहो मे पितरौ वृद्धौ भार्या बालात्मजात्मजा: ।
अनाथा मामृते दीना: कथं जीवन्ति दु:खिता: ॥ ५७ ॥
aho me pitarau vṛddhau
bhāryā bālātmajātmajāḥ
anāthā mām ṛte dīnāḥ
kathaṁ jīvanti duḥkhitāḥ
Synonyms
aho — alas; me — my; pitarau — parents; vṛddhau — elderly; bhāryā — wife; bāla-ātma-jā — having a mere infant in her arms; ātmā-jāḥ — and my other young children; anāthāḥ — with no one to protect them; mām — me; ṛte — without; dīnāḥ — wretched; katham — how in the world; jīvanti — can they live; duḥkhitāḥ — suffering greatly.

Translation
“O my poor elderly parents, and my wife with a mere infant in her arms, and my other young children! Without me they have absolutely no one to protect them and will suffer unbearably. How can my poor relatives possibly live without me?”

Text 58
एवं गृहाशयाक्षिप्तहृदयो मूढधीरयम् ।
अतृप्तस्ताननुध्यायन् मृतोऽन्धं विशते तम: ॥ ५८ ॥
evaṁ gṛhāśayākṣipta-
hṛdayo mūḍha-dhīr ayam
atṛptas tān anudhyāyan
mṛto ’ndhaṁ viśate tamaḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; gṛha — in his domestic situation; āśaya — by intense desire; ākṣipta — overwhelmed; hṛdayaḥ — his heart; mūḍha — unintelligent; dhīḥ — whose point of view; ayam — this person; atṛptaḥ — unsatisfied; tān — them (family members); anudhyāyan — constantly thinking of; mṛtaḥ — he dies; andham — blindness; viśate — enters; tamaḥ — darkness.

Translation
Thus, because of his foolish mentality, a householder whose heart is overwhelmed by family attachment is never satisfied. Constantly meditating on his relatives, he dies and enters into the darkness of ignorance.