Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
गोविन्दभुजगुप्तायां द्वारवत्यां कुरूद्वह ।
अवात्सीन्नारदोऽभीक्ष्णं कृष्णोपासनलालस: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
govinda-bhuja-guptāyāṁ
dvāravatyāṁ kurūdvaha
avātsīn nārado ’bhīkṣṇaṁ
kṛṣṇopāsana-lālasaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śuka said; govinda — of Lord Govinda; bhuja — by the arms; guptāyām — protected; dvāravatyām — in the capital Dvāravatī; kuru-udvaha — O best of the Kurus; avātsīt — dwelled; nāradaḥ — Nārada Muni; abhīkṣṇam — constantly; kṛṣṇa-upāsana — to engage in the worship of Kṛṣṇa; lālasaḥ — who had great eagerness.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Eager to engage in the worship of Lord Kṛṣṇa, O best of the Kurus, Nārada Muni stayed for some time in Dvārakā, which was always protected by the arms of Govinda.

Text 2
को नु राजन्निन्द्रियवान् मुकुन्दचरणाम्बुजम् ।
न भजेत् सर्वतोमृत्युरुपास्यममरोत्तमै: ॥ २ ॥
ko nu rājann indriyavān
mukunda-caraṇāmbujam
na bhajet sarvato-mṛtyur
upāsyam amarottamaiḥ
Synonyms
kaḥ — who; nu — indeed; rājan — O King; indriya-vān — possessed of senses; mukunda-caraṇa-ambujam — the lotus feet of Lord Mukunda; na bhajet — would not worship; sarvataḥ-mṛtyuḥ — being faced by death on all sides; upāśyam — worshipable; amara-uttamaiḥ — by the best of liberated personalities.

Translation
My dear King, in the material world the conditioned souls are confronted by death at every step of life. Therefore, who among the conditioned souls would not render service to the lotus feet of Lord Mukunda, who is worshipable even for the greatest of liberated souls?

Text 3
तमेकदा तु देवर्षिं वसुदेवो गृहागतम् ।
अर्चितं सुखमासीनमभिवाद्येदमब्रवीत् ॥ ३ ॥
tam ekadā tu devarṣiṁ
vasudevo gṛhāgatam
arcitaṁ sukham āsīnam
abhivādyedam abravīt
Synonyms
tam — him; ekadā — once; tu — and; deva-ṛṣim — the sage among the demigods, Nārada; vasudevaḥ — Vasudeva, the father of Lord Kṛṣṇa; gṛha-āgatam — who had come to his house; arcitam — worshiped with paraphernalia; sukham āsīnam — comfortably seated; abhivādya — respectfully greeting him; idam — this; abravīt — said.

Translation
One day the sage among the demigods, Nārada, came to the house of Vasudeva. After worshiping Nārada with suitable paraphernalia, seating him comfortably and respectfully bowing down to him, Vasudeva spoke as follows.

Text 4
श्रीवसुदेव उवाच
भगवन् भवतो यात्रा स्वस्तये सर्वदेहिनाम् ।
कृपणानां यथा पित्रोरुत्तमश्लोकवर्त्मनाम् ॥ ४ ॥
śrī-vasudeva uvāca
bhagavan bhavato yātrā
svastaye sarva-dehinām
kṛpaṇānāṁ yathā pitror
uttama-śloka-vartmanām
Synonyms
śrī-vasudevaḥ uvāca — Śrī Vasudeva said; bhagavan — O lord; bhavataḥ — of your good self; yātrā — the coming; svastaye — for the benefit; sarva-dehinām — of all embodied beings; kṛpaṇānām — of the most wretched; yathā — as; pitroḥ — that of a father; uttama-śloka — the Supreme Lord, who is praised by excellent verses; vartmanām — of those who are fixed on the path toward.

Translation
Śrī Vasudeva said: My lord, your visit, like that of a father to his children, is for the benefit of all living beings. You especially help the most wretched among them, as well as those who are advanced on the path toward the Supreme Lord, Uttamaśloka.

Text 5
भूतानां देवचरितं दु:खाय च सुखाय च ।
सुखायैव हि साधूनां त्वाद‍ृशामच्युतात्मनाम् ॥ ५ ॥
bhūtānāṁ deva-caritaṁ
duḥkhāya ca sukhāya ca
sukhāyaiva hi sādhūnāṁ
tvādṛśām acyutātmanām
Synonyms
bhūtānām — of the living beings; deva-caritam — the activities of demigods; duḥkhāya — result in the misery; ca — also; sukhāya — in happiness; ca — as well; sukhāya — in happiness; eva — only; hi — indeed; sādhūnām — that of saints; tvādṛśām — like you; acyuta — the infallible Supreme Lord; ātmanām — who have accepted as their very soul.

Translation
The activities of demigods lead to both misery and happiness for living beings, but the activities of great saints like you, who have accepted the infallible Lord as their very soul, result only in the happiness of all beings.

Text 6
भजन्ति ये यथा देवान् देवा अपि तथैव तान् ।
छायेव कर्मसचिवा: साधवो दीनवत्सला: ॥ ६ ॥
bhajanti ye yathā devān
devā api tathaiva tān
chāyeva karma-sacivāḥ
sādhavo dīna-vatsalāḥ
Synonyms
bhajanti — worship; ye — they who; yathā — in which way; devān — the demigods; devāḥ — the demigods; api — also; tathā eva — just in that way; tān — them; chāyā — in a shadow; iva — as if; karma — of material work and its reactions; sacivāḥ — the attendants; sādhavaḥ — saintly persons; dīna-vatsalāḥ — merciful to the fallen.

Translation
Those who worship the demigods receive reciprocation from the demigods in a way just corresponding to the offering. The demigods are attendants of karma, like a person’s shadow, but sādhus are actually merciful to the fallen.

Text 7
ब्रह्मंस्तथापि पृच्छामो धर्मान् भागवतांस्तव ।
यान् श्रुत्वा श्रद्धया मर्त्यो मुच्यते सर्वतोभयात् ॥ ७ ॥
brahmaṁs tathāpi pṛcchāmo
dharmān bhāgavatāṁs tava
yān śrutvā śraddhayā martyo
mucyate sarvato bhayāt
Synonyms
brahman — O brāhmaṇa; tathā api — nevertheless (although I am completely satisfied just by seeing you); pṛcchāmaḥ — I am inquiring about; dharmān — religious duties; bhāgavatān — which are specifically meant for pleasing the Supreme Lord; tava — from you; yān — which; śrutvā — hearing; śraddhayā — with faith; martyaḥ — one destined to die; mucyate — he is freed; sarvataḥ — from all; bhayāt — fear.

Translation
O brāhmaṇa, although I am satisfied simply by seeing you, I still wish to inquire about those duties which give pleasure to the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Any mortal who faithfully hears about them is freed from all kinds of fear.

Text 8
अहं किल पुरानन्तं प्रजार्थो भुवि मुक्तिदम् ।
अपूजयं न मोक्षाय मोहितो देवमायया ॥ ८ ॥
ahaṁ kila purānantaṁ
prajārtho bhuvi mukti-dam
apūjayaṁ na mokṣāya
mohito deva-māyayā
Synonyms
aham — I; kila — indeed; purā — long ago; anantam — the Supreme Lord, who is unlimited; prajā-arthaḥ — wanting a child; bhuvi — on the earth; mukti-dam — the Lord, who awards liberation; apūjayam — I worshiped; na mokṣāya — not for liberation; mohitaḥ — bewildered; deva-māyayā — by the illusory energy of the Lord.

Translation
In a previous birth on this earth, I worshiped the Supreme Lord, Ananta, who alone can award liberation, but because I desired to have a child, I did not worship Him for liberation. Thus I was bewildered by the Lord’s illusory energy.

Text 9
यथा विचित्रव्यसनाद् भवद्भ‍िर्विश्वतोभयात् ।
मुच्येम ह्यञ्जसैवाद्धा तथा न: शाधि सुव्रत ॥ ९ ॥
yathā vicitra-vyasanād
bhavadbhir viśvato-bhayāt
mucyema hy añjasaivāddhā
tathā naḥ śādhi su-vrata
Synonyms
yathā — so that; vicitra-vyasanāt — which is full of various dangers; bhavadbhiḥ — because of you; viśvataḥ-bhayāt — (from this material world) which is fearful everywhere; mucyema — I may be liberated; hi — indeed; añjasā — easily; eva — even; addhā — directly; tathā — thus; naḥ — us; śādhi — please instruct; su-vrata — O you who are always true to your vow.

Translation
My dear lord, you are always true to your vow. Please instruct me clearly, so that by your mercy I may easily free myself from material existence, which is full of many dangers and keeps us constantly bound in fear.

Text 10
श्रीशुक उवाच
राजन्नेवं कृतप्रश्न‍ो वसुदेवेन धीमता ।
प्रीतस्तमाह देवर्षिर्हरे: संस्मारितो गुणै: ॥ १० ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
rājann evaṁ kṛta-praśno
vasudevena dhīmatā
prītas tam āha devarṣir
hareḥ saṁsmārito guṇaiḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; rājan — O King; evam — thus; kṛta-praśnaḥ — questioned; vasudevena — by Vasudeva; dhīmatā — the intelligent; prītaḥ — pleased; tam — to him; āha — spoke; deva-ṛṣiḥ — the sage among the demigods; hareḥ — of Lord Hari; saṁsmāritaḥ — made to remember; guṇaiḥ — by the qualities.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, Devarṣi Nārada was pleased by the questions of the highly intelligent Vasudeva. Because they suggested the transcendental qualities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, they reminded Nārada of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Thus Nārada replied to Vasudeva as follows.

Text 11
श्रीनारद उवाच
सम्यगेतद् व्यवसितं भवता सात्वतर्षभ ।
यत् पृच्छसे भागवतान् धर्मांस्त्वं विश्वभावनान् ॥ ११ ॥
śrī-nārada uvāca
samyag etad vyavasitaṁ
bhavatā sātvatarṣabha
yat pṛcchase bhāgavatān
dharmāṁs tvaṁ viśva-bhāvanān
Synonyms
śrī-nāradaḥ uvāca — Nārada Muni said; samyak — correctly; etat — this; vyavasitam — determined; bhavatā — by you; sātvata-ṛṣabha — O best of the Sātvata clan; yat — because; pṛcchase — you are asking about; bhāgavatān dharmān — duties toward the Supreme Lord; tvam — you; viśva-bhāvanān — which can purify the entire universe.

Translation
Śrī Nārada said: O best of the Sātvatas, you have quite correctly asked about the eternal duty of the living entity toward the Supreme Lord. Such devotional service to the Lord is so potent that its performance can purify the entire universe.

Text 12
श्रुतोऽनुपठितो ध्यात आद‍ृतो वानुमोदित: ।
सद्य: पुनाति सद्धर्मो देव विश्वद्रुहोऽपि हि ॥ १२ ॥
śruto ’nupaṭhito dhyāta
ādṛto vānumoditaḥ
sadyaḥ punāti sad-dharmo
deva-viśva-druho ’pi hi
Synonyms
śrutaḥ — heard; anupaṭhitaḥ — subsequently chanted; dhyātaḥ — meditated on; ādṛtaḥ — faithfully accepted; vā — or; anumoditaḥ — praised when performed by others; sadyaḥ — immediately; punāti — purifies; sat-dharmaḥ — pure devotional service; deva — to the demigods; viśva — and to the universe; druhaḥ — those who are hateful; api hi — even.

Translation
Pure devotional service rendered to the Supreme Lord is spiritually so potent that simply by hearing about such transcendental service, by chanting its glories in response, by meditating on it, by respectfully and faithfully accepting it, or by praising the devotional service of others, even persons who hate the demigods and all other living beings can be immediately purified.

Text 13
त्वया परमकल्याण: पुण्यश्रवणकीर्तन: ।
स्मारितो भगवानद्य देवो नारायणो मम ॥ १३ ॥
tvayā parama-kalyāṇaḥ
puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ
smārito bhagavān adya
devo nārāyaṇo mama
Synonyms
tvayā — by you; parama — supremely; kalyāṇaḥ — blissful; puṇya — very pious; śravaṇa — hearing; kīrtanaḥ — and chanting (about whom); smāritaḥ — brought to memory; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; adya — today; devaḥ nārāyaṇaḥ — Lord Nārāyaṇa; mama — my.

Translation
Today you have made me remember my Lord, the supremely blissful Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa. The Supreme Lord is so auspicious that whoever hears and chants about Him becomes completely pious.

Text 14
अत्राप्युदाहरन्तीममितिहासं पुरातनम् ।
आर्षभाणां च संवादं विदेहस्य महात्मन: ॥ १४ ॥
atrāpy udāharantīmam
itihāsaṁ purātanam
ārṣabhāṇāṁ ca saṁvādaṁ
videhasya mahātmanaḥ
Synonyms
atra api — in this very matter (of describing bhāgavata-dharma); udāharanti — is given as an example; imam — this; itihāsam — historical account; purātanam — ancient; ārṣabhāṇām — of the sons of Ṛṣabha; ca — and; saṁvādam — the conversation; videhasya — with Janaka, King of Videha; mahā-ātmanaḥ — who was a great broad-minded soul.

Translation
To explain the devotional service of the Lord, sages have related the ancient history of the conversation between the great soul King Videha and the sons of Ṛṣabha.

Text 15
प्रियव्रतो नाम सुतो मनो: स्वायम्भुवस्य य: ।
तस्याग्नीध्रस्ततो नाभिऋर्षभस्तत्सुत: स्मृत: ॥ १५ ॥
priyavrato nāma suto
manoḥ svāyambhuvasya yaḥ
tasyāgnīdhras tato nābhir
ṛṣabhas tat-sutaḥ smṛtaḥ
Synonyms
priyavrataḥ — Mahārāja Priyavrata; nāma — by name; sutaḥ — the son; manoḥ svāyambhuvasya — of Svāyambhuva Manu; yaḥ — who; tasya — his; āgnīdhraḥ — (son was) Āgnīdhra; tataḥ — from him (Āgnīdhra); nābhiḥ — King Nābhi; ṛṣabhaḥ — Lord Ṛṣabhadeva; tat-sutaḥ — his son; smṛtaḥ — is so remembered.

Translation
Svāyambhuva Manu had a son named Mahārāja Priyavrata, and among Priyavrata’s sons was Āgnīdhra. From Āgnīdhra was born Nābhi, whose son was known as Ṛṣabhadeva.

Text 16
तमाहुर्वासुदेवांशं मोक्षधर्मविवक्षया ।
अवतीर्णं सुतशतं तस्यासीद् ब्रह्मपारगम् ॥ १६ ॥
tam āhur vāsudevāṁśaṁ
mokṣa-dharma-vivakṣayā
avatīrṇaṁ suta-śataṁ
tasyāsīd brahma-pāragam
Synonyms
tam — Him; āhuḥ — they call; vāsudeva-aṁśam — a plenary expansion of the Supreme Lord, Vāsudeva; mokṣa-dharma — the process of attaining liberation; vivakṣayā — with the desire to teach; avatīrṇam — appeared in this world; suta — sons; śatam — one hundred; tasya — His; āsīt — there were; brahma — the Vedas; pāra-gam — who perfectly assimilated.

Translation
Śrī Ṛṣabhadeva is accepted as an expansion of the Supreme Lord, Vāsudeva. He incarnated in this world to propagate those religious principles that lead living entities to ultimate liberation. He had one hundred sons, all perfect in Vedic knowledge.

Text 17
तेषां वै भरतो ज्येष्ठो नारायणपरायण: ।
विख्यातं वर्षमेतद् यन्नाम्ना भारतमद्भ‍ुतम् ॥ १७ ॥
teṣāṁ vai bharato jyeṣṭho
nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇaḥ
vikhyātaṁ varṣam etad yan-
nāmnā bhāratam adbhutam
Synonyms
teṣām — of them; vai — indeed; bharataḥ — Bharata; jyeṣṭhaḥ — the oldest; nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇaḥ — completely devoted to Lord Nārāyaṇa; vikhyātam — is famous; varṣam — the planet; etat — this; yat-nāmnā — by whose name; bhāratam — Bhārata-varṣa; adbhutam — wonderful.

Translation
Of the one hundred sons of Lord Ṛṣabhadeva, the eldest, Bharata, was completely devoted to Lord Nārāyaṇa. It is because of Bharata’s fame that this planet is now celebrated as the great Bhārata-varṣa.

Text 18
स भुक्तभोगां त्यक्त्वेमां निर्गतस्तपसा हरिम् ।
उपासीनस्तत्पदवीं लेभे वै जन्मभिस्त्रिभि: ॥ १८ ॥
sa bhukta-bhogāṁ tyaktvemāṁ
nirgatas tapasā harim
upāsīnas tat-padavīṁ
lebhe vai janmabhis tribhiḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he; bhukta — used up; bhogām — all the pleasures; tyaktvā — rejecting; imām — of this (earth); nirgataḥ — having left home; tapasā — by austerities; harim — the Supreme Lord, Hari; upāsīnaḥ — having worshiped; tat-padavīm — His destination; lebhe — he achieved; vai — indeed; janmabhiḥ — in births; tribhiḥ — three.

Translation
King Bharata rejected this material world, considering all types of material pleasure temporary and useless. Leaving his beautiful young wife and family, he worshiped Lord Hari by severe austerities and attained the abode of the Lord after three lifetimes.

Text 19
तेषां नव नवद्वीपपतयोऽस्य समन्तत: ।
कर्मतन्त्रप्रणेतार एकाशीतिर्द्विजातय: ॥ १९ ॥
teṣāṁ nava nava-dvīpa-
patayo ’sya samantataḥ
karma-tantra-praṇetāra
ekāśītir dvijātayaḥ
Synonyms
teṣām — of them (the one hundred sons of Ṛṣabhadeva); nava — nine; nava-dvīpa — of the nine islands (comprising Bhārata-varṣa); patayaḥ — the masters; asya — of this varṣa; samantataḥ — covering it entirely; karma-tantra — of the path of fruitive Vedic sacrifices; praṇetāraḥ — initiators; ekāśītiḥ — eighty-one; dvi-jātayaḥ — twice-born brāhmaṇas.

Translation
Nine of the remaining sons of Ṛṣabhadeva became the rulers of the nine islands of Bhārata-varṣa, and they exercised complete sovereignty over this planet. Eighty-one sons became twice-born brāhmaṇas and helped initiate the Vedic path of fruitive sacrifices [karma-kāṇḍa].

Texts 20-21
नवाभवन् महाभागा मुनयो ह्यर्थशंसिन: ।
श्रमणा वातरसना आत्मविद्याविशारदा: ॥ २० ॥
कविर्हविरन्तरीक्ष: प्रबुद्ध: पिप्पलायन: ।
आविर्होत्रोऽथ द्रुमिलश्चमस: करभाजन: ॥ २१ ॥
navābhavan mahā-bhāgā
munayo hy artha-śaṁsinaḥ
śramaṇā vāta-rasanā
ātma-vidyā-viśāradāḥ
kavir havir antarīkṣaḥ
prabuddhaḥ pippalāyanaḥ
āvirhotro ’tha drumilaś
camasaḥ karabhājanaḥ
Synonyms
nava — nine; abhavan — there were; mahā-bhāgāḥ — greatly fortunate souls; munayaḥ — sages; hi — indeed; artha-śaṁsinaḥ — engaged in explaining the Absolute Truth; śramaṇāḥ — thus exerting great endeavor; vāta-rasanāḥ — dressed by the wind (naked); ātma-vidyā — in spiritual science; viśāradāḥ — learned; kaviḥ haviḥ antarīkṣaḥ — Kavi, Havir and Antarīkṣa; prabuddhaḥ pippalāyanaḥ — Prabuddha and Pippalāyana; āvirhotraḥ — Āvirhotra; atha — also; drumilaḥ — Drumila; camasaḥ karabhājanaḥ — Camasa and Karabhājana.

Translation
The nine remaining sons of Ṛṣabha were greatly fortunate sages who worked vigorously to spread knowledge of the Absolute Truth. They wandered about naked and were very well versed in spiritual science. Their names were Kavi, Havir, Antarīkṣa, Prabuddha, Pippalāyana, Āvirhotra, Drumila, Camasa and Karabhājana.

Text 22
त एते भगवद्रूपं विश्वं सदसदात्मकम् ।
आत्मनोऽव्यतिरेकेण पश्यन्तो व्यचरन् महीम् ॥ २२ ॥
ta ete bhagavad-rūpaṁ
viśvaṁ sad-asad-ātmakam
ātmano ’vyatirekeṇa
paśyanto vyacaran mahīm
Synonyms
te ete — these (nine Yogendras); bhagavat — of the Supreme Lord; rūpam — a form; viśvam — the entire universe; sat-asat-ātmakam — consisting of both gross and subtle objects; ātmanaḥ — from the self; avyatirekeṇa — as nondifferent; paśyantaḥ — seeing; vyacaran — they wandered; mahīm — the earth.

Translation
These sages wandered the earth seeing the entire universe, with all its gross and subtle objects, as a manifestation of the Supreme Lord and as nondifferent from the self.

Text 23
अव्याहतेष्टगतय: सुरसिद्धसाध्य-
गन्धर्वयक्षनरकिन्नरनागलोकान् ।
मुक्ताश्चरन्ति मुनिचारणभूतनाथ-
विद्याधरद्विजगवां भुवनानि कामम् ॥ २३ ॥
avyāhateṣṭa-gatayaḥ sura-siddha-sādhya-
gandharva-yakṣa-nara-kinnara-nāga-lokān
muktāś caranti muni-cāraṇa-bhūtanātha-
vidyādhara-dvija-gavāṁ bhuvanāni kāmam
Synonyms
avyāhata — unimpeded; iṣṭa-gatayaḥ — in moving as they please; sura — of the demigods; siddha — perfected mystics; sādhya — Sādhyas; gandharva — heavenly musicians; yakṣa — associates of Kuvera; nara — human beings; kinnara — minor demigods who can change their form at will; nāga — and serpents; lokān — the worlds; muktāḥ — free; caranti — they travel; muni — of the sages; cāraṇa — angels; bhūta-nātha — ghostly followers of Lord Śiva; vidyādhara — Vidyādharas; dvija — brāhmaṇas; gavām — and of the cows; bhuvanāni — the worlds; kāmam — however they want.

Translation
The nine Yogendras are liberated souls who travel freely to the planets of the demigods, the perfected mystics, the Sādhyas, the heavenly musicians, the Yakṣas, the human beings, and the minor demigods such as the Kinnaras and the serpents. No mundane force can check their free movement, and exactly as they wish they can travel as well to the worlds of the sages, the angels, the ghostly followers of Lord Śiva, the Vidyādharas, the brāhmaṇas and the cows.

Text 24
त एकदा निमे: सत्रमुपजग्मुर्यद‍ृच्छया ।
वितायमानमृषिभिरजनाभे महात्मन: ॥ २४ ॥
ta ekadā nimeḥ satram
upajagmur yadṛcchayā
vitāyamānam ṛṣibhir
ajanābhe mahātmanaḥ
Synonyms
te — they; ekadā — once; nimeḥ — of King Nimi; satram — the soma sacrifice; upajagmuḥ — they approached; yadṛcchayā — as they wished; vitāyamānam — being carried out; ṛṣibhiḥ — by sages; ajanābhe — in Ajanābha (the old name for Bhārata-varṣa); mahā-ātmanaḥ — of the great soul.

Translation
Once in Ajanābha [the former name of the earth], they came upon the sacrificial performance of the great soul Mahārāja Nimi, which was being carried out under the direction of elevated sages.

Text 25
तान् द‍ृष्ट्वा सूर्यसङ्काशान् महाभागवतान् नृप ।
यजमानोऽग्नयो विप्रा: सर्व एवोपतस्थिरे ॥ २५ ॥
tān dṛṣṭvā sūrya-saṅkāśān
mahā-bhāgavatān nṛpa
yajamāno ’gnayo viprāḥ
sarva evopatasthire
Synonyms
tān — them; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; sūrya — the sun; saṅkāśān — who rivaled in brilliance; mahā-bhāgavatān — the pure devotees of the Lord; nṛpa — O King (Vasudeva); yajamānaḥ — the performer of the sacrifice (Nimi Mahārāja); agnayaḥ — the fires; viprāḥ — the brāhmaṇas; sarve — everyone; eva — even; upatasthire — stood in respect.

Translation
My dear King, seeing those pure devotees of the Lord, who rival the sun in brilliance, everyone present — the performer of the sacrifice, the brāhmaṇas and even the sacrificial fires — stood in respect.

Text 26
विदेहस्तानभिप्रेत्य नारायणपरायणान् ।
प्रीत: सम्पूजयां चक्रे आसनस्थान् यथार्हत: ॥ २६ ॥
videhas tān abhipretya
nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇān
prītaḥ sampūjayāṁ cakre
āsana-sthān yathārhataḥ
Synonyms
videhaḥ — Nimi Mahārāja; tān — them; abhipretya — recognizing; nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇān — as devotees whose only goal was Nārāyaṇa; prītaḥ — satisfied; sampūjayām cakre — he fully worshiped them; āsana-sthān — who had been seated; yathā-arhataḥ — as they deserved.

Translation
King Videha [Nimi] understood that the nine sages were exalted devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Therefore, overjoyed at their auspicious arrival, he offered them suitable sitting places and worshiped them in a proper way, just as one would worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 27
तान् रोचमानान् स्वरुचा ब्रह्मपुत्रोपमान् नव ।
पप्रच्छ परमप्रीत: प्रश्रयावनतो नृप: ॥ २७ ॥
tān rocamānān sva-rucā
brahma-putropamān nava
papraccha parama-prītaḥ
praśrayāvanato nṛpaḥ
Synonyms
tān — them; rocamānān — glowing; sva-rucā — by their own effulgence; brahma-putra-upamān — just like the sons of Brahmā; nava — nine; papraccha — he asked; parama-prītaḥ — transcendentally overjoyed; praśraya — with humility; avanataḥ — bowed down; nṛpaḥ — the King.

Translation
Overwhelmed by transcendental joy, the King humbly bowed his head and then proceeded to question the nine sages. These nine great souls glowed with their own effulgence and thus appeared equal to the four Kumāras, the sons of Lord Brahmā.

Text 28
श्रीविदेह उवाच
मन्ये भगवत: साक्षात् पार्षदान् वो मधुद्विष: ।
विष्णोर्भूतानि लोकानां पावनाय चरन्ति हि ॥ २८ ॥
śrī-videha uvāca
manye bhagavataḥ sākṣāt
pārṣadān vo madhu-dvisaḥ
viṣṇor bhūtāni lokānāṁ
pāvanāya caranti hi
Synonyms
śrī-videhaḥ uvāca — King Videha said; manye — I consider; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Lord; sākṣāt — directly; pārṣadān — personal associates; vaḥ — you; madhu-dviṣaḥ — of the enemy of Madhu; visṇoḥ — of Lord Viṣṇu; bhūtāni — the servants; lokānām — of all the worlds; pāvanāya — for the purification; caranti — they move about; hi — indeed.

Translation
King Videha said: I think that you must be direct associates of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is famous as the enemy of the demon Madhu. Indeed, the pure devotees of Lord Viṣṇu wander throughout the universe not for their personal, selfish interest, but to purify all the conditioned souls.

Text 29
दुर्लभो मानुषो देहो देहिनां क्षणभङ्गुर: ।
तत्रापि दुर्लभं मन्ये वैकुण्ठप्रियदर्शनम् ॥ २९ ॥
durlabho mānuṣo deho
dehināṁ kṣaṇa-bhaṅguraḥ
tatrāpi durlabhaṁ manye
vaikuṇṭha-priya-darśanam
Synonyms
durlabhaḥ — difficult to achieve; mānuṣaḥ — human; dehaḥ — body; dehinām — for embodied beings; kṣaṇa-bhaṅguraḥ — prone to be destroyed at any moment; tatra — in that human body; api — even; durlabham — more difficult to achieve; manye — I consider; vaikuṇṭhapriya — of those who are dear to the Supreme Lord, Vaikuṇṭha; darśanam — the vision.

Translation
For the conditioned souls, the human body is most difficult to achieve, and it can be lost at any moment. But I think that even those who have achieved human life rarely gain the association of pure devotees, who are dear to the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha.

Text 30
अत आत्यन्तिकं क्षेमं पृच्छामो भवतोऽनघा: ।
संसारेऽस्मिन् क्षणार्धोऽपि सत्सङ्ग: शेवधिर्नृणाम् ॥ ३० ॥
ata ātyantikaṁ kṣemaṁ
pṛcchāmo bhavato ’naghāḥ
saṁsāre ’smin kṣaṇārdho ’pi
sat-saṅgaḥ śevadhir nṛṇām
Synonyms
ataḥ — therefore; ātyantikam — supreme; kṣemam — good; pṛcchāmaḥ — I am asking; bhavataḥ — from you; anaghāḥ — O sinless ones; saṁsāre — in the cycle of birth and death; asmin — this; kṣaṇa-ardhaḥ — lasting only half of one moment; api — even; sat-saṅgaḥ — the association of devotees of the Lord; śevadhiḥ — a great treasure; nṛṇām — for human beings.

Translation
Therefore, O completely sinless ones, I ask you to kindly tell me what the supreme good is. After all, even half a moment’s association with pure devotees within this world of birth and death is a priceless treasure for any man.

Text 31
धर्मान् भागवतान् ब्रूत यदि न: श्रुतये क्षमम् ।
यै: प्रसन्न: प्रपन्नाय दास्यत्यात्मानमप्यज: ॥ ३१ ॥
dharmān bhāgavatān brūta
yadi naḥ śrutaye kṣamam
yaiḥ prasannaḥ prapannāya
dāsyaty ātmānam apy ajaḥ
Synonyms
dharmān bhāgavatān — the science of devotional service; brūta — please speak; yadi — if; naḥ — of us; śrutaye — to hear properly; kṣamam — there is the capacity; yaiḥ — by which (devotional service); prasannaḥ — being satisfied; prapannāya — to one who has taken shelter; dāsyati — He will give; ātmānam — Himself; api — even; ajaḥ — the unborn Supreme Lord.

Translation
Please speak about how one engages in the devotional service of the Supreme Lord, if you consider me capable of properly hearing these topics. When a living entity offers loving service to the Supreme Lord, the Lord is immediately satisfied, and in return He will give even His own self to the surrendered soul.

Text 32
श्रीनारद उवाच
एवं ते निमिना पृष्टा वसुदेव महत्तमा: ।
प्रतिपूज्याब्रुवन् प्रीत्या ससदस्यर्त्विजं नृपम् ॥ ३२ ॥
śrī-nārada uvāca
evaṁ te niminā pṛṣṭā
vasudeva mahattamāḥ
pratipūjyābruvan prītyā
sa-sadasyartvijaṁ nṛpam
Synonyms
śrī-nāradaḥ uvāca — Śrī Nārada said; evam — thus; te — they; niminā — by King Nimi; pṛṣṭāḥ — questioned; vasudeva — O Vasudeva; mahat-tamāḥ — those best of saints; pratipūjya — offering him words of respect in return; abruvan — they spoke; prītyā — affectionately; sa-sadasya — who was accompanied by the members of the sacrificial assembly; ṛtvijam — and by the priests; nṛpam — to the King.

Translation
Śrī Nārada said: O Vasudeva, when Mahārāja Nimi had thus inquired from the nine Yogendras about devotional service to the Lord, those best of saintly persons sincerely thanked the King for his questions and spoke to him with affection in the presence of the members of the sacrificial assembly and the brāhmaṇa priests.

Text 33
श्रीकविरुवाच
मन्येऽकुतश्चिद्भयमच्युतस्य
पादाम्बुजोपासनमत्र नित्यम् ।
उद्विग्नबुद्धेरसदात्मभावाद्
विश्वात्मना यत्र निवर्तते भी: ॥ ३३ ॥
śrī-kavir uvāca
manye ’kutaścid-bhayam acyutasya
pādāmbujopāsanam atra nityam
udvigna-buddher asad-ātma-bhāvād
viśvātmanā yatra nivartate bhīḥ
Synonyms
śrī-kaviḥ uvāca — Śrī Kavi said; manye — I consider; akutaścit-bhayam — fearlessness; acyutasya — of the infallible Lord; pāda-ambuja — of the lotus feet; upāsanam — the worship; atra — in this world; nityam — constantly; udvigna-buddheḥ — of one whose intelligence is disturbed; asat — that which is only temporary; ātma-bhāvāt — by thinking to be the self; viśva-ātmanā — thoroughly; yatra — in which (service to the Lord); nivartate — ceases; bhīḥ — fear.

Translation
Śrī Kavi said: I consider that one whose intelligence is constantly disturbed by his falsely identifying himself with the temporary material world can achieve real freedom from fear only by worshiping the lotus feet of the infallible Supreme Lord. In such devotional service, all fear ceases entirely.

Text 34
ये वै भगवता प्रोक्ता उपाया ह्यात्मलब्धये ।
अञ्ज: पुंसामविदुषां विद्धि भागवतान् हि तान् ॥ ३४ ॥
ye vai bhagavatā proktā
upāyā hy ātma-labdhaye
añjaḥ puṁsām aviduṣāṁ
viddhi bhāgavatān hi tān
Synonyms
ye — which; vai — indeed; bhagavatā — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; proktāḥ — spoken; upāyāḥ — means; hi — indeed; ātma-labdhaye — for realizing the Supreme Soul; añjaḥ — easily; puṁsām — by persons; aviduṣām — less intelligent; viddhi — know; bhāgavatān — to be bhāgavata-dharma; hi — certainly; tān — these.

Translation
Even ignorant living entities can very easily come to know the Supreme Lord if they adopt those means prescribed by the Supreme Lord Himself. The process recommended by the Lord is to be known as bhāgavata-dharma, or devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 35
यानास्थाय नरो राजन् न प्रमाद्येत कर्हिचित् ।
धावन् निमील्य वा नेत्रे न स्खलेन्न पतेदिह ॥ ३५ ॥
yān āsthāya naro rājan
na pramādyeta karhicit
dhāvan nimīlya vā netre
na skhalen na pated iha
Synonyms
yān — which (means); āsthāya — accepting; naraḥ — a man; rājan — O King; na pramādyeta — is not bewildered; karhicit — ever; dhāvan — running; nimīlya — closing; vā — or; netre — his eyes; na skhalet — will not trip; na patet — will not fall; iha — on this path.

Translation
O King, one who accepts this process of devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead will never blunder on his path in this world. Even while running with eyes closed, he will never trip or fall.

Text 36
कायेन वाचा मनसेन्द्रियैर्वा
बुद्ध्यात्मना वानुसृतस्वभावात् ।
करोति यद् यत् सकलं परस्मै
नारायणायेति समर्पयेत्तत् ॥ ३६ ॥
kāyena vācā manasendriyair vā
buddhyātmanā vānusṛta-svabhāvāt
karoti yad yat sakalaṁ parasmai
nārāyaṇāyeti samarpayet tat
Synonyms
kāyena — with the body; vācā — speech; manasā — mind; indriyaiḥ — senses; vā — or; buddhyā — with the intelligence; ātmanā — the purified consciousness; vā — or; anusṛta — followed; svabhāvāt — according to one’s conditioned nature; karoti — one does; yat yat — whatever; sakalam — all; parasmai — to the Supreme; nārāyaṇāya iti — thinking, “This is for Nārāyaṇa”; samarpayet — he should offer; tat — that.

Translation
In accordance with the particular nature one has acquired in conditioned life, whatever one does with body, words, mind, senses, intelligence or purified consciousness one should offer to the Supreme, thinking, “This is for the pleasure of Lord Nārāyaṇa.”

Text 37
भयं द्वितीयाभिनिवेशत: स्या-
दीशादपेतस्य विपर्ययोऽस्मृति: ।
तन्माययातो बुध आभजेत्तं
भक्त्यैकयेशं गुरुदेवतात्मा ॥ ३७ ॥
bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syād
īśād apetasya viparyayo ’smṛtiḥ
tan-māyayāto budha ābhajet taṁ
bhaktyaikayeśaṁ guru-devatātmā
Synonyms
bhayam — fear; dvitīya — in something seeming to be other than the Lord; abhiniveśataḥ — because of absorption; syāt — it will arise; īśāt — from the Supreme Lord; apetasya — for one who has turned away; viparyayaḥ — misidentification; asmṛtiḥ — forgetfulness; tat — of the Lord; māyayā — by the illusory energy; ataḥ — therefore; budhaḥ — an intelligent person; ābhajet — should worship fully; tam — Him; bhaktyā — with devotion; ekayā — unalloyed; īśam — the Lord; guru-devatā-ātmā — one who sees his own spiritual master as his lord and very soul.

Translation
Fear arises when a living entity misidentifies himself as the material body because of absorption in the external, illusory energy of the Lord. When the living entity thus turns away from the Supreme Lord, he also forgets his own constitutional position as a servant of the Lord. This bewildering, fearful condition is effected by the potency for illusion, called māyā. Therefore, an intelligent person should engage unflinchingly in the unalloyed devotional service of the Lord, under the guidance of a bona fide spiritual master, whom he should accept as his worshipable deity and as his very life and soul.

Text 38
अविद्यमानोऽप्यवभाति हि द्वयो
ध्यातुर्धिया स्वप्नमनोरथौ यथा ।
तत् कर्मसङ्कल्पविकल्पकं मनो
बुधो निरुन्ध्यादभयं तत: स्यात् ॥ ३८ ॥
avidyamāno ’py avabhāti hi dvayo
dhyātur dhiyā svapna-manorathau yathā
tat karma-saṅkalpa-vikalpakaṁ mano
budho nirundhyād abhayaṁ tataḥ syāt
Synonyms
avidyamānaḥ — not present in reality; api — although; avabhāti — is manifest; hi — indeed; dvayaḥ — duality; dhyātuḥ — of the person experiencing; dhiyā — by the intelligence; svapna — a dream; manaḥ-rathau — or the conceiving of a desire; yathā — as; tat — therefore; karma — of material activities; saṅkalpa-vikalpakam — having the functions of forming positive and negative desires; manaḥ — the mind; budhaḥ — an intelligent person; nirundhyāt — should bring under control; abhayam — fearlessness; tataḥ — in this way; syāt — there may be.

Translation
Although the duality of the material world does not ultimately exist, the conditioned soul experiences it as real under the influence of his own conditioned intelligence. This imaginary experience of a world separate from Kṛṣṇa can be compared to the acts of dreaming and desiring. When the conditioned soul dreams at night of something desirable or horrible, or when he daydreams of what he would like to have or avoid, he creates a reality that has no existence beyond his own imagination. The tendency of the mind is to accept and reject various activities based on sense gratification. Therefore an intelligent person should control the mind, restricting it from the illusion of seeing things separate from Kṛṣṇa, and when the mind is thus controlled he will experience actual fearlessness.

Text 39
श‍ृण्वन् सुभद्राणि रथाङ्गपाणे-
र्जन्मानि कर्माणि च यानि लोके ।
गीतानि नामानि तदर्थकानि
गायन् विलज्जो विचरेदसङ्ग: ॥ ३९ ॥
śṛṇvan su-bhadrāṇi rathāṅga-pāṇer
janmāni karmāṇi ca yāni loke
gītāni nāmāni tad-arthakāni
gāyan vilajjo vicared asaṅgaḥ
Synonyms
śṛṇvan — hearing; su-bhadrāṇi — all-auspicious; ratha-aṅga-pāṇeḥ — of the Supreme Lord, who holds a chariot wheel in His hand (in His pastime of fighting with grandfather Bhīṣma); janmāni — the appearances; karmāṇi — activities; ca — and; yāni — which; loke — in this world; gītāni — are chanted; nāmāni — names; tat-arthakāni — signifying these appearances and activities; gāyan — singing; vilajjaḥ — free from embarrassment; vicaret — one should wander; asaṅgaḥ — without material association.

Translation
An intelligent person who has controlled his mind and conquered fear should give up all attachment to material objects such as wife, family and nation and should wander freely without embarrassment, hearing and chanting the holy names of the Lord, the bearer of the chariot wheel. The holy names of Kṛṣṇa are all-auspicious because they describe His transcendental birth and activities, which He performs within this world for the salvation of the conditioned souls. Thus the holy names of the Lord are sung throughout the world.

Text 40
एवंव्रत: स्वप्रियनामकीर्त्या
जातानुरागो द्रुतचित्त उच्चै: ।
हसत्यथो रोदिति रौति गाय-
त्युन्मादवन्नृत्यति लोकबाह्य: ॥ ४० ॥
evaṁ-vrataḥ sva-priya-nāma-kīrtyā
jātānurāgo druta-citta uccaiḥ
hasaty atho roditi rauti gāyaty
unmāda-van nṛtyati loka-bāhyaḥ
Synonyms
evam-vrataḥ — when one thus engages in the vow to chant and dance; sva — own; priya — very dear; nāma — holy name; kīrtya — by chanting; jāta — in this way develops; anurāgaḥ — attachment; druta-cittaḥ — with a melted heart; uccaiḥ — loudly; hasati — laughs; atho — also; roditi — cries; rauti — becomes agitated; gāyati — chants; unmāda-vat — like a madman; nṛtyati — dancing; loka-bāhyaḥ — without caring for outsiders.

Translation
By chanting the holy name of the Supreme Lord, one comes to the stage of love of Godhead. Then the devotee is fixed in his vow as an eternal servant of the Lord, and he gradually becomes very much attached to a particular name and form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. As his heart melts with ecstatic love, he laughs very loudly or cries or shouts. Sometimes he sings and dances like a madman, for he is indifferent to public opinion.

Text 41
खं वायुमग्निं सलिलं महीं च
ज्योतींषि सत्त्वानि दिशो द्रुमादीन् ।
सरित्समुद्रांश्च हरे: शरीरं
यत् किंच भूतं प्रणमेदनन्य: ॥ ४१ ॥
khaṁ vāyum agniṁ salilaṁ mahīṁ ca
jyotīṁṣi sattvāni diśo drumādīn
sarit-samudrāṁś ca hareḥ śarīraṁ
yat kiṁ ca bhūtaṁ praṇamed ananyaḥ
Synonyms
kham — ether; vāyum — air; agnim — fire; salilam — water; mahīm — earth; ca — and; jyotīṁṣi — the sun, moon and other celestial luminaries; sattvāni — all living beings; diśaḥ — the directions; druma-ādīn — trees and other immovable creatures; sarit — the rivers; samudrān — and oceans; ca — also; hareḥ — of the Supreme Lord, Hari; śarīram — the body; yat kim ca — whatever; bhūtam — in created existence; praṇamet — one should bow to; ananyaḥ — thinking nothing to be separate from the Lord.

Translation
A devotee should not see anything as being separate from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. Ether, fire, air, water, earth, the sun and other luminaries, all living beings, the directions, trees and other plants, the rivers and oceans — whatever a devotee experiences he should consider to be an expansion of Kṛṣṇa. Thus seeing everything that exists within creation as the body of the Supreme Lord, Hari, the devotee should offer his sincere respects to the entire expansion of the Lord’s body.

Text 42
भक्ति: परेशानुभवो विरक्ति-
रन्यत्र चैष त्रिक एककाल: ।
प्रपद्यमानस्य यथाश्न‍त: स्यु-
स्तुष्टि: पुष्टि: क्षुदपायोऽनुघासम् ॥ ४२ ॥
bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir
anyatra caiṣa trika eka-kālaḥ
prapadyamānasya yathāśnataḥ syus
tuṣṭiḥ puṣṭiḥ kṣud-apāyo ’nu-ghāsam
Synonyms
bhaktiḥ — devotion; para-īśa — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anubhavaḥ — direct perception; viraktiḥ — detachment; anyatra — from everything else; ca — and; eṣaḥ — this; trikaḥ — group of three; eka-kālaḥ — simultaneously; prapadyamānasya — for one in the process of taking shelter of the Supreme Lord; yathā — in the same way as; aśnataḥ — for one engaged in eating; syuḥ — they occur; tuṣṭiḥ — satisfaction; puṣṭiḥ — nourishment; kṣut-apāyaḥ — eradication of hunger; anu-ghāsam — increasingly with each morsel.

Translation
Devotion, direct experience of the Supreme Lord, and detachment from other things — these three occur simultaneously for one who has taken shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, in the same way that pleasure, nourishment and relief from hunger come simultaneously and increasingly, with each bite, for a person engaged in eating.

Text 43
इत्यच्युताङ्‍‍घ्रि भजतोऽनुवृत्त्या
भक्तिर्विरक्तिर्भगवत्प्रबोध: ।
भवन्ति वै भागवतस्य राजं-
स्तत: परां शान्तिमुपैति साक्षात् ॥ ४३ ॥
ity acyutāṅghriṁ bhajato ’nuvṛttyā
bhaktir viraktir bhagavat-prabodhaḥ
bhavanti vai bhāgavatasya rājaṁs
tataḥ parāṁ śāntim upaiti sākṣāt
Synonyms
iti — thus; acyuta — of the infallible Supreme Lord; aṅghrim — the feet; bhajataḥ — for one who is worshiping; anuvṛttyā — by constant practice; bhaktiḥ — devotion; viraktiḥ — detachment; bhagavat-prabodhaḥ — knowledge of the Personality of Godhead; bhavanti — they manifest; vai — indeed; bhāgavatasya — for the devotee; rājan — O King Nimi; tataḥ — then; parām śāntim — supreme peace; upaiti — he attains; sākṣāt — directly.

Translation
My dear King, the devotee who worships the lotus feet of the infallible Personality of Godhead with constant endeavor thus achieves unflinching devotion, detachment and experienced knowledge of the Personality of Godhead. In this way the successful devotee of the Lord achieves supreme spiritual peace.

Text 44
श्रीराजोवाच
अथ भागवतं ब्रूत यद्धर्मो याद‍ृशो नृणाम् ।
यथा चरति यद् ब्रूते यैर्लिङ्गैर्भगवत्प्रिय: ॥ ४४ ॥
śrī-rājovāca
atha bhāgavataṁ brūta
yad-dharmo yādṛśo nṛṇām
yathācarati yad brūte
yair liṅgair bhagavat-priyaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-rājā uvāca — the King spoke; atha — next; bhāgavatam — about the devotee of the Personality of Godhead; brūta — please tell me; yat-dharmaḥ — having what duties; yādṛśaḥ — having what nature; nṛṇām — among men; yathā — how; ācarati — he behaves; yat — what; brūte — he speaks; yaiḥ — by which; liṅgaiḥ — visible symptoms; bhagavat-priyaḥ — (he is known as) one dear to the Supreme Lord.

Translation
Mahārāja Nimi said: Now please tell me in greater detail about the devotees of the Supreme Lord. What are the natural symptoms by which I can distinguish between the most advanced devotees, those on the middle level and those who are neophytes? What are the typical religious activities of a Vaiṣṇava, and how does he speak? Specifically, please describe those symptoms and characteristics by which Vaiṣṇavas become dear to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 45
श्रीहविरुवाच
सर्वभूतेषु य: पश्येद् भगवद्भ‍ावमात्मन: ।
भूतानि भगवत्यात्मन्येष भागवतोत्तम: ॥ ४५ ॥
śrī-havir uvāca
sarva-bhūteṣu yaḥ paśyed
bhagavad-bhāvam ātmanaḥ
bhūtāni bhagavaty ātmany
eṣa bhāgavatottamaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-haviḥ uvāca — Śrī Havir said; sarva-bhūteṣu — in all objects (in matter, spirit, and combinations of matter and spirit); yaḥ — anyone who; paśyet — sees; bhagavat-bhāvam — the ability to be engaged in the service of the Lord; ātmanaḥ — of the supreme spirit soul, or the transcendence beyond the material concept of life; bhūtāni — all beings; bhagavati — in the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ātmani — the basic principle of all existence; eṣaḥ — this; bhāgavata-uttamaḥ — a person advanced in devotional service.

Translation
Śrī Havir said: The most advanced devotee sees within everything the soul of all souls, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Consequently he sees everything in relation to the Supreme Lord and understands that everything that exists is eternally situated within the Lord.

Text 46
ईश्वरे तदधीनेषु बालिशेषु द्विषत्सु च ।
प्रेममैत्रीकृपोपेक्षा य: करोति स मध्यम: ॥ ४६ ॥
īśvare tad-adhīneṣu
bāliśeṣu dviṣatsu ca
prema-maitrī-kṛpopekṣā
yaḥ karoti sa madhyamaḥ
Synonyms
īśvare — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat-adhīneṣu — to persons who have taken fully to Kṛṣṇa consciousness; bāliśeṣu — unto the neophytes or the ignorant; dviṣatsu — to persons envious of Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa’s devotees; ca — and; prema — love; maitrī — friendship; kṛpā — mercy; upekṣāḥ — negligence; yaḥ — anyone who; karoti — does; saḥ — he; madhyamaḥ — a second-class devotee.

Translation
An intermediate or second-class devotee, called madhyama-adhikārī, offers his love to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is a sincere friend to all the devotees of the Lord, shows mercy to ignorant people who are innocent and disregards those who are envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 47
अर्चायामेव हरये पूजां य: श्रद्धयेहते ।
न तद्भ‍क्तेषु चान्येषु स भक्त: प्राकृत: स्मृत: ॥ ४७ ॥
arcāyām eva haraye
pūjāṁ yaḥ śraddhayehate
na tad-bhakteṣu cānyeṣu
sa bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ smṛtaḥ
Synonyms
arcāyām — Deity; eva — certainly; haraye — to Lord Hari; pūjām — worship; yaḥ — who; śraddhayā — faithfully; īhate — engages; na — not; tat — of Kṛṣṇa; bhakteṣu — toward the devotees; ca — and; anyeṣu — toward people in general; saḥ — he; bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ — materialistic devotee; smṛtaḥ — is called.

Translation
A devotee who faithfully engages in the worship of the Deity in the temple but does not behave properly toward other devotees or people in general is called a prākṛta-bhakta, a materialistic devotee, and is considered to be in the lowest position.

Text 48
गृहीत्वापीन्द्रियैरर्थान्यो न द्वेष्टि न हृष्यति ।
विष्णोर्मायामिदं पश्यन्स वै भागवतोत्तम: ॥ ४८ ॥
gṛhītvāpīndriyair arthān
yo na dveṣṭi na hṛṣyati
viṣṇor māyām idaṁ paśyan
sa vai bhāgavatottamaḥ
Synonyms
gṛhītvā — accepting; api — even though; indriyaiḥ — with his senses; arthān — objects of the senses; yaḥ — who; na dveṣṭi — does not hate; na hṛṣyati — does not rejoice; viṣṇoḥ — of the Supreme Lord, Viṣṇu; māyām — the illusory potency; idam — this material universe; paśyan — seeing as; saḥ — he; vai — indeed; bhāgavata-uttamaḥ — a first-class devotee.

Translation
Even while engaging his senses in contact with their objects, one who sees this whole world as the energy of Lord Viṣṇu is neither repelled nor elated. He is indeed the greatest among devotees.

Text 49
देहेन्द्रियप्राणमनोधियां यो
जन्माप्ययक्षुद्भ‍यतर्षकृच्छ्रै: ।
संसारधर्मैरविमुह्यमान:
स्मृत्या हरेर्भागवतप्रधान: ॥ ४९ ॥
dehendriya-prāṇa-mano-dhiyāṁ yo
janmāpyaya-kṣud-bhaya-tarṣa-kṛcchraiḥ
saṁsāra-dharmair avimuhyamānaḥ
smṛtyā harer bhāgavata-pradhānaḥ
Synonyms
deha — of the body; indriya — senses; prāṇa — life air; manaḥ — mind; dhiyām — and intelligence; yaḥ — who; janma — by birth; apyaya — diminution; kṣut — hunger; bhaya — fear; tarṣa — thirst; kṛcchraiḥ — and the pain of exertion; saṁsāra — of material life; dharmaiḥ — by the inseparable features; avimuhyamānaḥ — not bewildered; smṛtyā — because of remembrance; hareḥ — of Lord Hari; bhāgavata-pradhānaḥ — the foremost of devotees.

Translation
Within the material world, one’s material body is always subject to birth and decay. Similarly, the life air [prāṇa] is harassed by hunger and thirst, the mind is always anxious, the intelligence hankers for that which cannot be obtained, and all of the senses are ultimately exhausted by constant struggle in the material nature. A person who is not bewildered by the inevitable miseries of material existence, and who remains aloof from them simply by remembering the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is to be considered bhāgavata-pradhāna, the foremost devotee of the Lord.

Text 50
न कामकर्मबीजानां यस्य चेतसि सम्भव: ।
वासुदेवैकनिलय: स वै भागवतोत्तम: ॥ ५० ॥
na kāma-karma-bījānāṁ
yasya cetasi sambhavaḥ
vāsudevaika-nilayaḥ
sa vai bhāgavatottamaḥ
Synonyms
na — never; kāma — of lust; karma — fruitive work; bījānām — or of material hankerings, which are the seeds of fruitive activity; yasya — of whom; cetasi — in the mind; sambhavaḥ — chance to arise; vāsudeva-eka-nilayaḥ — one for whom the Supreme Lord, Vāsudeva, is the only shelter; saḥ — he; vai — indeed; bhāgavata-uttamaḥ — is a first-class devotee.

Translation
One who has taken exclusive shelter of the Supreme Lord, Vāsudeva, becomes free from fruitive activities, which are based on material lust. In fact, one who has taken shelter of the lotus feet of the Lord is freed from even the desire to enjoy material sense gratification. Plans for enjoying sex life, social prestige and money cannot develop within his mind. Thus he is considered bhāgavatottama, a pure devotee of the Lord on the highest platform.

Text 51
न यस्य जन्मकर्मभ्यां न वर्णाश्रमजातिभि: ।
सज्जतेऽस्मिन्नहंभावो देहे वै स हरे: प्रिय: ॥ ५१ ॥
na yasya janma-karmabhyāṁ
na varṇāśrama-jātibhiḥ
sajjate ’sminn ahaṁ-bhāvo
dehe vai sa hareḥ priyaḥ
Synonyms
na — there is not; yasya — of whom; janma — by good birth; karmabhyām — or meritorious acts; na — not; varṇa-āśrama — by adherence to rules of occupational or religious duty; jātibhiḥ — or by belonging to a certain class of society; sajjate — attaches itself; asmin — in this (body); aham-bhāvaḥ — egotistic sentiment; dehe — in the body; vai — indeed; saḥ — he; hareḥ — to Lord Hari; priyaḥ — is dear.

Translation
Birth in an aristocratic family and the execution of austere and pious activities certainly cause one to take pride in himself. Similarly, if one enjoys a prestigious position within society because his parents are highly respected members of the varṇāśrama social system, one becomes even more infatuated with himself. But if despite these excellent material qualifications one does not feel even a tinge of pride within himself, he is to be considered the dearmost servitor of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 52
न यस्य स्व: पर इति वित्तेष्वात्मनि वा भिदा ।
सर्वभूतसम: शान्त: स वै भागवतोत्तम: ॥ ५२ ॥
na yasya svaḥ para iti
vitteṣv ātmani vā bhidā
sarva-bhūta-samaḥ śāntaḥ
sa vai bhāgavatottamaḥ
Synonyms
na — there is not; yasya — of whom; svaḥ paraḥ iti — “mine” and “someone else’s”; vitteṣu — about his property; ātmani — about his body; vā — or; bhidā — by thinking in terms of duality; sarva-bhūta — to all living beings; samaḥ — equal; śāntaḥ — peaceful; saḥ — he; vai — indeed; bhāgavata-uttamaḥ — the best of devotees.

Translation
When a devotee gives up the selfish conception by which one thinks “This is my property, and that is his,” and when he is no longer concerned with the pleasures of his own material body or indifferent to the discomforts of others, he becomes fully peaceful and satisfied. He considers himself simply one among all the living beings who are equally part and parcel of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Such a satisfied Vaiṣṇava is considered to be at the highest standard of devotional service.

Text 53
त्रिभुवनविभवहेतवेऽप्यकुण्ठ-
स्मृतिरजितात्मसुरादिभिर्विमृग्यात् ।
न चलति भगवत्पदारविन्दा-
ल्ल‍वनिमिषार्धमपि य: स वैष्णवाग्य्र: ॥ ५३ ॥
tri-bhuvana-vibhava-hetave ’py akuṇṭha-
smṛtir ajitātma-surādibhir vimṛgyāt
na calati bhagavat-padāravindāl
lava-nimiṣārdham api yaḥ sa vaiṣṇavāgryaḥ
Synonyms
tri-bhuvana — of the three worlds comprising the material universe; vibhava-hetave — for the sake of the opulences; api — even; akuṇṭha-smṛtiḥ — whose remembrance is undisturbed; ajita-ātma — of whom the unconquerable Lord is the very soul; sura-ādibhiḥ — by the demigods and others; vimṛgyāt — which are sought; na calati — he does not go away; bhagavat — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pada-aravindāt — from the lotus feet; lava — of eight forty-fifths of one second; nimiṣa — or of three times that; ardham — one half; api — even; yaḥ — who; saḥ — he; vaiṣṇava-agryaḥ — the foremost of devotees of Lord Viṣṇu.

Translation
The lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead are sought even by the greatest of demigods, such as Brahmā and Śiva, who have all accepted the Supreme Personality of Godhead as their life and soul. A pure devotee of the Lord can never forget those lotus feet in any circumstance. He will not give up his shelter at the lotus feet of the Lord for a single moment — indeed, not for half a moment — even in exchange for the benediction of ruling and enjoying the opulence of the entire universe. Such a devotee of the Lord is to be considered the best of the Vaiṣṇavas.

Text 54
भगवत उरुविक्रमाङ्‍‍घ्रिशाखा-
नखमणिचन्द्रिकया निरस्ततापे ।
हृदि कथमुपसीदतां पुन: स
प्रभवति चन्द्र इवोदितेऽर्कताप: ॥ ५४ ॥
bhagavata uru-vikramāṅghri-śākhā-
nakha-maṇi-candrikayā nirasta-tāpe
hṛdi katham upasīdatāṁ punaḥ sa
prabhavati candra ivodite ’rka-tāpaḥ
Synonyms
bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; uru-vikrama — which have performed great heroic deeds; aṅghri — of the lotus feet; śākhā — of the toes; nakha — of the nails; maṇi — which are like jewels; candrikayā — by the moonshine; nirasta-tāpe — when the pain has been removed; hṛdi — in the hearts; katham — how indeed; upasīdatām — of those who are worshiping; punaḥ — again; saḥ — that pain; prabhavati — can have its effect; candre — when the moon; iva — just as; udite — risen; arka — of the sun; tāpaḥ — the burning heat.

Translation
How can the fire of material suffering continue to burn the hearts of those who worship the Supreme Lord? The Lord’s lotus feet have performed innumerable heroic deeds, and the beautiful nails on His toes resemble valuable jewels. The effulgence emanating from those nails resembles cooling moonshine, for it instantly relieves the suffering within the heart of the pure devotee, just as the appearance of the moon’s cooling light relieves the burning heat of the sun.

Text 55
विसृजति हृदयं न यस्य साक्षा-
द्धरिरवशाभिहितोऽप्यघौघनाश: ।
प्रणयरसनया धृताङ्‍‍घ्रिपद्म:
स भवति भागवतप्रधान उक्त: ॥ ५५ ॥
visṛjati hṛdayaṁ na yasya sākṣād
dharir avaśābhihito ’py aghaugha-nāśaḥ
praṇaya-rasanayā dhṛtāṅghri-padmaḥ
sa bhavati bhāgavata-pradhāna uktaḥ
Synonyms
visṛjati — He leaves; hṛdayam — the heart; na — never; yasya — of whom; sākṣāt — Himself; hariḥ — Lord Hari; avaśa — accidentally; abhihitaḥ — called; api — even though; agha — of sins; ogha — heaps; nāśaḥ — who destroys; praṇaya — of love; rasanayā — by ropes; dhṛta — held; aṅghri-padmaḥ — His lotus feet; saḥ — he; bhavati — is; bhāgavata-pradhānaḥ — the foremost devotee; uktaḥ — called.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is so kind to the conditioned souls that if they call upon Him by speaking His holy name, even unintentionally or unwillingly, the Lord is inclined to destroy innumerable sinful reactions in their hearts. Therefore, when a devotee who has taken shelter of the Lord’s lotus feet chants the holy name of Kṛṣṇa with genuine love, the Supreme Personality of Godhead can never give up the heart of such a devotee. One who has thus captured the Supreme Lord within his heart is to be known as bhāgavata-pradhāna, the most exalted devotee of the Lord.