Text 1
श्रीउद्धव उवाच
विधिश्च प्रतिषेधश्च निगमो हीश्वरस्य ते ।
अवेक्षतेऽरविन्दाक्ष गुणं दोषं च कर्मणाम् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-uddhava uvāca
vidhiś ca pratiṣedhaś ca
nigamo hīśvarasya te
avekṣate ’raviṇḍākṣa
guṇaṁ doṣaṁ ca karmaṇām
Synonyms
śrī-uddhavaḥ uvāca — Śrī Uddhava said; vidhiḥ — positive injunction; ca — also; pratiṣedhaḥ — prohibitive injunction; ca — and; nigamaḥ — the Vedic literature; hi — indeed; īśvarasya — of the Lord; te — of You; avekṣate — focuses upon; araviṇḍa-akṣa — O lotus-eyed one; guṇam — good or pious qualities; doṣam — bad or sinful qualities; ca — also; karmaṇām — of activities.

Translation
Śrī Uddhava said: My dear lotus-eyed Kṛṣṇa, You are the Supreme Lord, and thus the Vedic literatures, consisting of positive and negative injunctions, constitute Your order. Such literatures focus upon the good and bad qualities of work.

Text 2
वर्णाश्रमविकल्पं च प्रतिलोमानुलोमजम् ।
द्रव्यदेशवय:कालान् स्वर्गं नरकमेव च ॥ २ ॥
varṇāśrama-vikalpaṁ ca
pratilomānulomajam
dravya-deśa-vayaḥ-kālān
svargaṁ narakam eva ca
Synonyms
varṇa-āśrama — of the varṇāśrama system; vikalpam — the variety of superior and inferior positions created by piety and sin; ca — and; pratiloma — birth in a mixed family wherein the father is inferior in social status to the mother; anuloma-jam — birth in a mixed family in which the father is superior in social status to the mother; dravya — material objects or possessions; deśa — the place; vayaḥ — one’s age; kālān — the time; svargam — heaven; narakam — hell; eva — indeed; ca — also.

Translation
According to Vedic literature, the superior and inferior varieties found in the human social system, varṇāśrama, are due to pious and sinful modes of family planning. Thus piety and sin are constant points of reference in the Vedic analysis of the components of a given situation — namely the material ingredients, place, age and time. Indeed, the Vedas reveal the existence of material heaven and hell, which are certainly based on piety and sin.

Text 3
गुणदोषभिदाद‍ृष्टिमन्तरेण वचस्तव ।
नि:श्रेयसं कथं नृणां निषेधविधिलक्षणम् ॥ ३ ॥
guṇa-doṣa-bhidā-dṛṣṭim
antareṇa vacas tava
niḥśreyasaṁ kathaṁ nṝṇāṁ
niṣedha-vidhi-lakṣaṇam
Synonyms
guṇa — piety; doṣa — sin; bhidā — the difference between; dṛṣṭim — seeing; antareṇa — without; vacaḥ — words; tava — Your; niḥśreyasam — perfection of life, liberation; katham — how is it possible; nṝṇām — for human beings; niṣedha — prohibitions; vidhi — positive injunctions; lakṣaṇam — characterized by.

Translation
Without seeing the difference between piety and sin, how can one understand Your own instructions in the form of Vedic literatures, which order one to act piously and forbid one to act sinfully? Furthermore, without such authorized Vedic literatures, which ultimately award liberation, how can human beings achieve the perfection of life?

Text 4
पितृदेवमनुष्याणां वेदश्चक्षुस्तवेश्वर ।
श्रेयस्त्वनुपलब्धेऽर्थे साध्यसाधनयोरपि ॥ ४ ॥
pitṛ-deva-manuṣyānāṁ
vedaś cakṣus taveśvara
śreyas tv anupalabdhe ’rthe
sādhya-sādhanayor api
Synonyms
pitṛ — of the forefathers; deva — of the demigods; manuṣyāṇām — of the human beings; vedaḥ — the Vedic knowledge; cakṣuḥ — is the eye; tava — emanating from You; īśvara — O Supreme Lord; śreyaḥ — superior; tu — indeed; anupalabdhe — in that which cannot be directly perceived; arthe — in the goals of human life, such as sense gratification, liberation, and attainment of heaven; sādhya-sādhanayoḥ — both in the means and the end; api — indeed.

Translation
My dear Lord, to understand those things beyond direct experience — such as spiritual liberation or the attainment of heaven and similar material enjoyments — and in general to understand the means and end of all things, it is imperative that the forefathers, demigods and human beings consult the Vedic literatures, for these literatures, being Your own laws, constitute the highest evidence and revelation.

Text 5
गुणदोषभिदाद‍ृष्टिर्निगमात्ते न हि स्वत: ।
निगमेनापवादश्च भिदाया इति ह भ्रम: ॥ ५ ॥
guṇa-doṣa-bhidā-dṛṣṭir
nigamāt te na hi svataḥ
nigamenāpavādaś ca
bhidāyā iti ha bhramaḥ
Synonyms
guṇa — piety; doṣa — sin; bhidā — the difference between; dṛṣṭiḥ — seeing; nigamāt — from Vedic knowledge; te — Your; na — not; hi — indeed; svataḥ — automatically; nigamena — by the Vedas; apavādaḥ — nullification; ca — also; bhidāyāḥ — of such distinction; iti — thus; ha — clearly; bhramaḥ — confusion.

Translation
My dear Lord, the distinction observed between piety and sin comes from Your own Vedic knowledge and does not arise by itself. If the same Vedic literature subsequently nullifies such distinction between piety and sin, there will certainly be confusion.

Text 6
श्रीभगवानुवाच
योगास्‍त्रयो मया प्रोक्ता नृणां श्रेयोविधित्सया ।
ज्ञानं कर्म च भक्तिश्च नोपायोऽन्योऽस्ति कुत्रचित् ॥ ६ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
yogās trayo mayā proktā
nṝṇāṁ śreyo-vidhitsayā
jñānaṁ karma ca bhaktiś ca
nopāyo ’nyo ’sti kutracit
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; yogāḥ — processes; trayaḥ — three; mayā — by Me; proktāḥ — described; nṝṇām — of human beings; śreyaḥ — perfection; vidhitsayā — desiring to bestow; jñānam — the path of philosophy; karma — the path of work; ca — also; bhaktiḥ — the path of devotion; ca — also; na — no; upāyaḥ — means; anyaḥ — other; asti — exists; kutracit — whatsoever.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, because I desire that human beings may achieve perfection, I have presented three paths of advancement — the path of knowledge, the path of work and the path of devotion. Besides these three there is absolutely no other means of elevation.

Text 7
निर्विण्णानां ज्ञानयोगो न्यासिनामिह कर्मसु ।
तेष्वनिर्विण्णचित्तानां कर्मयोगस्तु कामिनाम् ॥ ७ ॥
nirviṇṇānāṁ jñāna-yogo
nyāsinām iha karmasu
teṣv anirviṇṇa-cittānāṁ
karma-yogas tu kāminām
Synonyms
nirviṇṇānām — for those who are disgusted; jñāna-yogaḥ — the path of philosophical speculation; nyāsinām — for those who are renounced; iha — among these three paths; karmasu — in ordinary material activities; teṣu — in those activities; anirviṇṇa — not disgusted; cittānām — for those who have consciousness; karma-yogaḥ — the path of karma-yoga; tu — indeed; kāminām — for those who still desire material happiness.

Translation
Among these three paths, jñāna-yoga, the path of philosophical speculation, is recommended for those who are disgusted with material life and are thus detached from ordinary, fruitive activities. Those who are not disgusted with material life, having many desires yet to fulfill, should seek perfection through the path of karma-yoga.

Text 8
यद‍ृच्छया मत्कथादौ जातश्रद्धस्तु य: पुमान् ।
न निर्विण्णो नातिसक्तो भक्तियोगोऽस्य सिद्धिद: ॥ ८ ॥
yadṛcchayā mat-kathādau
jāta-śraddhas tu yaḥ pumān
na nirviṇṇo nāti-sakto
bhakti-yogo ’sya siddhi-daḥ
Synonyms
yadṛcchayā — somehow or other by good fortune; mat-kathā-ādau — in the narrations, songs, philosophy, dramatical performances, etc., that describe My glories; jāta — awakened; śraddhaḥ — faith; tu — indeed; yaḥ — one who; pumān — a person; na — not; nirviṇṇaḥ — disgusted; na — not; ati-saktaḥ — very attached; bhakti-yogaḥ — the path of loving devotion; asya — his; siddhi-daḥ — will award perfection.

Translation
If somehow or other by good fortune one develops faith in hearing and chanting My glories, such a person, being neither disgusted with nor very much attached to material life, should achieve perfection through the path of loving devotion to Me.

Text 9
तावत् कर्माणि कुर्वीत न निर्विद्येत यावता ।
मत्कथाश्रवणादौ वा श्रद्धा यावन्न जायते ॥ ९ ॥
tāvat karmāṇi kurvīta
na nirvidyeta yāvatā
mat-kathā-śravaṇādau vā
śraddhā yāvan na jāyate
Synonyms
tāvat — up to that time; karmāṇi — fruitive activities; kurvīta — one should execute; na nirvidyeta — is not satiated; yāvatā — as long as; mat-kathā — of discourses about Me; śravaṇa-ādau — in the matter of śravaṇam, kīrtanam and so on; vā — or; śraddhā — faith; yāvat — as long as; na — not; jāyate — is awakened.

Translation
As long as one is not satiated by fruitive activity and has not awakened his taste for devotional service by śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ, one has to act according to the regulative principles of the Vedic injunctions.

Text 10
स्वधर्मस्थो यजन् यज्ञैरनाशी:काम उद्धव ।
न याति स्वर्गनरकौ यद्यन्यन्न समाचरेत् ॥ १० ॥
sva-dharma-stho yajan yajñair
anāśīḥ-kāma uddhava
na yāti svarga-narakau
yady anyan na samācaret
Synonyms
sva-dharma — in one’s prescribed duties; sthaḥ — situated; yajan — worshiping; yajñaiḥ — by prescribed sacrifices; anāśīḥ-kāmaḥ — not desiring fruitive results; uddhava — My dear Uddhava; na — does not; yāti — go; svarga — to heaven; narakau — or to hell; yadi — if; anyat — something other than his prescribed duty; na — does not; samācaret — perform.

Translation
My dear Uddhava, a person who is situated in his prescribed duty, properly worshiping by Vedic sacrifices but not desiring the fruitive result of such worship, will not go to the heavenly planets; similarly, by not performing forbidden activities he will not go to hell.

Text 11
अस्मिंल्ल‍ोके वर्तमान: स्वधर्मस्थोऽनघ: शुचि: ।
ज्ञानं विशुद्धमाप्नोति मद्भ‍‍क्तिं वा यद‍ृच्छया ॥ ११ ॥
asmiḻ loke vartamānaḥ
sva-dharma-stho ’naghaḥ śuciḥ
jñānaṁ viśuddham āpnoti
mad-bhaktiṁ vā yadṛcchayā
Synonyms
asmin — in this; loke — world; vartamānaḥ — existing; sva-dharma — in one’s prescribed duty; sthaḥ — situated; anaghaḥ — free from sinful activities; śuciḥ — cleansed of material contamination; jñānam — knowledge; viśuddham — transcendental; āpnoti — obtains; mat — to Me; bhaktim — devotional service; vā — or; yadṛcchayā — according to one’s fortune.

Translation
One who is situated in his prescribed duty, free from sinful activities and cleansed of material contamination, in this very life obtains transcendental knowledge or, by fortune, devotional service unto Me.

Text 12
स्वर्गिणोऽप्येतमिच्छन्ति लोकं निरयिणस्तथा ।
साधकं ज्ञानभक्तिभ्यामुभयं तदसाधकम् ॥ १२ ॥
svargiṇo ’py etam icchanti
lokaṁ nirayiṇas tathā
sādhakaṁ jñāna-bhaktibhyām
ubhayaṁ tad-asādhakam
Synonyms
svargiṇaḥ — the residents of the heavenly planets; api — even; etam — this; icchanti — desire; lokam — earth planet; nirayiṇaḥ — the residents of hell; tathā — in the same way; sādhakam — leading to achievement; jñāna-bhaktibhyām — of transcendental knowledge and love of Godhead; ubhayam — both (heaven and hell); tat — for that perfection; asādhakam — not useful.

Translation
The residents of both heaven and hell desire human birth on the earth planet because human life facilitates the achievement of transcendental knowledge and love of Godhead, whereas neither heavenly nor hellish bodies efficiently provide such opportunities.

Text 13
न नर: स्वर्गतिं काङ्‍क्षेन्नारकीं वा विचक्षण: ।
नेमं लोकं च काङ्‍क्षेत देहावेशात् प्रमाद्यति ॥ १३ ॥
na naraḥ svar-gatiṁ kāṅkṣen
nārakīṁ vā vicakṣaṇaḥ
nemaṁ lokaṁ ca kāṅkṣeta
dehāveśāt pramādyati
Synonyms
na — never; naraḥ — a human being; svaḥ-gatim — promotion to heaven; kāṅkṣet — should desire; nārakīm — to hell; vā — or; vicakṣaṇaḥ — a learned person; na — nor; imam — this; lokam — earth planet; ca — also; kāṅkṣeta — one should desire; deha — in the material body; āveśāt — from absorption; pramādyati — one becomes a fool.

Translation
A human being who is wise should never desire promotion to heavenly planets or residence in hell. Indeed, a human being should also never desire permanent residence on the earth, for by such absorption in the material body one becomes foolishly negligent of one’s actual self-interest.

Text 14
एतद् विद्वान् पुरा मृत्योरभवाय घटेत स: ।
अप्रमत्त इदं ज्ञात्वा मर्त्यमप्यर्थसिद्धिदम् ॥ १४ ॥
etad vidvān purā mṛtyor
abhavāya ghaṭeta saḥ
apramatta idaṁ jñātvā
martyam apy artha-siddhi-dam
Synonyms
etat — this; vidvān — knowing; purā — before; mṛtyoḥ — death; abhavāya — to transcend material existence; ghaṭeta — should act; saḥ — he; apramattaḥ — without laziness or foolishness; idam — this; jñātvā — knowing; martyam — subject to death; api — even though; artha — of the goal of life; siddhi-dam — giving the perfection.

Translation
A wise person, knowing that although the material body is subject to death it can still award the perfection of one’s life, should not foolishly neglect to take advantage of this opportunity before death arrives.

Text 15
छिद्यमानं यमैरेतै: कृतनीडं वनस्पतिम् ।
खग: स्वकेतमुत्सृज्य क्षेमं याति ह्यलम्पट: ॥ १५ ॥
chidyamānaṁ yamair etaiḥ
kṛta-nīḍaṁ vanaspatim
khagaḥ sva-ketam utsṛjya
kṣemaṁ yāti hy alampaṭaḥ
Synonyms
chidyamānam — being cut down; yamaiḥ — by cruel men, who are like death personified; etaiḥ — by these; kṛta-nīḍam — in which he has constructed his nest; vanaspatim — a tree; khagaḥ — a bird; sva-ketam — his home; utsṛjya — giving up; kṣemam — happiness; yāti — achieves; hi — indeed; alampaṭaḥ — without attachment.

Translation
Without attachment, a bird gives up the tree in which his nest was constructed when that tree is cut down by cruel men who are like death personified, and thus the bird achieves happiness in another place.

Text 16
अहोरात्रैश्छिद्यमानं बुद्ध्वायुर्भयवेपथु: ।
मुक्तसङ्ग: परं बुद्ध्वा निरीह उपशाम्यति ॥ १६ ॥
aho-rātraiś chidyamānaṁ
buddhvāyur bhaya-vepathuḥ
mukta-saṅgaḥ paraṁ buddhvā
nirīha upaśāmyati
Synonyms
ahaḥ — by days; rātraiḥ — by nights; chidyamānam — being cut down; buddhvā — knowing; āyuḥ — the duration of life; bhaya — with fear; vepathuḥ — trembling; mukta-saṅgaḥ — free from attachment; param — the Supreme Lord; buddhvā — understanding; nirīhaḥ — without material desire; upaśāmyati — achieves perfect peace.

Translation
Knowing that one’s duration of life is being similarly cut down by the passing of days and nights, one should be shaken by fear. In this way, giving up all material attachment and desire, one understands the Supreme Lord and achieves perfect peace.

Text 17
नृदेहमाद्यं सुलभं सुदुर्लभं
प्लवं सुकल्पं गुरुकर्णधारम् ।
मयानुकूलेन नभस्वतेरितं
पुमान् भवाब्धिं न तरेत् स आत्महा ॥ १७ ॥
nṛ-deham ādyaṁ su-labhaṁ su-durlabhaṁ
plavaṁ su-kalpaṁ guru-karṇadhāram
mayānukūlena nabhasvateritaṁ
pumān bhavābdhiṁ na taret sa ātma-hā
Synonyms
nṛ — human; deham — body; ādyam — the source of all favorable results; su-labham — effortlessly obtained; su-durlabham — although impossible to obtain even with great endeavor; plavam — a boat; su-kalpam — extremely well suited for its purpose; guru — having the spiritual master; karṇa-dhāram — as the captain of the boat; mayā — by Me; anukūlena — with favorable; nabhasvatā — winds; īritam — impelled; pumān — a person; bhava — of material existence; abdhim — the ocean; na — does not; taret — cross over; saḥ — he; ātma-hā — the killer of his own soul.

Translation
The human body, which can award all benefit in life, is automatically obtained by the laws of nature, although it is a very rare achievement. This human body can be compared to a perfectly constructed boat having the spiritual master as the captain and the instructions of the Personality of Godhead as favorable winds impelling it on its course. Considering all these advantages, a human being who does not utilize his human life to cross the ocean of material existence must be considered the killer of his own soul.

Text 18
यदारम्भेषु निर्विण्णो विरक्त: संयतेन्द्रिय: ।
अभ्यासेनात्मनो योगी धारयेदचलं मन: ॥ १८ ॥
yadārambheṣu nirviṇṇo
viraktaḥ saṁyatendriyaḥ
abhyāsenātmano yogī
dhārayed acalaṁ manaḥ
Synonyms
yadā — when; ārambheṣu — in material endeavors; nirviṇṇaḥ — hopeless; viraktaḥ — detached; saṁyata — completely controlling; indriyaḥ — the senses; abhyāsena — by practice; ātmanaḥ — of the soul; yogī — the transcendentalist; dhārayet — should concentrate; acalam — steady; manaḥ — the mind.

Translation
A transcendentalist, having become disgusted and hopeless in all endeavors for material happiness, completely controls the senses and develops detachment. By spiritual practice he should then fix the mind on the spiritual platform without deviation.

Text 19
धार्यमाणं मनो यर्हि भ्राम्यदश्वनवस्थितम् ।
अतन्द्रितोऽनुरोधेन मार्गेणात्मवशं नयेत् ॥ १९ ॥
dhāryamāṇaṁ mano yarhi
bhrāmyad āśv anavasthitam
atandrito ’nurodhena
mārgeṇātma-vaśaṁ nayet
Synonyms
dhāryamāṇam — being concentrated on the spiritual platform; manaḥ — the mind; yarhi — when; bhrāmyat — is deviated; āśu — suddenly; anavasthitam — not situated on the spiritual platform; atandritaḥ — carefully; anurodhena — according to the prescribed regulations; mārgeṇa — by the process; ātma — of the soul; vaśam — under the control; nayet — one should bring.

Translation
Whenever the mind, being concentrated on the spiritual platform, is suddenly deviated from its spiritual position, one should carefully bring it under the control of the self by following the prescribed means.

Text 20
मनोगतिं न विसृजेज्जितप्राणो जितेन्द्रिय: ।
सत्त्वसम्पन्नया बुद्ध्या मन आत्मवशं नयेत् ॥ २० ॥
mano-gatiṁ na visṛjej
jita-prāṇo jitendriyaḥ
sattva-sampannayā buddhyā
mana ātma-vaśaṁ nayet
Synonyms
manaḥ — of the mind; gatim — goal; na — not; visṛjet — should lose sight of; jita-prāṇaḥ — one who has conquered the breath; jita-indriyaḥ — who has conquered his senses; sattva — of the mode of goodness; sampannayā — characterized by flourishing; buddhyā — by the intelligence; manaḥ — the mind; ātma-vaśam — under the control of the self; nayet — one should bring.

Translation
One should never lose sight of the actual goal of mental activities, but rather, conquering the life air and senses and utilizing intelligence strengthened by the mode of goodness, one should bring the mind under the control of the self.

Text 21
एष वै परमो योगो मनस: सङ्ग्रह: स्मृत: ।
हृदयज्ञत्वमन्विच्छन् दम्यस्येवार्वतो मुहु: ॥ २१ ॥
eṣa vai paramo yogo
manasaḥ saṅgrahaḥ smṛtaḥ
hṛdaya-jñatvam anvicchan
damyasyevārvato muhuḥ
Synonyms
eṣaḥ — this; vai — indeed; paramaḥ — supreme; yogaḥ — yoga process; manasaḥ — of the mind; saṅgrahaḥ — complete control; smṛtaḥ — thus declared; hṛdaya-jñatvam — the characteristic of knowing intimately; anvicchan — carefully watching; damyasya — which is to be subdued; iva — like; arvataḥ — of a horse; muhuḥ — always.

Translation
An expert horseman, desiring to tame a headstrong horse, first lets the horse have his way for a moment and then, pulling the reins, gradually places the horse on the desired path. Similarly, the supreme yoga process is that by which one carefully observes the movements and desires of the mind and gradually brings them under full control.

Text 22
साङ्ख्येन सर्वभावानां प्रतिलोमानुलोमत: ।
भवाप्ययावनुध्यायेन्मनो यावत् प्रसीदति ॥ २२ ॥
sāṅkhyena sarva-bhāvānāṁ
pratilomānulomataḥ
bhavāpyayāv anudhyāyen
mano yāvat prasīdati
Synonyms
sāṅkhyena — by analytic study; sarva — of all; bhāvānām — material elements (cosmic, earthly and atomic); pratiloma — by regressive function; anulomataḥ — by progressive function; bhava — creation; apyayau — annihilation; anudhyāyet — should constantly observe; manaḥ — the mind; yāvat — until; prasīdati — is spiritually satisfied.

Translation
Until one’s mind is fixed in spiritual satisfaction, one should analytically study the temporary nature of all material objects, whether cosmic, earthly or atomic. One should constantly observe the process of creation through the natural progressive function and the process of annihilation through the regressive function.

Text 23
निर्विण्णस्य विरक्तस्य पुरुषस्योक्तवेदिन: ।
मनस्त्यजति दौरात्म्यं चिन्तितस्यानुचिन्तया ॥ २३ ॥
nirviṇṇasya viraktasya
puruṣasyokta-vedinaḥ
manas tyajati daurātmyaṁ
cintitasyānucintayā
Synonyms
nirviṇṇasya — of one who is disgusted with the illusory nature of the material world; viraktasya — and who is therefore detached; puruṣasya — of such a person; ukta-vedinaḥ — who is guided by the instructions of his spiritual master; manaḥ — the mind; tyajati — gives up; daurātmyam — the false identification with the material body and mind; cintitasya — of that which is contemplated; anucintayā — by constant analysis.

Translation
When a person is disgusted with the temporary, illusory nature of this world and is thus detached from it, his mind, guided by the instructions of his spiritual master, considers again and again the nature of this world and eventually gives up the false identification with matter.

Text 24
यमादिभिर्योगपथैरान्वीक्षिक्या च विद्यया ।
ममार्चोपासनाभिर्वा नान्यैर्योग्यं स्मरेन्मन: ॥ २४ ॥
yamādibhir yoga-pathair
ānvīkṣikyā ca vidyayā
mamārcopāsanābhir vā
nānyair yogyaṁ smaren manaḥ
Synonyms
yama-ādibhiḥ — by disciplinary regulations, etc.; yoga-pathaiḥ — by the procedures of the yoga system; ānvīkṣikyā — by logical analysis; ca — also; vidyayā — by spiritual knowledge; mama — My; arcā — worship; upāsanābhiḥ — by adoration, etc.; vā — or; na — never; anyaiḥ — by other (means); yogyam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the object of meditation; smaret — one should focus on; manaḥ — the mind.

Translation
Through the various disciplinary regulations and the purificatory procedures of the yoga system, through logic and spiritual education or through worship and adoration of Me, one should constantly engage his mind in remembering the Personality of Godhead, the goal of yoga. No other means should be employed for this purpose.

Text 25
यदि कुर्यात् प्रमादेन योगी कर्म विगर्हितम् ।
योगेनैव दहेदंहो नान्यत्तत्र कदाचन ॥ २५ ॥
yadi kuryāt pramādena
yogī karma vigarhitam
yogenaiva dahed aṁho
nānyat tatra kadācana
Synonyms
yadi — if; kuryāt — should perform; pramādena — due to negligence; yogī — the yogī; karma — an activity; vigarhitam — abominable; yogena — by the yoga process; eva — only; dahet — he should burn up; aṁhaḥ — that sin; na — no; anyat — other means; tatra — in this matter; kadācana — at any time (should be employed).

Translation
If, because of momentary inattention, a yogī accidentally commits an abominable activity, then by the very practice of yoga he should burn to ashes the sinful reaction, without at any time employing any other procedure.

Text 26
स्वे स्वेऽधिकारे या निष्ठा स गुण: परिकीर्तित: ।
कर्मणां जात्यशुद्धानामनेन नियम: कृत: ।
गुणदोषविधानेन सङ्गानां त्याजनेच्छया ॥ २६ ॥
sve sve ’dhikāre yā niṣṭhā
sa guṇaḥ parikīrtitaḥ
karmaṇāṁ jāty-aśuddhānām
anena niyamaḥ kṛtaḥ
guṇa-doṣa-vidhānena
saṅgānāṁ tyājanecchayā
Synonyms
sve sve — each in his own; adhikāre — position; yā — which; niṣṭhā — steady practice; saḥ — this; guṇaḥ — piety; parikīrtitaḥ — is thoroughly declared; karmaṇām — of fruitive activities; jāti — by nature; aśuddhānām — impure; anena — by this; niyamaḥ — disciplinary control; kṛtaḥ — is established; guṇa — of piety; doṣa — of sin; vidhānena — by the rule; saṅgānām — of association with different types of sense gratification; tyājana — of renunciation; icchayā — by the desire.

Translation
It is firmly declared that the steady adherence of transcendentalists to their respective spiritual positions constitutes real piety and that sin occurs when a transcendentalist neglects his prescribed duty. One who adopts this standard of piety and sin, sincerely desiring to give up all past association with sense gratification, is able to subdue materialistic activities, which are by nature impure.

Texts 27-28
जातश्रद्धो मत्कथासु निर्विण्ण: सर्वकर्मसु ।
वेद दु:खात्मकान् कामान् परित्यागेऽप्यनीश्वर: ॥ २७ ॥
ततो भजेत मां प्रीत: श्रद्धालुर्दृढनिश्चय: ।
जुषमाणश्च तान् कामान् दु:खोदर्कांश्च गर्हयन् ॥ २८ ॥
jāta-śraddho mat-kathāsu
nirviṇṇaḥ sarva-karmasu
veda duḥkhātmakān kāmān
parityāge ’py anīśvaraḥ
tato bhajeta māṁ prītaḥ
śraddhālur dṛḍha-niścayaḥ
juṣamāṇaś ca tān kāmān
duḥkhodarkāṁś ca garhayan
Synonyms
jāta — one who has awakened; śraddhaḥ — faith; mat-kathāsu — in the descriptions of My glories; nirviṇṇaḥ — disgusted; sarva — with all; karmasu — activities; veda — he knows; duḥkha — misery; ātmakān — constituted of; kāmān — all types of sense gratification; parityāge — in the process of renouncing; api — although; anīśvaraḥ — unable; tataḥ — due to such faith; bhajeta — he should worship; mām — Me; prītaḥ — remaining happy; śraddhāluḥ — being faithful; dṛḍha — resolute; niścayaḥ — conviction; juṣamāṇaḥ — engaging in; ca — also; tān — that; kāmān — sense gratification; duḥkha — misery; udarkān — leading to; ca — also; garhayan — repenting of.

Translation
Having awakened faith in the narrations of My glories, being disgusted with all material activities, knowing that all sense gratification leads to misery, but still being unable to renounce all sense enjoyment, My devotee should remain happy and worship Me with great faith and conviction. Even though he is sometimes engaged in sense enjoyment, My devotee knows that all sense gratification leads to a miserable result, and he sincerely repents such activities.

Text 29
प्रोक्तेन भक्तियोगेन भजतो मासकृन्मुने: ।
कामा हृदय्या नश्यन्ति सर्वे मयि हृदि स्थिते ॥ २९ ॥
proktena bhakti-yogena
bhajato māsakṛn muneḥ
kāmā hṛdayyā naśyanti
sarve mayi hṛdi sthite
Synonyms
proktena — which has been described; bhakti-yogena — by devotional service; bhajataḥ — who is worshiping; mā — Me; asakṛt — constantly; muneḥ — of the sage; kāmāḥ — material desires; hṛdayyāḥ — in the heart; naśyanti — are destroyed; sarve — all of them; mayi — in Me; hṛdi — when the heart; sthite — is firmly situated.

Translation
When an intelligent person engages constantly in worshiping Me through loving devotional service as described by Me, his heart becomes firmly situated in Me. Thus all material desires within the heart are destroyed.

Text 30
भिद्यते हृदयग्रन्थिश्छिद्यन्ते सर्वसंशया: ।
क्षीयन्ते चास्य कर्माणि मयि द‍ृष्टेऽखिलात्मनि ॥ ३० ॥
bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś
chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ
kṣīyante cāsya karmāṇi
mayi dṛṣṭe ’khilātmani
Synonyms
bhidyate — pierced; hṛdaya — heart; granthiḥ — knots; chidyante — cut to pieces; sarva — all; saṁśayāḥ — misgivings; kṣīyante — terminated; ca — and; asya — his; karmāṇi — chain of fruitive actions; mayi — when I; dṛṣṭe — am seen; akhila-ātmani — as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
The knot in the heart is pierced, all misgivings are cut to pieces and the chain of fruitive actions is terminated when I am seen as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 31
तस्मान्मद्भ‍‍क्तियुक्तस्य योगिनो वै मदात्मन: ।
न ज्ञानं न च वैराग्यं प्राय: श्रेयो भवेदिह ॥ ३१ ॥
tasmān mad-bhakti-yuktasya
yogino vai mad-ātmanaḥ
na jñānaṁ na ca vairāgyaṁ
prāyaḥ śreyo bhaved iha
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; mat-bhakti-yuktasya — of one who is engaged in My loving service; yoginaḥ — of a devotee; vai — certainly; mat-ātmanaḥ — whose mind is fixed in Me; na — not; jñānam — the cultivation of knowledge; na — nor; ca — also; vairāgyam — the cultivation of renunciation; prāyaḥ — generally; śreyaḥ — the means of achieving perfection; bhavet — may be; iha — in this world.

Translation
Therefore, for a devotee engaged in My loving service, with mind fixed on Me, the cultivation of knowledge and renunciation is generally not the means of achieving the highest perfection within this world.

Texts 32-33
यत् कर्मभिर्यत्तपसा ज्ञानवैराग्यतश्च यत् ।
योगेन दानधर्मेण श्रेयोभिरितरैरपि ॥ ३२ ॥
सर्वं मद्भ‍‍क्तियोगेन मद्भ‍क्तो लभतेऽञ्जसा ।
स्वर्गापवर्गं मद्धाम कथञ्चिद् यदि वाञ्छति ॥ ३३ ॥
yat karmabhir yat tapasā
jñāna-vairāgyataś ca yat
yogena dāna-dharmeṇa
śreyobhir itarair api
sarvaṁ mad-bhakti-yogena
mad-bhakto labhate ’ñjasā
svargāpavargaṁ mad-dhāma
kathañcid yadi vāñchati
Synonyms
yat — that which is obtained; karmabhiḥ — by fruitive activities; yat — that which; tapasā — by penance; jñāna — by cultivation of knowledge; vairāgyataḥ — by detachment; ca — also; yat — that which is achieved; yogena — by the mystic yoga system; dāna — by charity; dharmeṇa — by religious duties; śreyobhiḥ — by processes for making life auspicious; itaraiḥ — by others; api — indeed; sarvam — all; mat-bhakti-yogena — by loving service unto Me; mat-bhaktaḥ — My devotee; labhate — achieves; añjasā — easily; svarga — promotion to heaven; apavargam — liberation from all misery; mat-dhāma — residence in My abode; kathañcit — somehow or other; yadi — if; vāñchati — he desires.

Translation
Everything that can be achieved by fruitive activities, penance, knowledge, detachment, mystic yoga, charity, religious duties and all other means of perfecting life is easily achieved by My devotee through loving service unto Me. If somehow or other My devotee desires promotion to heaven, liberation, or residence in My abode, he easily achieves such benedictions.

Text 34
न किञ्चित् साधवो धीरा भक्ता ह्येकान्तिनो मम ।
वाञ्छन्त्यपि मया दत्तं कैवल्यमपुनर्भवम् ॥ ३४ ॥
na kiñcit sādhavo dhīrā
bhaktā hy ekāntino mama
vāñchanty api mayā dattaṁ
kaivalyam apunar-bhavam
Synonyms
na — never; kiñcit — anything; sādhavaḥ — saintly persons; dhīrāḥ — with deep intelligence; bhaktāḥ — devotees; hi — certainly; ekāntinaḥ — completely dedicated; mama — unto Me; vāñchanti — desire; api — indeed; mayā — by Me; dattam — given; kaivalyam — liberation; apunaḥ-bhavam — freedom from birth and death.

Translation
Because My devotees possess saintly behavior and deep intelligence, they completely dedicate themselves to Me and do not desire anything besides Me. Indeed, even if I offer them liberation from birth and death, they do not accept it.

Text 35
नैरपेक्ष्यं परं प्राहुर्नि:श्रेयसमनल्पकम् ।
तस्मान्निराशिषो भक्तिर्निरपेक्षस्य मे भवेत् ॥ ३५ ॥
nairapekṣyaṁ paraṁ prāhur
niḥśreyasam analpakam
tasmān nirāśiṣo bhaktir
nirapekṣasya me bhavet
Synonyms
nairapekṣyam — not desiring anything except devotional service; param — the best; prāhuḥ — it is said; niḥśreyasam — highest stage of liberation; analpakam — great; tasmāt — therefore; nirāśiṣaḥ — of one who does not seek personal rewards; bhaktiḥ — loving devotional service; nirapekṣasya — of one who only sees Me; me — unto Me; bhavet — may arise.

Translation
It is said that complete detachment is the highest stage of freedom. Therefore, one who has no personal desire and does not pursue personal rewards can achieve loving devotional service unto Me.

Text 36
न मय्येकान्तभक्तानां गुणदोषोद्भ‍वा गुणा: ।
साधूनां समचित्तानां बुद्धे: परमुपेयुषाम् ॥ ३६ ॥
na mayy ekānta-bhaktānāṁ
guṇa-doṣodbhavā guṇāḥ
sādhūnāṁ sama-cittānāṁ
buddheḥ param upeyuṣām
Synonyms
na — not; mayi — in Me; eka-anta — unalloyed; bhaktānām — of the devotees; guṇa — recommended as good; doṣa — forbidden as unfavorable; udbhavāḥ — arising from such things; guṇāḥ — piety and sin; sādhūnām — of those who are free from material hankering; sama-cittānām — who maintain steady spiritual consciousness in all circumstances; buddheḥ — that which can be conceived by material intelligence; param — beyond; upeyuṣām — of those who have achieved.

Translation
Material piety and sin, which arise from the good and evil of this world, cannot exist within My unalloyed devotees, who, being free from material hankering, maintain steady spiritual consciousness in all circumstances. Indeed, such devotees have achieved Me, the Supreme Lord, who am beyond anything that can be conceived by material intelligence.

Text 37
एवमेतान् मया दिष्टाननुतिष्ठन्ति मे पथ: ।
क्षेमं विन्दन्ति मत्स्थानं यद् ब्रह्म परमं विदु: ॥ ३७ ॥
evam etān mayā diṣṭān
anutiṣṭhanti me pathaḥ
kṣemaṁ vindanti mat-sthānaṁ
yad brahma paramaṁ viduḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; etān — these; mayā — by Me; diṣṭān — instructed; anutiṣṭhanti — those who follow; me — Me; pathaḥ — the means of achieving; kṣemam — freedom from illusion; vindanti — they achieve; mat-sthānam — My personal abode; yat — that which; brahma paramam — the Absolute Truth; viduḥ — they directly know.

Translation
Persons who seriously follow these methods of achieving Me, which I have personally taught, attain freedom from illusion, and upon reaching My personal abode they perfectly understand the Absolute Truth.