Text 1
श्रीभगवानुवाच
य एतान् मत्पथो हित्वा भक्तिज्ञानक्रियात्मकान् ।
क्षुद्रान् कामांश्चलै: प्राणैर्जुषन्त: संसरन्ति ते ॥ १ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
ya etān mat-patho hitvā
bhakti-jñāna-kriyātmakān
kṣudrān kāmāṁś calaiḥ prāṇair
juṣantaḥ saṁsaranti te
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; ye — those who; etān — these; mat-pathaḥ — means for achieving Me; hitvā — giving up; bhakti — devotional service; jñāna — analytic philosophy; kriyā — regulated work; ātmakān — consisting of; kṣudrān — insignificant; kāmān — sense gratification; calaiḥ — by the flickering; prāṇaiḥ — senses; juṣantaḥ — cultivating; saṁsaranti — undergo material existence; te — they.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Those who give up these methods for achieving Me, which consist of devotional service, analytic philosophy and regulated execution of prescribed duties, and instead, being moved by the material senses, cultivate insignificant sense gratification, certainly undergo the continual cycle of material existence.

Text 2
स्वे स्वेऽधिकारे या निष्ठा स गुण: परिकीर्तित: ।
विपर्ययस्तु दोष: स्यादुभयोरेष निश्चय: ॥ २ ॥
sve sve ’dhikāre yā niṣṭhā
sa guṇaḥ parikīrtitaḥ
viparyayas tu doṣaḥ syād
ubhayor eṣa niścayaḥ
Synonyms
sve sve — each in his own; adhikāre — position; yā — such; niṣṭhā — steadiness; saḥ — this; guṇaḥ — piety; parikīrtitaḥ — is declared to be; viparyayaḥ — the opposite; tu — indeed; doṣaḥ — impiety; syāt — is; ubhayoḥ — of the two; eṣaḥ — this; niścayaḥ — the definite conclusion.

Translation
Steadiness in one’s own position is declared to be actual piety, whereas deviation from one’s position is considered impiety. In this way the two are definitely ascertained.

Text 3
शुद्ध्यशुद्धी विधीयेते समानेष्वपि वस्तुषु ।
द्रव्यस्य विचिकित्सार्थं गुणदोषौ शुभाशुभौ ।
धर्मार्थं व्यवहारार्थं यात्रार्थमिति चानघ ॥ ३ ॥
śuddhy-aśuddhī vidhīyete
samāneṣv api vastuṣu
dravyasya vicikitsārthaṁ
guṇa-doṣau śubhāśubhau
dharmārthaṁ vyavahārārthaṁ
yātrārtham iti cānagha
Synonyms
śuddhi — purity; aśuddhī — and impurity; vidhīyete — are established; samāneṣu — of the same category; api — indeed; vastuṣu — among objects; dravyasya — of a particular object; vicikitsā — evaluation; artham — for the purpose of; guṇa-doṣau — good and bad qualities; śubha-aśubhau — auspicious and inauspicious; dharma-artham — for the purpose of religious activities; vyavahāra-artham — for the purpose of ordinary dealings; yātrā-artham — for one’s physical survival; iti — thus; ca — also; anagha — O sinless one.

Translation
O sinless Uddhava, in order to understand what is proper in life one must evaluate a given object within its particular category. Thus, in analyzing religious principles one must consider purity and impurity. Similarly, in one’s ordinary dealings one must distinguish between good and bad, and to insure one’s physical survival one must recognize that which is auspicious and inauspicious.

Text 4
दर्शितोऽयं मयाचारो धर्ममुद्वहतां धुरम् ॥ ४ ॥
darśito ’yaṁ mayācāro
dharmam udvahatāṁ dhuram
Synonyms
darśitaḥ — revealed; ayam — this; mayā — by Me; ācāraḥ — way of life; dharmam — religious principles; udvahatām — for those who are bearing; dhuram — the burden.

Translation
I have revealed this way of life for those bearing the burden of mundane religious principles.

Text 5
भूम्यम्ब्वग्‍न्यनिलाकाशा भूतानां पञ्चधातव: ।
आब्रह्मस्थावरादीनां शारीरा आत्मसंयुता: ॥ ५ ॥
bhūmy-ambv-agny-anilākāśā
bhūtānāṁ pañca-dhātavaḥ
ā-brahma-sthāvarādīnāṁ
śārīrā ātma-saṁyutāḥ
Synonyms
bhūmi — earth; ambu — water; agni — fire; anila — air; ākāśāḥ — sky or ether; bhūtānām — of all conditioned souls; pañca — the five; dhātavaḥ — basic elements; ā-brahma — from Lord Brahmā; sthāvara-ādīnām — down to the nonmoving creatures; śārīrāḥ — used for the construction of the material bodies; ātma — to the Supreme Soul; saṁyutāḥ — equally related.

Translation
Earth, water, fire, air and ether are the five basic elements that constitute the bodies of all conditioned souls, from Lord Brahmā himself down to the nonmoving creatures. These elements all emanate from the one Personality of Godhead.

Text 6
वेदेन नामरूपाणि विषमाणि समेष्वपि ।
धातुषूद्धव कल्प्यन्त एतेषां स्वार्थसिद्धये ॥ ६ ॥
vedena nāma-rūpāṇi
viṣamāṇi sameṣv api
dhātuṣūddhava kalpyanta
eteṣāṁ svārtha-siddhaye
Synonyms
vedena — by Vedic literature; nāma — names; rūpāṇi — and forms; viṣamāṇi — different; sameṣu — which are equal; api — indeed; dhātuṣu — in (material bodies composed of) the five elements; uddhava — My dear Uddhava; kalpyante — are conceived of; eteṣām — of them, the living entities; sva-artha — of self-interest; siddhaye — for the achievement.

Translation
My dear Uddhava, although all material bodies are composed of the same five elements and are thus equal, the Vedic literatures conceive of different names and forms in relation to such bodies so that the living entities may achieve their goal of life.

Text 7
देशकालादिभावानां वस्तूनां मम सत्तम ।
गुणदोषौ विधीयेते नियमार्थं हि कर्मणाम् ॥ ७ ॥
deśa-kālādi-bhāvānāṁ
vastūnāṁ mama sattama
guṇa-doṣau vidhīyete
niyamārthaṁ hi karmaṇām
Synonyms
deśa — of space; kāla — time; ādi — and so on; bhāvānām — of such states of existence; vastūnām — of things; mama — by Me; sat-tama — O most saintly Uddhava; guṇa-doṣau — piety and sin; vidhīyete — are established; niyama-artham — for the restriction; hi — certainly; karmaṇām — of fruitive activities.

Translation
O saintly Uddhava, in order to restrict materialistic activities, I have established that which is proper and improper among all material things, including time, space and all physical objects.

Text 8
अकृष्णसारो देशानामब्रह्मण्योऽशुचिर्भवेत् ।
कृष्णसारोऽप्यसौवीरकीकटासंस्कृतेरिणम् ॥ ८ ॥
akṛṣṇa-sāro deśānām
abrahmaṇyo ’sucir bhavet
kṛṣṇa-sāro ’py asauvīra-
kīkaṭāsaṁskṛteriṇam
Synonyms
akṛṣṇa-sāraḥ — without spotted antelopes; deśānām — among places; abrahmaṇyaḥ — where there is no devotion to the brāhmaṇas; aśuciḥ — contaminated; bhavet — is; kṛṣṇa-sāraḥ — possessing spotted antelopes; api — even; asauvīra — without saintly cultured men; kīkaṭa — (a place of low-class men, such as) the state of Gayā; asaṁskṛta — where people do not practice cleanliness or purificatory ceremonies; īraṇam — where the land is barren.

Translation
Among places, those bereft of the spotted antelope, those devoid of devotion to the brāhmaṇas, those possessing spotted antelopes but bereft of respectable men, provinces like Kīkaṭa and places where cleanliness and purificatory rites are neglected, where meat-eaters are prominent or where the earth is barren, are all considered to be contaminated lands.

Text 9
कर्मण्यो गुणवान् कालो द्रव्यत: स्वत एव वा ।
यतो निवर्तते कर्म स दोषोऽकर्मक: स्मृत: ॥ ९ ॥
karmaṇyo guṇavān kālo
dravyataḥ svata eva vā
yato nivartate karma
sa doṣo ’karmakaḥ smṛtaḥ
Synonyms
karmaṇyaḥ — suitable for executing one’s prescribed duty; guṇavān — pure; kālaḥ — time; dravyataḥ — by achievement of auspicious objects; svataḥ — by its own nature; eva — indeed; vā — or; yataḥ — due to which (time); nivartate — is impeded; karma — one’s duty; saḥ — this (time); doṣaḥ — impure; akarmakaḥ — inappropriate for working properly; smṛtaḥ — is considered.

Translation
A specific time is considered pure when it is appropriate, either by its own nature or through achievement of suitable paraphernalia, for the performance of one’s prescribed duty. That time which impedes the performance of one’s duty is considered impure.

Text 10
द्रव्यस्य शुद्ध्यशुद्धी च द्रव्येण वचनेन च ।
संस्कारेणाथ कालेन महत्वाल्पतयाथवा ॥ १० ॥
dravyasya śuddhy-aśuddhī ca
dravyeṇa vacanena ca
saṁskāreṇātha kālena
mahatvālpatayātha vā
Synonyms
dravyasya — of an object; śuddhi — purity; aśuddhī — or impurity; ca — and; dravyeṇa — by another object; vacanena — by speech; ca — and; saṁskāreṇa — by ritual performance; atha — or else; kālena — by time; mahatva-alpatayā — by greatness or smallness; atha vā — or else.

Translation
An object’s purity or impurity is established by application of another object, by words, by rituals, by the effects of time or according to relative magnitude.

Text 11
शक्त्याशक्त्याथ वा बुद्ध्या समृद्ध्या च यदात्मने ।
अघं कुर्वन्ति हि यथा देशावस्थानुसारत: ॥ ११ ॥
śaktyāśaktyātha vā buddhyā
samṛddhyā ca yad ātmane
aghaṁ kurvanti hi yathā
deśāvasthānusārataḥ
Synonyms
śaktyā — by relative potency; aśaktyā — impotence; atha vā — or; buddhyā — in terms of understanding; samṛddhyā — opulence; ca — and; yat — which; ātmane — to oneself; agham — sinful reaction; kurvanti — cause; hi — indeed; yathā — in actuality; deśa — place; avasthā — or one’s condition; anusārataḥ — in accordance with.

Translation
Impure things may or may not impose sinful reactions upon a person, depending on that person’s strength or weakness, intelligence, wealth, location and physical condition.

Text 12
धान्यदार्वस्थितन्तूनां रसतैजसचर्मणाम् ।
कालवाय्वग्निमृत्तोयै: पार्थिवानां युतायुतै: ॥ १२ ॥
dhānya-dārv-asthi-tantūnāṁ
rasa-taijasa-carmaṇām
kāla-vāyv-agni-mṛt-toyaiḥ
pārthivānāṁ yutāyutaiḥ
Synonyms
dhānya — of grains; dāru — of wood (in the form of both ordinary objects and sacred utensils); asthi — bone (such as elephant tusks); tantūnām — and thread; rasa — of liquids (oil, ghee, etc.); taijasa — fiery objects (gold, etc.); carmaṇām — and skins; kāla — by time; vāyu — by air; agni — by fire; mṛt — by earth; toyaiḥ — and by water; pārthivānām — (also) of earthen objects (such as chariot wheels, mud, pots, bricks, etc.); yuta — in combination; ayutaiḥ — or separately.

Translation
Various objects such as grains, wooden utensils, things made of bone, thread, liquids, objects derived from fire, skins and earthy objects are all purified by time, by the wind, by fire, by earth and by water, either separately or in combination.

Text 13
अमेध्यलिप्तं यद् येन गन्धलेपं व्यपोहति ।
भजते प्रकृतिं तस्य तच्छौचं तावदिष्यते ॥ १३ ॥
amedhya-liptaṁ yad yena
gandha-lepaṁ vyapohati
bhajate prakṛtiṁ tasya
tac chaucaṁ tāvad iṣyate
Synonyms
amedhya — by something impure; liptam — touched; yat — that thing which; yena — by which; gandha — the bad smell; lepam — and the impure covering; vyapohati — gives up; bhajate — the contaminated object again assumes; prakṛtim — its original nature; tasya — of that object; tat — that application; śaucam — purification; tāvat — to that extent; iṣyate — is considered.

Translation
A particular purifying agent is considered appropriate when its application removes the bad odor or dirty covering of some contaminated object and makes it resume its original nature.

Text 14
स्‍नानदानतपोऽवस्थावीर्यसंस्कारकर्मभि: ।
मत्स्मृत्या चात्मन: शौचं शुद्ध: कर्माचरेद्‌द्विज: ॥ १४ ॥
snāna-dāna-tapo-’vasthā-
vīrya-saṁskāra-karmabhiḥ
mat-smṛtyā cātmanaḥ śaucaṁ
śuddhaḥ karmācared dvijaḥ
Synonyms
snāna — by bathing; dāna — charity; tapaḥ — austerity; avasthā — by virtue of one’s age; vīrya — potency; saṁskāra — execution of ritual purification; karmabhiḥ — and prescribed duties; mat-smṛtyā — by remembrance of Me; ca — also; ātmanaḥ — of the self; śaucam — cleanliness; śuddhaḥ — pure; karma — activity; ācaret — he should perform; dvijaḥ — a twice-born man.

Translation
The self can be cleansed by bathing, charity, austerity, age, personal strength, purificatory rituals, prescribed duties and, above all, by remembrance of Me. The brāhmaṇa and other twice-born men should be duly purified before performing their specific activities.

Text 15
मन्त्रस्य च परिज्ञानं कर्मशुद्धिर्मदर्पणम् ।
धर्म: सम्पद्यते षड्‌भिरधर्मस्तु विपर्यय: ॥ १५ ॥
mantrasya ca parijñānaṁ
karma-śuddhir mad-arpaṇam
dharmaḥ sampadyate ṣaḍbhir
adharmas tu viparyayaḥ
Synonyms
mantrasya — (the purification) of a mantra; ca — and; parijñānam — correct knowledge; karma — of work; śuddhiḥ — the purification; mat-arpaṇam — offering unto Me; dharmaḥ — religiousness; sampadyate — is achieved; ṣaḍbhiḥ — by the six (purification of place, time, substance, the doer, the mantras and the work); adharmaḥ — irreligiosity; tu — but; viparyayaḥ — otherwise.

Translation
A mantra is purified when chanted with proper knowledge, and one’s work is purified when offered to Me. Thus by purification of the place, time, substance, doer, mantras and work, one becomes religious, and by negligence of these six items one is considered irreligious.

Text 16
क्व‍‍चिद् गुणोऽपि दोष: स्याद् दोषोऽपि विधिना गुण: ।
गुणदोषार्थनियमस्तद्भ‍िदामेव बाधते ॥ १६ ॥
kvacid guṇo ’pi doṣaḥ syād
doṣo ’pi vidhinā guṇaḥ
guṇa-doṣārtha-niyamas
tad-bhidām eva bādhate
Synonyms
kvacit — sometimes; guṇaḥ — piety; api — even; doṣaḥ — sin; syāt — becomes; doṣaḥ — sin; api — also; vidhinā — on the strength of Vedic injunction; guṇaḥ — piety; guṇa-doṣa — to piety and sin; artha — regarding; niyamaḥ — restrictive regulation; tat — of them; bhidām — the distinction; eva — actually; bādhate — undoes.

Translation
Sometimes piety becomes sin, and sometimes what is ordinarily sin becomes piety on the strength of Vedic injunctions. Such special rules in effect eradicate the clear distinction between piety and sin.

Text 17
समानकर्माचरणं पतितानां न पातकम् ।
औत्पत्तिको गुण: सङ्गो न शयान: पतत्यध: ॥ १७ ॥
samāna-karmācaraṇaṁ
patitānāṁ na pātakam
autpattiko guṇaḥ saṅgo
na śayānaḥ pataty adhaḥ
Synonyms
samāna — equal; karma — of work; ācaraṇam — the performance; patitānām — for those who are fallen; na — is not; pātakam — a cause of falldown; autpattikaḥ — dictated by one’s nature; guṇaḥ — becomes a good quality; saṅgaḥ — material association; na — does not; śayānaḥ — one who is lying down; patati — fall; adhaḥ — further down.

Translation
The same activities that would degrade an elevated person do not cause falldown for those who are already fallen. Indeed, one who is lying on the ground cannot possibly fall further. The material association that is dictated by one’s own nature is considered a good quality.

Text 18
यतो यतो निवर्तेत विमुच्येत ततस्तत: ।
एष धर्मो नृणां क्षेम: शोकमोहभयापह: ॥ १८ ॥
yato yato nivarteta
vimucyeta tatas tataḥ
eṣa dharmo nṛṇāṁ kṣemaḥ
śoka-moha-bhayāpahaḥ
Synonyms
yataḥ yataḥ — from whatever; nivarteta — one desists; vimucyeta — he becomes liberated; tataḥ tataḥ — from that; eṣaḥ — this; dharmaḥ — the system of religion; nṛṇām — for humans; kṣemaḥ — the path of auspiciousness; śoka — suffering; moha — delusion; bhaya — and fear; apahaḥ — which takes away.

Translation
By refraining from a particular sinful or materialistic activity, one becomes freed from its bondage. Such renunciation is the basis of religious and auspicious life for human beings and drives away all suffering, illusion and fear.

Text 19
विषयेषु गुणाध्यासात् पुंस: सङ्गस्ततो भवेत् ।
सङ्गात्तत्र भवेत् काम: कामादेव कलिर्नृणाम् ॥ १९ ॥
viṣayeṣu guṇādhyāsāt
puṁsaḥ saṅgas tato bhavet
saṅgāt tatra bhavet kāmaḥ
kāmād eva kalir nṛṇām
Synonyms
viṣayeṣu — in material objects of sense gratification; guṇa-adhyāsāt — because of presuming them to be good; puṁsaḥ — of a person; saṅgaḥ — attachment; tataḥ — from that presumption; bhavet — comes into being; saṅgāt — from that material association; tatra — thus; bhavet — arises; kāmaḥ — lust; kāmāt — from lust; eva — also; kaliḥ — quarrel; nṛṇām — among men.

Translation
One who accepts material sense objects as desirable certainly becomes attached to them. From such attachment lust arises, and this lust creates quarrel among men.

Text 20
कलेर्दुर्विषह: क्रोधस्तमस्तमनुवर्तते ।
तमसा ग्रस्यते पुंसश्चेतना व्यापिनी द्रुतम् ॥ २० ॥
kaler durviṣahaḥ krodhas
tamas tam anuvartate
tamasā grasyate puṁsaś
cetanā vyāpinī drutam
Synonyms
kaleḥ — from quarrel; durviṣahaḥ — intolerable; krodhaḥ — anger; tamaḥ — ignorance; tam — that anger; anuvartate — follows; tamasā — by ignorance; grasyate — is seized; puṁsaḥ — of a man; cetanā — the consciousness; vyāpinī — broad; drutam — swiftly.

Translation
From quarrel arises intolerable anger, followed by the darkness of ignorance. This ignorance quickly overtakes a man’s broad intelligence.

Text 21
तया विरहित: साधो जन्तु: शून्याय कल्पते ।
ततोऽस्य स्वार्थविभ्रंशो मूर्च्छितस्य मृतस्य च ॥ २१ ॥
tayā virahitaḥ sādho
jantuḥ śūnyāya kalpate
tato ’sya svārtha-vibhraṁśo
mūrcchitasya mṛtasya ca
Synonyms
tayā — of that intelligence; virahitaḥ — deprived; sādho — O saintly Uddhava; jantuḥ — a living creature; śūnyāya — practically void; kalpate — becomes; tataḥ — consequently; asya — his; sva-artha — from the goals of life; vibhraṁśaḥ — downfall; mūrcchitasya — of him who has become like dull matter; mṛtasya — virtually dead; ca — and.

Translation
O saintly Uddhava, a person bereft of real intelligence is considered to have lost everything. Deviated from the actual purpose of his life, he becomes dull, just like a dead person.

Text 22
विषयाभिनिवेशेन नात्मानं वेद नापरम् ।
वृक्षजीविकया जीवन् व्यर्थं भस्त्र‍ोव य: श्वसन् ॥ २२ ॥
viṣayābhiniveśena
nātmānaṁ veda nāparam
vṛkṣa jīvikayā jīvan
vyarthaṁ bhastreva yaḥ śvasan
Synonyms
viṣaya — in sense gratification; abhiniveśena — by overabsorption; na — not; ātmānam — himself; veda — knows; na — nor; aparam — another; vṛkṣa — of a tree; jīvakayā — by the lifestyle; jīvan — living; vyartham — in vain; bhastrā iva — just like a bellows; yaḥ — who; śvasan — is breathing.

Translation
Because of absorption in sense gratification, one cannot recognize himself or others. Living uselessly in ignorance like a tree, one is merely breathing just like a bellows.

Text 23
फलश्रुतिरियं नृणां न श्रेयो रोचनं परम् ।
श्रेयोविवक्षया प्रोक्तं यथा भैषज्यरोचनम् ॥ २३ ॥
phala-śrutir iyaṁ nṝṇāṁ
na śreyo rocanaṁ param
śreyo-vivakṣayā proktaṁ
yathā bhaiṣajya-rocanam
Synonyms
phala-śrutiḥ — the statements of scripture promising rewards; iyam — these; nṝṇām — for men; na — are not; śreyaḥ — the highest good; rocanam — enticement; param — merely; śreyaḥ — the ultimate good; vivakṣayā — with the idea of saying; proktam — spoken; yathā — just as; bhaiṣajya — for taking medicine; rocanam — inducement.

Translation
Those statements of scripture promising fruitive rewards do not prescribe the ultimate good for men but are merely enticements for executing beneficial religious duties, like promises of candy spoken to induce a child to take beneficial medicine.

Text 24
उत्पत्त्यैव हि कामेषु प्राणेषु स्वजनेषु च ।
आसक्तमनसो मर्त्या आत्मनोऽनर्थहेतुषु ॥ २४ ॥
utpattyaiva hi kāmeṣu
prāṇeṣu sva-janeṣu ca
āsakta-manaso martyā
ātmano ’nartha-hetuṣu
Synonyms
utpattyā eva — simply by birth; hi — indeed; kāmeṣu — in objects of selfish desires; prāṇeṣu — in vital functions (such as one’s duration of life, sense activities, physical strength and sexual potency); sva-janeṣu — in his family members; ca — and; āsakta-manasaḥ — having become attached within the mind; martyāḥ — mortal human beings; ātmanaḥ — of their real self; anartha — of defeating the purpose; hetuṣu — which are the causes.

Translation
Simply by material birth, human beings become attached within their minds to personal sense gratification, long duration of life, sense activities, bodily strength, sexual potency and friends and family. Their minds are thus absorbed in that which defeats their actual self-interest.

Text 25
न तानविदुष: स्वार्थं भ्राम्यतो वृजिनाध्वनि ।
कथं युञ्ज्यात् पुनस्तेषु तांस्तमो विशतो बुध: ॥ २५ ॥
natān aviduṣaḥ svārthaṁ
bhrāmyato vṛjinādhvani
kathaṁ yuñjyāt punas teṣu
tāṁs tamo viśato budhaḥ
Synonyms
natān — submissive; aviduṣaḥ — ignorant; sva-artham — of their own interest; bhrāmyataḥ — wandering; vṛjina — of danger; adhvani — upon the path; katham — for what purpose; yuñjyāt — would cause to engage; punaḥ — further; teṣu — in those (modes of sense gratification); tān — them; tamaḥ — darkness; viśataḥ — who are entering; budhaḥ — the intelligent (Vedic authority).

Translation
Those ignorant of their real self-interest are wandering on the path of material existence, gradually heading toward darkness. Why would the Vedas further encourage them in sense gratification if they, although foolish, submissively pay heed to Vedic injunctions?

Text 26
एवं व्यवसितं केचिदविज्ञाय कुबुद्धय: ।
फलश्रुतिं कुसुमितां न वेदज्ञा वदन्ति हि ॥ २६ ॥
evaṁ vyavasitaṁ kecid
avijñāya kubuddhayaḥ
phala-śrutiṁ kusumitāṁ
na veda-jñā vadanti hi
Synonyms
evam — in this way; vyavasitam — the actual conclusion; kecit — some people; avijñāya — not understanding; ku-buddhayaḥ — having perverted intelligence; phala-śrutim — the scriptural statements promising material rewards; kusumitām — flowery; na — do not; veda-jñāḥ — those in full knowledge of the Vedas; vadanti — speak; hi — indeed.

Translation
Persons with perverted intelligence do not understand this actual purpose of Vedic knowledge and instead propagate as the highest Vedic truth the flowery statements of the Vedas that promise material rewards. Those in actual knowledge of the Vedas never speak in that way.

Text 27
कामिन: कृपणा लुब्धा: पुष्पेषु फलबुद्धय: ।
अग्निमुग्धा धूमतान्ता: स्वं लोकं न विदन्ति ते ॥ २७ ॥
kāminaḥ kṛpaṇā lubdhāḥ
puṣpeṣu phala-buddhayaḥ
agni-mugdhā dhūma-tāntāḥ
svaṁ lokaṁ na vidanti te
Synonyms
kāminaḥ — lusty persons; kṛpaṇāḥ — miserly; lubdhāḥ — greedy; puṣpeṣu — flowers; phala-buddhayaḥ — thinking to be the ultimate fruits; agni — by fire; mugdhāḥ — bewildered; dhūma-tāntāḥ — suffocating from smoke; svam — their own; lokam — identity; na vidanti — do not recognize; te — they.

Translation
Those who are full of lust, avarice and greed mistake mere flowers to be the actual fruit of life. Bewildered by the glare of fire and suffocated by its smoke, they cannot recognize their own true identity.

Text 28
न ते मामङ्ग जानन्ति हृदिस्थं य इदं यत: ।
उक्थशस्‍‍‍‍‍त्रा ह्यसुतृपो यथा नीहारचक्षुष: ॥ २८ ॥
na te mām aṅga jānanti
hṛdi-sthaṁ ya idaṁ yataḥ
uktha-śastrā hy asu-tṛpo
yathā nīhāra-cakṣuṣaḥ
Synonyms
na — do not; te — they; mām — Me; aṅga — My dear Uddhava; jānanti — know; hṛdi-stham — seated within the heart; yaḥ — who is; idam — this created universe; yataḥ — from whom it comes; uktha-śastrāḥ — who consider Vedic ritual activities to be praiseworthy, or else, for whom their own ritualistic performances are like the weapon that kills the sacrificial animal; hi — indeed; asu-tṛpaḥ — interested only in sense gratification; yathā — just as; nīhāra — in fog; cakṣuṣaḥ — those whose eyes.

Translation
My dear Uddhava, persons dedicated to sense gratification obtained through honoring the Vedic rituals cannot understand that I am situated in everyone’s heart and that the entire universe is nondifferent from Me and emanates from Me. Indeed, they are just like persons whose eyes are covered by fog.

Texts 29-30
ते मे मतमविज्ञाय परोक्षं विषयात्मका: ।
हिंसायां यदि राग: स्याद् यज्ञ एव न चोदना ॥ २९ ॥
हिंसाविहारा ह्यालब्धै: पशुभि: स्वसुखेच्छया ।
यजन्ते देवता यज्ञै: पितृभूतपतीन् खला: ॥ ३० ॥
te me matam avijñāya
parokṣaṁ viṣayātmakāḥ
hiṁsāyāṁ yadi rāgaḥ syād
yajña eva na codanā
hiṁsā-vihārā hy ālabdhaiḥ
paśubhiḥ sva-sukhecchayā
yajante devatā yajñaiḥ
pitṛ-bhūta-patīn khalāḥ
Synonyms
te — they; me — My; matam — conclusion; avijñāya — without understanding; parokṣam — confidential; viṣaya-ātmakāḥ — absorbed in sense gratification; hiṁsāyām — to violence; yadi — if; rāgaḥ — attachment; syāt — may be; yajñe — in the sacrificial prescriptions; eva — certainly; na — there is not; codanā — encouragement; hiṁsā-vihārāḥ — those who take pleasure in violence; hi — indeed; ālabdhaiḥ — which have been slaughtered; paśubhiḥ — by means of the animals; sva-sukha — for their own happiness; icchayā — with the desire; yajante — they worship; devatāḥ — the demigods; yajñaiḥ — by sacrificial rituals; pitṛ — the forefathers; bhūta-patīn — and the leaders among the ghostly spirits; khalāḥ — cruel persons.

Translation
Those who are sworn to sense gratification cannot understand the confidential conclusion of Vedic knowledge as explained by Me. Taking pleasure in violence, they cruelly slaughter innocent animals in sacrifice for their own sense gratification and thus worship demigods, forefathers and leaders among ghostly creatures. Such passion for violence, however, is never encouraged within the process of Vedic sacrifice.

Text 31
स्वप्नोपमममुं लोकमसन्तं श्रवणप्रियम् ।
आशिषो हृदि सङ्कल्प्य त्यजन्त्यर्थान् यथा वणिक् ॥ ३१ ॥
svapnopamam amuṁ lokam
asantaṁ śravaṇa-priyam
āśiṣo hṛdi saṅkalpya
tyajanty arthān yathā vaṇik
Synonyms
svapna — a dream; upamam — equal to; amum — that; lokam — world (after death); asantam — unreal; śravaṇa-priyam — only enchanting to hear about; āśiṣaḥ — mundane achievements in this life; hṛdi — in their hearts; saṅkalpya — imagining; tyajanti — they give up; arthān — their wealth; yathā — like; vaṇik — a businessman.

Translation
Just as a foolish businessman gives up his real wealth in useless business speculation, foolish persons give up all that is actually valuable in life and instead pursue promotion to material heaven, which although pleasing to hear about is actually unreal, like a dream. Such bewildered persons imagine within their hearts that they will achieve all material blessings.

Text 32
रज:सत्त्वतमोनिष्ठा रज:सत्त्वतमोजुष: ।
उपासत इन्द्रमुख्यान् देवादीन् न यथैव माम् ॥ ३२ ॥
rajaḥ-sattva-tamo-niṣṭhā
rajaḥ-sattva-tamo-juṣaḥ
upāsata indra-mukhyān
devādīn na yathaiva mām
Synonyms
rajaḥ — in the mode of passion; sattva — goodness; tamaḥ — or ignorance; niṣṭhāḥ — established; rajaḥ — passion; sattva — goodness; tamaḥ — or ignorance; juṣaḥ — who manifest; upāsate — they worship; indra-mukhyān — headed by Lord Indra; deva-ādīn — the demigods and other deities; na — but not; yathā eva — in the proper way; mām — Me.

Translation
Those established in material passion, goodness and ignorance worship the particular demigods and other deities, headed by Indra, who manifest the same modes of passion, goodness or ignorance. They fail, however, to properly worship Me.

Texts 33-34
इष्ट्वेह देवता यज्ञैर्गत्वा रंस्यामहे दिवि ।
तस्यान्त इह भूयास्म महाशाला महाकुला: ॥ ३३ ॥
एवं पुष्पितया वाचा व्याक्षिप्तमनसां नृणाम् ।
मानिनां चातिलुब्धानां मद्वार्तापि न रोचते ॥ ३४ ॥
iṣṭveha devatā yajñair
gatvā raṁsyāmahe divi
tasyānta iha bhūyāsma
mahā-śālā mahā-kulāḥ
evaṁ puṣpitayā vācā
vyākṣipta-manasāṁ nṛṇām
mānināṁ cāti-lubdhānāṁ
mad-vārtāpi na rocate
Synonyms
iṣṭvā — offering sacrifice; iha — in this world; devatāḥ — to the demigods; yajñaiḥ — by our sacrifices; gatvā — going; raṁsyāmahe — we shall enjoy; divi — in heaven; tasya — of that enjoyment; ante — at the end; iha — on this earth; bhūyāsmaḥ — we shall become; mahā-śālāḥ — great householders; mahā-kulāḥ — members of aristocratic families; evam — thus; puṣpitayā — by the flowery; vācā — words; vyākṣipta-manasām — for those whose minds are bewildered; nṛṇām — men; māninām — very proud; ca — and; ati-lubdhānām — extremely greedy; mad-vārtā — topics about Me; api — even; na rocate — have no attraction.

Translation
The worshipers of demigods think, “We shall worship the demigods in this life, and by our sacrifices we shall go to heaven and enjoy there. When that enjoyment is finished we shall return to this world and take birth as great householders in aristocratic families.” Being excessively proud and greedy, such persons are bewildered by the flowery words of the Vedas. They are not attracted to topics about Me, the Supreme Lord.

Text 35
वेदा ब्रह्मात्मविषयास्‍त्रिकाण्डविषया इमे ।
परोक्षवादा ऋषय: परोक्षं मम च प्रियम् ॥ ३५ ॥
vedā brahmātma-viṣayās
tri-kāṇḍa-viṣayā ime
parokṣa-vādā ṛṣayaḥ
parokṣaṁ mama ca priyam
Synonyms
vedāḥ — the Vedas; brahma-ātma — the understanding that the soul is pure spirit; viṣayāḥ — having as their subject matter; tri-kāṇḍa-viṣayāḥ — divided into three sections (which represent fruitive work, worship of demigods and realization of the Absolute Truth); ime — these; parokṣa-vādāḥ — speaking esoterically; ṛṣayaḥ — the Vedic authorities; parokṣam — indirect explanation; mama — to Me; ca — also; priyam — dear.

Translation
The Vedas, divided into three divisions, ultimately reveal the living entity as pure spirit soul. The Vedic seers and mantras, however, deal in esoteric terms, and I also am pleased by such confidential descriptions.

Text 36
शब्दब्रह्म सुदुर्बोधं प्राणेन्द्रियमनोमयम् ।
अनन्तपारं गम्भीरं दुर्विगाह्यं समुद्रवत् ॥ ३६ ॥
śabda-brahma su-durbodhaṁ
prāṇendriya-mano-mayam
ananta-pāraṁ gambhīraṁ
durvigāhyaṁ samudra-vat
Synonyms
śabda-brahma — the transcendental sound of the Vedas; su-durbodham — extremely difficult to comprehend; prāṇa — of the vital air; indriya — senses; manaḥ — and mind; mayam — manifesting on the different levels; ananta-pāram — without limit; gambhīram — deep; durvigāhyam — unfathomable; samudra-vat — like the ocean.

Translation
The transcendental sound of the Vedas is very difficult to comprehend and manifests on different levels within the prāṇa, senses and mind. This Vedic sound is unlimited, very deep and unfathomable, just like the ocean.

Text 37
मयोपबृंहितं भूम्ना ब्रह्मणानन्तशक्तिना ।
भूतेषु घोषरूपेण बिसेषूर्णेव लक्ष्यते ॥ ३७ ॥
mayopabṛṁhitaṁ bhūmnā
brahmaṇānanta-śaktinā
bhūteṣu ghoṣa-rūpeṇa
viseṣūrṇeva lakṣyate
Synonyms
mayā — by Me; upabṛṁhitam — established; bhūmnā — by the unlimited; brahmaṇā — the changeless Absolute; ananta-śaktinā — whose potencies have no end; bhūteṣu — within the living beings; ghoṣa-rūpeṇa — in the form of subtle sound, the oṁkāra; viseṣu — in the subtle fibrous covering of a lotus stalk; ūrṇā — one thread; iva — as; lakṣyate — appears.

Translation
As the unlimited, unchanging and omnipotent Personality of Godhead dwelling within all living beings, I personally establish the Vedic sound vibration in the form of oṁkāra within all living entities. It is thus perceived subtly, just like a single strand of fiber on a lotus stalk.

Texts 38-40
यथोर्णनाभिर्हृदयादूर्णामुद्वमते मुखात् ।
आकाशाद् घोषवान् प्राणो मनसा स्पर्शरूपिणा ॥ ३८ ॥
छन्दोमयोऽमृतमय: सहस्रपदवीं प्रभु: ।
ओङ्काराद् व्यञ्जितस्पर्शस्वरोष्मान्त स्थभूषिताम् ॥ ३९ ॥
विचित्रभाषाविततां छन्दोभिश्चतुरुत्तरै: ।
अनन्तपारां बृहतीं सृजत्याक्षिपते स्वयम् ॥ ४० ॥
yathorṇanābhir hṛdayād
ūrṇām udvamate mukhāt
ākāśād ghoṣavān prāṇo
manasā sparśa-rūpiṇā
chando-mayo ’mṛta-mayaḥ
sahasra-padavīṁ prabhuḥ
oṁkārād vyañjita-sparśa-
svaroṣmāntastha-bhūṣitām
vicitra-bhāṣā-vitatāṁ
chandobhiś catur-uttaraiḥ
ananta-pārāṁ bṛhatīṁ
sṛjaty ākṣipate svayam
Synonyms
yathā — just as; ūrṇa-nābhiḥ — a spider; hṛdayāt — from its heart; ūrṇām — its web; udvamate — emits; mukhāt — through its mouth; ākāśāt — from the ether; ghoṣa-vān — manifesting sound vibration; prāṇaḥ — the Lord in the form of the original life air; manasā — by means of the primeval mind; sparśa-rūpiṇā — which exhibits the forms of the different phonemes of the alphabet, beginning with the sparśa letters; chandaḥ-mayaḥ — comprising all the sacred Vedic meters; amṛta-mayaḥ — full of transcendental pleasure; sahasra-padavīm — which branches out in thousands of directions; prabhuḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; oṁkārāt — from the subtle vibration oṁkāra; vyañjita — expanded; sparśa — with the consonant stops; svara — vowels; uṣma — sibilants; anta-stha — and semivowels; bhūṣitām — decorated; vicitra — variegated; bhāṣā — by verbal expressions; vitatām — elaborated; chandobhiḥ — along with the metrical arrangements; catuḥ-uttaraiḥ — each having four syllables more than the previous; ananta-pārām — limitless; bṛhatīm — the great expanse of Vedic literature; sṛjati — He creates; ākṣipate — and withdraws; svayam — Himself.

Translation
Just as a spider brings forth from its heart its web and emits it through its mouth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead manifests Himself as the reverberating primeval vital air, comprising all sacred Vedic meters and full of transcendental pleasure. Thus the Lord, from the ethereal sky of His heart, creates the great and limitless Vedic sound by the agency of His mind, which conceives of variegated sounds such as the sparśas. The Vedic sound branches out in thousands of directions, adorned with the different letters expanded from the syllable om: the consonants, vowels, sibilants and semivowels. The Veda is then elaborated by many verbal varieties, expressed in different meters, each having four more syllables than the previous one. Ultimately the Lord again withdraws His manifestation of Vedic sound within Himself.

Text 41
गायत्र्युष्णिगनुष्टुप् च बृहती पङ्‌क्तिरेव च ।
त्रिष्टुब्जगत्यतिच्छन्दो ह्यत्यष्‍ट्यतिजगद् विराट् ॥ ४१ ॥
gāyatry uṣṇig anuṣṭup ca
bṛhatī paṅktir eva ca
triṣṭub jagaty aticchando
hy atyaṣṭy-atijagad-virāṭ
Synonyms
gāyatrī uṣṇik anuṣṭup ca — known as Gāyatrī, Uṣṇik and Anuṣṭup; bṛhatī paṅktiḥ — Bṛhatī and Paṅkti; eva ca — also; triṣṭup jagatī aticchandaḥ — Triṣṭup, Jagatī and Aticchanda; hi — indeed; atyaṣṭi-atijagat-virāṭ — Atyaṣṭi, Atijagatī and Ativirāṭ.

Translation
The Vedic meters are Gāyatrī, Uṣṇik, Anuṣṭup, Bṛhatī, Paṅkti, Triṣṭup, Jagatī, Aticchanda, Atyaṣṭi, Atijagatī and Ativirāṭ.

Text 42
किं विधत्ते किमाचष्टे किमनूद्य विकल्पयेत् ।
इत्यस्या हृदयं लोके नान्यो मद् वेद कश्चन ॥ ४२ ॥
kiṁ vidhatte kim ācaṣṭe
kim anūdya vikalpayet
ity asyā hṛdayaṁ loke
nānyo mad veda kaścana
Synonyms
kim — what; vidhatte — enjoins (in the ritualistic karma-kāṇḍa); kim — what; ācaṣṭe — indicates (as the object of worship in the devatā-kāṇḍa); kim — what; anūdya — describing in different aspects; vikalpayet — raises the possibility of alternatives (in the jñāna-kāṇḍa); iti — thus; asyāḥ — of Vedic literature; hṛdayam — the heart, or confidential purpose; loke — in this world; na — does not; anyaḥ — other; mat — than Me; veda — know; kaścana — anyone.

Translation
In the entire world no one but Me actually understands the confidential purpose of Vedic knowledge. Thus people do not know what the Vedas are actually prescribing in the ritualistic injunctions of karma-kāṇḍa, or what object is actually being indicated in the formulas of worship found in the upāsanā-kāṇḍa, or that which is elaborately discussed through various hypotheses in the jñāna-kāṇḍa section of the Vedas.

Text 43
मां विधत्तेऽभिधत्ते मां विकल्प्यापोह्यते त्वहम् ।
एतावान् सर्ववेदार्थ: शब्द आस्थाय मां भिदाम् ।
मायामात्रमनूद्यान्ते प्रतिषिध्य प्रसीदति ॥ ४३ ॥
māṁ vidhatte ’bhidhatte māṁ
vikalpyāpohyate tv aham
etāvān sarva-vedārthaḥ
śabda āsthāya māṁ bhidām
māyā-mātram anūdyānte
pratiṣidhya prasīdati
Synonyms
mām — Me; vidhatte — enjoins in sacrifice; abhidhatte — designates as the object of worship; mām — Me; vikalpya — presented as alternate hypothesis; apohyate — am refuted; tu — also; aham — I; etāvān — thus; sarva-veda — of all the Vedas; arthaḥ — the meaning; śabdaḥ — the transcendental sound vibration; āsthāya — establishing; mām — Me; bhidām — material duality; māyā-mātram — as simply illusion; anūdya — describing elaborately in different aspects; ante — ultimately; pratiṣidhya — negating; prasīdati — becomes satisfied.

Translation
I am the ritualistic sacrifice enjoined by the Vedas, and I am the worshipable Deity. It is I who am presented as various philosophical hypotheses, and it is I alone who am then refuted by philosophical analysis. The transcendental sound vibration thus establishes Me as the essential meaning of all Vedic knowledge. The Vedas, elaborately analyzing all material duality as nothing but My illusory potency, ultimately completely negate this duality and achieve their own satisfaction.