Texts 1-3
श्रीउद्धव उवाच
कति तत्त्वानि विश्वेश सङ्ख्यातान्यृषिभि: प्रभो ।
नवैकादश पञ्च त्रीण्यात्थ त्वमिह शुश्रुम ॥ १ ॥
केचित् षड्‌विंशतिं प्राहुरपरे पञ्चविंशतिम् ।
सप्तैके नव षट् केचिच्चत्वार्येकादशापरे ।
केचित् सप्तदश प्राहु: षोडशैके त्रयोदश ॥ २ ॥
एतावत्त्वं हि सङ्ख्यानामृषयो यद्विवक्षया ।
गायन्ति पृथगायुष्मन्निदं नो वक्तुमर्हसि ॥ ३ ॥
śrī-uddhava uvāca
kati tattvāni viśveśa
saṅkhyātāny ṛṣibhiḥ prabho
navaikādaśa pañca trīṇy
āttha tvam iha śuśruma
kecit ṣaḍ-viṁśatiṁ prāhur
apare pañca-viṁśatiṁ
saptaike nava ṣaṭ kecic
catvāry ekādaśāpare
kecit saptadaśa prāhuḥ
ṣoḍaśaike trayodaśa
etāvattvaṁ hi saṅkhyānām
ṛṣayo yad-vivakṣayā
gāyanti pṛthag āyuṣmann
idaṁ no vaktum arhasi
Synonyms
śrī-uddhavaḥ uvāca — Śrī Uddhava said; kati — how many; tattvāni — basic elements of creation; viśva-īśa — O Lord of the universe; saṅkhyātāni — have been enumerated; ṛṣibhiḥ — by great authorities; prabho — O my master; nava — nine (God, the individual soul, the mahat-tattva, false ego and the five gross elements); ekādaśa — plus eleven (the ten knowledge-acquiring and working senses together with the mind); pañca — plus five (the subtle forms of the sense objects); trīṇi — plus three (the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance, making altogether a total of twenty-eight); āttha — have stated; tvam — You; iha — during Your appearance in this world; śuśruma — so I have heard; kecit — some; ṣaṭ-viṁśatim — twenty-six; prāhuḥ — they say; apare — others; pañca-viṁśatim — twenty-five; sapta — seven; eke — some; nava — nine; ṣaṭ — six; kecit — some; catvāri — four; ekādaśa — eleven; apare — still others; kecit — some; saptadaśa — seventeen; prāhuḥ — say; ṣoḍaśa — sixteen; eke — some; trayodaśa — thirteen; etāvattvam — such calculations; hi — indeed; saṅkhyānām — of the different ways of counting the elements; ṛṣayaḥ — the sages; yat-vivakṣayā — with the intention of expressing what ideas; gāyanti — they have declared; pṛthak — in various manners; āyuḥ-man — O supreme eternal; idam — this; naḥ — to us; vaktum — to explain; arhasi — You should please.

Translation
Uddhava inquired: My dear Lord, O master of the universe, how many different elements of creation have been enumerated by the great sages? I have heard You personally describe a total of twenty-eight — God, the jīva soul, the mahat-tattva, false ego, the five gross elements, the ten senses, the mind, the five subtle objects of perception and the three modes of nature. But some authorities say that there are twenty-six elements, while others cite twenty-five or else seven, nine, six, four or eleven, and even others say that there are seventeen, sixteen or thirteen. What did each of these sages have in mind when he calculated the creative elements in such different ways? O supreme eternal, kindly explain this to me.

Text 4
श्रीभगवानुवाच
युक्तं च सन्ति सर्वत्र भाषन्ते ब्राह्मणा यथा ।
मायां मदीयामुद्गृह्य वदतां किं नु दुर्घटम् ॥ ४ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
yuktaṁ ca santi sarvatra
bhāṣante brāhmaṇā yathā
māyāṁ madīyām udgṛhya
vadatāṁ kiṁ nu durghaṭam
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; yuktam — reasonably; ca — even; santi — they are present; sarvatra — everywhere; bhāṣante — they speak; brāhmaṇāḥ — brāhmaṇas; yathā — how; māyām — the mystic energy; madīyām — My; udgṛhya — resorting to; vadatām — of those who speak; kim — what; nu — after all; durghaṭam — will be impossible.

Translation
Lord Kṛṣṇa replied: Because all material elements are present everywhere, it is reasonable that different learned brāhmaṇas have analyzed them in different ways. All such philosophers spoke under the shelter of My mystic potency, and thus they could say anything without contradicting the truth.

Text 5
नैतदेवं यथात्थ त्वं यदहं वच्मि तत्तथा ।
एवं विवदतां हेतुं शक्तयो मे दुरत्यया: ॥ ५ ॥
naitad evaṁ yathāttha tvaṁ
yad ahaṁ vacmi tat tathā
evaṁ vivadatāṁ hetuṁ
śaktayo me duratyayāḥ
Synonyms
na — it is not; etat — this; evam — so; yathā — as; āttha — say; tvam — you; yat — which; aham — I; vacmi — am saying; tat — that; tathā — thus; evam — in this way; vivadatām — for those who argue; hetum — over logical reasons; śaktayaḥ — the energies (are impelling); me — My; duratyayāḥ — unsurpassable.

Translation
When philosophers argue, “I don’t choose to analyze this particular case in the same way that you have,” it is simply My own insurmountable energies that are motivating their analytic disagreements.

Text 6
यासां व्यतिकरादासीद् विकल्पो वदतां पदम् ।
प्राप्ते शमदमेऽप्येति वादस्तमनुशाम्यति ॥ ६ ॥
yāsāṁ vyatikarād āsīd
vikalpo vadatāṁ padam
prāpte śama-dame ’pyeti
vādas tam anu śāmyati
Synonyms
yāsām — of which (energies of Mine); vyatikarāt — by the interaction; āsīt — has arisen; vikalpaḥ — difference of opinion; vadatām — of those arguing; padam — the subject of discussion; prāpte — when one has achieved; śama — the ability to fix his intelligence on Me; dame — and control of his external senses; apyeti — disappears (that difference of opinion); vādaḥ — the argument itself; tam anu — consequently; śāmyati — subsides.

Translation
By interaction of My energies different opinions arise. But for those who have fixed their intelligence on Me and controlled their senses, differences of perception disappear, and consequently the very cause for argument is removed.

Text 7
परस्परानुप्रवेशात् तत्त्वानां पुरुषर्षभ ।
पौर्वापर्यप्रसङ्ख्यानं यथा वक्तुर्विवक्षितम् ॥ ७ ॥
parasparānupraveśāt
tattvānāṁ puruṣarṣabha
paurvāparya-prasaṅkhyānaṁ
yathā vaktur vivakṣitam
Synonyms
paraspara — mutual; anupraveśāt — because of the entrance (as subtle causes within gross manifestations, and vice versa); tattvānām — of the various elements; puruṣa-ṛṣabha — O best among men (Uddhava); paurva — in terms of prior causes; aparya — or of resultant products; prasaṅkhyānam — enumeration; yathā — however; vaktuḥ — the speaker; vivakṣitam — wants to describe.

Translation
O best among men, because subtle and gross elements mutually enter into one another, philosophers may calculate the number of basic material elements in different ways, according to their personal desire.

Text 8
एकस्मिन्नपि द‍ृश्यन्ते प्रविष्टानीतराणि च ।
पूर्वस्मिन् वा परस्मिन् वा तत्त्वे तत्त्वानि सर्वश: ॥ ८ ॥
ekasminn api dṛśyante
praviṣṭānītarāṇi ca
pūrvasmin vā parasmin vā
tattve tattvāni sarvaśaḥ
Synonyms
ekasmin — in one (element); api — even; dṛśyante — there are seen; praviṣṭāni — entered within; itarāṇi — others; ca — also; pūrvasmin — in a prior (subtle causal element, such as the dormant presence of ether within its cause, sound); vā — either; parasmin — or in a later (produced element, such as the subtle presence of sound within its further product, air); vā — or; tattve — in some element; tattvāni — other elements; sarvaśaḥ — in the cases of each of the different enumerations.

Translation
All subtle material elements are actually present within their gross effects; similarly, all gross elements are present within their subtle causes, since material creation takes place by progressive manifestation of elements from subtle to gross. Thus we can find all material elements within any single element.

Text 9
पौर्वापर्यमतोऽमीषां प्रसङ्ख्यानमभीप्सताम् ।
यथा विविक्तं यद्वक्त्रं गृह्णीमो युक्तिसम्भवात् ॥ ९ ॥
paurvāparyam ato ’mīṣāṁ
prasaṅkhyānam abhīpsatām
yathā viviktaṁ yad-vaktraṁ
gṛhṇīmo yukti-sambhavāt
Synonyms
paurva — considering causal elements to include their manifest products; aparyam — or assuming elements to include their subtle causes; ataḥ — therefore; amīṣām — of these thinkers; prasaṅkhyānam — the counting; abhīpsatām — who are intending; yathā — how; viviktam — ascertained; yat-vaktram — from whose mouth; gṛhṇīmaḥ — We accept it; yukti — of reason; sambhavāt — because of the possibility.

Translation
Therefore, no matter which of these thinkers is speaking, and regardless of whether in their calculations they include material elements within their previous subtle causes or else within their subsequent manifest products, I accept their conclusions as authoritative, because a logical explanation can always be given for each of the different theories.

Text 10
अनाद्यविद्यायुक्तस्य पुरुषस्यात्मवेदनम् ।
स्वतो न सम्भवादन्यस्तत्त्वज्ञो ज्ञानदो भवेत् ॥ १० ॥
anādy-avidyā-yuktasya
puruṣasyātma-vedanam
svato na sambhavād anyas
tattva-jño jñāna-do bhavet
Synonyms
anādi — without beginning; avidyā — with ignorance; yuktasya — who is joined; puruṣasya — of a person; ātma-vedanam — the process of self-realization; svataḥ — by his own ability; na sambhavāt — because it cannot occur; anyaḥ — another person; tattva-jñaḥ — the knower of transcendental reality; jñāna-daḥ — the bestower of real knowledge; bhavet — must be.

Translation
Because a person who has been covered by ignorance since time immemorial is not capable of effecting his own self-realization, there must be some other personality who is in factual knowledge of the Absolute Truth and can impart this knowledge to him.

Text 11
पुरुषेश्व‍रयोरत्र न वैलक्षण्यमण्वपि ।
तदन्यकल्पनापार्था ज्ञानं च प्रकृतेर्गुण: ॥ ११ ॥
puruṣeśvarayor atra
na vailakṣaṇyam aṇv api
tad-anya-kalpanāpārthā
jñānaṁ ca prakṛter guṇaḥ
Synonyms
puruṣa — between the enjoyer; īśvarayoḥ — and the supreme controller; atra — herein; na — there is no; vailakṣaṇyam — dissimilarity; aṇu — minute; api — even; tat — of them; anya — as being completely different; kalpanā — the imagined idea; apārthā — useless; jñānam — knowledge; ca — and; prakṛteḥ — of material nature; guṇaḥ — a quality.

Translation
According to knowledge in the material mode of goodness, there is no qualitative difference between the living entity and the supreme controller. The imagination of qualitative difference between them is useless speculation.

Text 12
प्रकृतिर्गुणसाम्यं वै प्रकृतेर्नात्मनो गुणा: ।
सत्त्वं रजस्तम इति स्थित्युत्पत्त्यन्तहेतव: ॥ १२ ॥
prakṛtir guṇa-sāmyaṁ vai
prakṛter nātmano guṇāḥ
sattvaṁ rajas tama iti
sthity-utpatty-anta-hetavaḥ
Synonyms
prakṛtiḥ — material nature; guṇa — of the three modes; sāmyam — the original equilibrium; vai — indeed; prakṛteḥ — of nature; na ātmanaḥ — not of the spirit soul; guṇāḥ — these modes; sattvam — goodness; rajaḥ — passion; tamaḥ — ignorance; iti — thus called; sthiti — of the maintenance of universal creation; utpatti — its production; anta — and its annihilation; hetavaḥ — the causes.

Translation
Nature exists originally as the equilibrium of the three material modes, which pertain only to nature, not to the transcendental spirit soul. These modes — goodness, passion and ignorance — are the effective causes of the creation, maintenance and destruction of this universe.

Text 13
सत्त्वं ज्ञानं रज: कर्म तमोऽज्ञानमिहोच्यते ।
गुणव्यतिकर: काल: स्वभाव: सूत्रमेव च ॥ १३ ॥
sattvaṁ jñānaṁ rajaḥ karma
tamo ’jñānam ihocyate
guṇa-vyatikaraḥ kālaḥ
svabhāvaḥ sūtram eva ca
Synonyms
sattvam — the mode of goodness; jñānam — knowledge; rajaḥ — the mode of passion; karma — fruitive work; tamaḥ — the mode of ignorance; ajñānam — foolishness; iha — in this world; ucyate — is called; guṇa — of the modes; vyatikaraḥ — the agitated transformation; kālaḥ — time; svabhāvaḥ — innate tendency, nature; sūtram — the mahat-tattva; eva — indeed; ca — also.

Translation
In this world the mode of goodness is recognized as knowledge, the mode of passion as fruitive work, and the mode of darkness as ignorance. Time is perceived as the agitated interaction of the material modes, and the totality of functional propensity is embodied by the primeval sūtra, or mahat-tattva.

Text 14
पुरुष: प्रकृतिर्व्यक्तमहङ्कारो नभोऽनिल: ।
ज्योतिराप: क्षितिरिति तत्त्वान्युक्तानि मे नव ॥ १४ ॥
puruṣaḥ prakṛtir vyaktam
ahaṅkāro nabho ’nilaḥ
jyotir āpaḥ kṣitir iti
tattvāny uktāni me nava
Synonyms
puruṣaḥ — the enjoyer; prakṛtiḥ — nature; vyaktam — the primeval manifestation of matter; ahaṅkāraḥ — false ego; nabhaḥ — ether; anilaḥ — air; jyotiḥ — fire; āpaḥ — water; kṣitiḥ — earth; iti — thus; tattvāni — the elements of creation; uktāni — have been described; me — by Me; nava — nine.

Translation
I have described the nine basic elements as the enjoying soul, nature, nature’s primeval manifestation of the mahat-tattva, false ego, ether, air, fire, water and earth.

Text 15
श्रोत्रं त्वग्दर्शनं घ्राणो जिह्वेति ज्ञानशक्तय: ।
वाक्पाण्युपस्थपाय्वङ्‍‍घ्रि: कर्माण्यङ्गोभयं मन: ॥ १५ ॥
śrotraṁ tvag darśanaṁ ghrāṇo
jihveti jñāna-śaktayaḥ
vāk-pāṇy-upastha-pāyv-aṅghriḥ
karmāṇy aṅgobhayaṁ manaḥ
Synonyms
śrotram — the sense of hearing; tvak — the sense of touch, experienced upon the skin; darśanam — sight; ghrāṇaḥ — smell; jihvā — the sense of taste, experienced upon the tongue; iti — thus; jñāna-śaktayaḥ — the knowledge-acquiring senses; vāk — speech; pāṇi — the hands; upastha — the genitals; pāyu — the anus; aṅghriḥ — and the legs; karmāṇi — the working senses; aṅga — My dear Uddhava; ubhayam — belonging to both these categories; manaḥ — the mind.

Translation
Hearing, touch, sight, smell and taste are the five knowledge-acquiring senses, My dear Uddhava, and speech, the hands, the genitals, the anus and the legs constitute the five working senses. The mind belongs to both these categories.

Text 16
शब्द: स्पर्शो रसो गन्धो रूपं चेत्यर्थजातय: ।
गत्युक्त्युत्सर्गशिल्पानि कर्मायतनसिद्धय: ॥ १६ ॥
śabdaḥ sparśo raso gandho
rūpaṁ cety artha-jātayaḥ
gaty-ukty-utsarga-śilpāni
karmāyatana-siddhayaḥ
Synonyms
śabdaḥ — sound; sparśaḥ — touch; rasaḥ — taste; gandhaḥ — fragrance; rūpam — form; ca — and; iti — thus; artha — of sense objects; jātayaḥ — the categories; gati — movement; ukti — speech; utsarga — excretion (by both the genitals and anus); śilpāni — and manufacture; karma-āyatana — by the above-mentioned working senses; siddhayaḥ — accomplished.

Translation
Sound, touch, taste, smell and form are the objects of the knowledge-acquiring senses, and movement, speech, excretion and manufacture are functions of the working senses.

Text 17
सर्गादौ प्रकृतिर्ह्यस्य कार्यकारणरूपिणी ।
सत्त्वादिभिर्गुणैर्धत्ते पुरुषोऽव्यक्त ईक्षते ॥ १७ ॥
sargādau prakṛtir hy asya
kārya-kāraṇa-rūpiṇī
sattvādibhir guṇair dhatte
puruṣo ’vyakta īkṣate
Synonyms
sarga — of creation; ādau — in the beginning; prakṛtiḥ — the material nature; hi — indeed; asya — of this universe; kārya — the manifest products; kāraṇa — and subtle causes; rūpiṇī — embodying; sattva-ādibhiḥ — by means of goodness, passion and ignorance; guṇaiḥ — the modes; dhatte — assumes its position; puruṣaḥ — the Supreme Lord; avyaktaḥ — not involved in material manifestation; īkṣate — witnesses.

Translation
In the beginning of creation nature assumes, by the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance, its form as the embodiment of all subtle causes and gross manifestations within the universe. The Supreme Personality of Godhead does not enter the interaction of material manifestation but merely glances upon nature.

Text 18
व्यक्तादयो विकुर्वाणा धातव: पुरुषेक्षया ।
लब्धवीर्या: सृजन्त्यण्डं संहता: प्रकृतेर्बलात् ॥ १८ ॥
vyaktādayo vikurvāṇā
dhātavaḥ puruṣekṣayā
labdha-vīryāḥ sṛjanty aṇḍaṁ
saṁhatāḥ prakṛter balāt
Synonyms
vyakta-ādayaḥ — the mahat-tattva and so on; vikurvāṇāḥ — undergoing transformation; dhātavaḥ — the elements; puruṣa — of the Lord; īkṣayā — by the glance; labdha — having attained; vīryāḥ — their potencies; sṛjanti — they create; aṇḍam — the egg of the universe; saṁhatāḥ — amalgamated; prakṛteḥ — of nature; balāt — by the power.

Translation
As the material elements, headed by the mahat-tattva, are transformed, they receive their specific potencies from the glance of the Supreme Lord, and being amalgamated by the power of nature, they create the universal egg.

Text 19
सप्तैव धातव इति तत्रार्था: पञ्चखादय: ।
ज्ञानमात्मोभयाधारस्ततो देहेन्द्रियासव: ॥ १९ ॥
saptaiva dhātava iti
tatrārthāḥ pañca khādayaḥ
jñānam ātmobhayādhāras
tato dehendriyāsavaḥ
Synonyms
sapta — seven; eva — indeed; dhātavaḥ — elements; iti — thus saying; tatra — therein; arthāḥ — the physical elements; pañca — five; kha-ādayaḥ — beginning with ether; jñānam — the spirit soul, who is the possessor of knowledge; ātmā — the Supreme Soul; ubhaya — of both (the seen nature and the jīva who is its seer); ādhāraḥ — the fundamental basis; tataḥ — from these; deha — the body; indriya — senses; asavaḥ — and vital airs.

Translation
According to some philosophers there are seven elements, namely earth, water, fire, air and ether, along with the conscious spirit soul and the Supreme Soul, who is the basis of both the material elements and the ordinary spirit soul. According to this theory, the body, senses, life air and all material phenomena are produced from these seven elements.

Text 20
षडित्यत्रापि भूतानि पञ्चषष्ठ: पर: पुमान् ।
तैर्युक्त आत्मसम्भूतै: सृष्ट्वेदं समपाविशत् ॥ २० ॥
ṣaḍ ity atrāpi bhūtāni
pañca ṣaṣṭhaḥ paraḥ pumān
tair yukta ātma-sambhūtaiḥ
sṛṣṭvedaṁ samapāviśat
Synonyms
ṣaṭ — six; iti — thus; atra — in this theory; api — also; bhūtāni — the elements; pañca — five; ṣaṣṭhaḥ — the sixth; paraḥ — the transcendental; pumān — Supreme Personality; taiḥ — with those (five gross elements); yuktaḥ — conjoined; ātma — from Himself; sambhūtaiḥ — created; sṛṣṭvā — sending forth; idam — this creation; samupāviśat — He entered within it.

Translation
Other philosophers state that there are six elements — the five physical elements (earth, water, fire, air and ether) and the sixth element, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. That Supreme Lord, endowed with the elements that He has brought forth from Himself, creates this universe and then personally enters within it.

Text 21
चत्वार्येवेति तत्रापि तेज आपोऽन्नमात्मन: ।
जातानि तैरिदं जातं जन्मावयविन: खलु ॥ २१ ॥
catvāry eveti tatrāpi
teja āpo ’nnam ātmanaḥ
jātāni tair idaṁ jātaṁ
janmāvayavinaḥ khalu
Synonyms
catvāri — four; eva — also; iti — thus; tatra — in that case; api — even; tejaḥ — fire; āpaḥ — water; annam — earth; ātmanaḥ — from the Self; jātāni — all arising; taiḥ — by them; idam — this cosmos; jātam — has come about; janma — the birth; avayavinaḥ — of the manifest product; khalu — indeed.

Translation
Some philosophers propose the existence of four basic elements, of which three — fire, water and earth — emanate from the fourth, the Self. Once existing, these elements produce the cosmic manifestation, in which all material creation takes place.

Text 22
सङ्ख्याने सप्तदशके भूतमात्रेन्द्रियाणि च ।
पञ्च पञ्चैकमनसा आत्मा सप्तदश: स्मृत: ॥ २२ ॥
saṅkhyāne saptadaśake
bhūta-mātrendriyāṇi ca
pañca pañcaika-manasā
ātmā saptadaśaḥ smṛtaḥ
Synonyms
saṅkhyāne — in the enumeration; saptadaśake — in terms of seventeen elements; bhūta — the five gross elements; mātra — the five subtle perceptions pertaining to each; indriyāṇi — and the five corresponding senses; ca — also; pañca pañca — in groups of five; eka-manasā — along with the one mind; ātmā — the soul; saptadaśaḥ — as the seventeenth; smṛtaḥ — is so considered.

Translation
Some calculate the existence of seventeen basic elements, namely the five gross elements, the five objects of perception, the five sensory organs, the mind, and the soul as the seventeenth element.

Text 23
तद्वत् षोडशसङ्ख्याने आत्मैव मन उच्यते ।
भूतेन्द्रियाणि पञ्चैव मन आत्मा त्रयोदश ॥ २३ ॥
tadvat ṣoḍaśa-saṅkhyāne
ātmaiva mana ucyate
bhūtendriyāṇi pañcaiva
mana ātmā trayodaśa
Synonyms
tadvat — similarly; ṣoḍaśa-saṅkhyāne — in counting sixteen; ātmā — the soul; eva — indeed; manaḥ — as the mind; ucyate — is identified; bhūta — the five gross elements; indriyāṇi — the senses; pañca — five; eva — certainly; manaḥ — the mind; ātmā — the soul (both the individual soul and the Supersoul); trayodaśa — thirteen.

Translation
According to the calculation of sixteen elements, the only difference from the previous theory is that the soul is identified with the mind. If we think in terms of five physical elements, five senses, the mind, the individual soul and the Supreme Lord, there are thirteen elements.

Text 24
एकादशत्व आत्मासौ महाभूतेन्द्रियाणि च ।
अष्टौ प्रकृतयश्चैव पुरुषश्च नवेत्यथ ॥ २४ ॥
ekādaśatva ātmāsau
mahā-bhūtendriyāṇi ca
aṣṭau prakṛtayaś caiva
puruṣaś ca navety atha
Synonyms
ekādaśatve — in the consideration of eleven; ātmā — the soul; asau — this; mahā-bhūta — the gross elements; indriyāṇi — the senses; ca — and; aṣṭau — eight; prakṛtayaḥ — natural elements (earth, water, fire, air, ether, mind, intelligence and false ego); ca — also; eva — certainly; puruṣaḥ — the Supreme Lord; ca — and; nava — nine; iti — thus; atha — furthermore.

Translation
Counting eleven, there are the soul, the gross elements and the senses. Eight gross and subtle elements plus the Supreme Lord would make nine.

Text 25
इति नानाप्रसङ्ख्यानं तत्त्वानामृषिभि: कृतम् ।
सर्वं न्याय्यं युक्तिमत्त्वाद् विदुषां किमशोभनम् ॥ २५ ॥
iti nānā-prasaṅkhyānaṁ
tattvānām ṛṣibhiḥ kṛtam
sarvaṁ nyāyyaṁ yuktimattvād
viduṣāṁ kim aśobhanam
Synonyms
iti — in these ways; nānā — various; prasaṅkhyānam — enumeration; tattvānām — of the elements; ṛṣibhiḥ — by the sages; kṛtam — has been done; sarvam — all this; nyāyyam — logical; yukti-mattvāt — because of the presentation of rational arguments; viduṣām — of those who are learned; kim — what; aśobhanam — lack of brilliance.

Translation
Thus great philosophers have analyzed the material elements in many different ways. All of their proposals are reasonable, since they are all presented with ample logic. Indeed, such philosophical brilliance is expected of the truly learned.

Text 26
श्रीउद्धव उवाच
प्रकृति: पुरुषश्चोभौ यद्यप्यात्मविलक्षणौ । अन्योन्यापाश्रयात् कृष्ण द‍ृश्यते न भिदा तयो: । प्रकृतौ लक्ष्यते ह्यात्मा प्रकृतिश्च तथात्मनि ॥ २६ ॥
śrī-uddhava uvāca
prakṛtiḥ puruṣaś cobhau
yady apy ātma-vilakṣaṇau
anyonyāpāśrayāt kṛṣṇa
dṛśyate na bhidā tayoḥ
prakṛtau lakṣyate hy ātmā
prakṛtiś ca tathātmani
Synonyms
śrī-uddhavaḥ uvāca — Śrī Uddhava said; prakṛtiḥ — nature; puruṣaḥ — the enjoyer, or living entity; ca — and; ubhau — both; yadi api — although; ātma — constitutionally; vilakṣaṇau — distinct; anyonya — mutual; apāśrayāt — because of shelter; kṛṣṇa — O Lord Kṛṣṇa; dṛśyate na — it does not appear; bhidā — any difference; tayoḥ — between them; prakṛtau — within nature; lakṣyate — is apparently seen; hi — indeed; ātmā — the soul; prakṛtiḥ — nature; ca — and; tathā — also; ātmani — in the soul.

Translation
Śrī Uddhava inquired: Although nature and the living entity are constitutionally distinct, O Lord Kṛṣṇa, there appears to be no difference between them, because they are found residing within one another. Thus the soul appears to be within nature and nature within the soul.

Text 27
एवं मे पुण्डरीकाक्ष महान्तं संशयं हृदि ।
छेत्तुमर्हसि सर्वज्ञ वचोभिर्नयनैपुणै: ॥ २७ ॥
evaṁ me puṇḍarīkākṣa
mahāntaṁ saṁśayaṁ hṛdi
chettum arhasi sarva-jña
vacobhir naya-naipuṇaiḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; me — my; puṇḍarīka-akṣa — O lotus-eyed Lord; mahāntam — great; saṁśayam — doubt; hṛdi — within my heart; chettum — cut; arhasi — You should please; sarva-jña — O omniscient one; vacobhiḥ — with Your words; naya — in reasoning; naipuṇaiḥ — very expert.

Translation
O lotus-eyed Kṛṣṇa, O omniscient Lord, kindly cut this great doubt out of my heart with Your own words, which exhibit Your great skill in reasoning.

Text 28
त्वत्तो ज्ञानं हि जीवानां प्रमोषस्तेऽत्र शक्तित: ।
त्वमेव ह्यात्ममायाया गतिं वेत्थ न चापर: ॥ २८ ॥
tvatto jñānaṁ hi jīvānāṁ
pramoṣas te ’tra śaktitaḥ
tvam eva hy ātma-māyāyā
gatiṁ vettha na cāparaḥ
Synonyms
tvattaḥ — from You; jñānam — knowledge; hi — indeed; jīvānām — of the living beings; pramoṣaḥ — stealing away; te — Your; atra — in this knowledge; śaktitaḥ — by the potency; tvam — You; eva — alone; hi — indeed; ātma — Your own; māyāyāḥ — of the illusory potency; gatim — the real nature; vettha — You know; na — not; ca — and; aparaḥ — any other person.

Translation
From You alone the knowledge of the living beings arises, and by Your potency that knowledge is stolen away. Indeed, no one but Yourself can understand the real nature of Your illusory potency.

Text 29
श्रीभगवानुवाच
प्रकृति: पुरुषश्चेति विकल्प: पुरुषर्षभ ।
एष वैकारिक: सर्गो गुणव्यतिकरात्मक: ॥ २९ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
prakṛtiḥ puruṣaś ceti
vikalpaḥ puruṣarṣabha
eṣa vaikārikaḥ sargo
guṇa-vyatikarātmakaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; prakṛtiḥ — nature; puruṣaḥ — the enjoyer, living entity; ca — and; iti — thus; vikalpaḥ — complete distinction; puruṣa-ṛṣabha — O best among men; eṣaḥ — this; vaikārikaḥ — subject to transformation; sargaḥ — creation; guṇa — of the modes of nature; vyatikara — the agitation; ātmakaḥ — based upon.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O best among men, material nature and its enjoyer are clearly distinct. This manifest creation undergoes constant transformation, being founded upon the agitation of the modes of nature.

Text 30
ममाङ्ग माया गुणमय्यनेकधा
विकल्पबुद्धीश्च गुणैर्विधत्ते ।
वैकारिकस्‍त्रिविधोऽध्यात्ममेक-
मथाधिदैवमधिभूतमन्यत् ॥ ३० ॥
mamāṅga māyā guṇa-mayy anekadhā
vikalpa-buddhīś ca guṇair vidhatte
vaikārikas tri-vidho ’dhyātmam ekam
athādhidaivam adhibhūtam anyat
Synonyms
mama — My; aṅga — My dear Uddhava; māyā — material energy; guṇa-mayī — consisting of the three modes; anekadhā — manifold; vikalpa — different manifestations; buddhīḥ — and perceptions of these differences; ca — and; guṇaiḥ — by the modes; vidhatte — establishes; vaikārikaḥ — the full-blown manifestation of transformations; tri-vidhaḥ — having three aspects; adhyātmam — called adhyātma; ekam — one; atha — and; adhidaivam — adhidaiva; adhibhūtam — adhibhūta; anyat — another.

Translation
My dear Uddhava, My material energy, comprising three modes and acting through them, manifests the varieties of creation along with varieties of consciousness for perceiving them. The manifest result of material transformation is understood in three aspects: adhyātmic, adhidaivic and adhibhautic.

Text 31
द‍ृग् रूपमार्कं वपुरत्र रन्ध्रे
परस्परं सिध्यति य: स्वत: खे ।
आत्मा यदेषामपरो य आद्य:
स्वयानुभूत्याखिलसिद्धसिद्धि: ॥ ३१ ॥
dṛg rūpam ārkaṁ vapur atra randhre
parasparaṁ sidhyati yaḥ svataḥ khe
ātmā yad eṣām aparo ya ādyaḥ
svayānubhūtyākhila-siddha-siddhiḥ
Synonyms
dṛk — the function of sight (as adhyātma); rūpam — visible form (as adhibhūta); ārkam — of the sun; vapuḥ — the partial image (as adhidaiva); atra — in this; randhre — aperture (of the eyeball); parasparam — mutually; sidhyati — cause the manifestation of each other; yaḥ — which; svataḥ — by its own power; khe — in the sky; ātmā — the Supersoul; yat — which; eṣām — of these (three features); aparaḥ — separate; yaḥ — who; ādyaḥ — the original cause; svayā — by His own; anubhūtyā — transcendental experience; akhila — of all; siddha — manifest phenomena; siddhiḥ — the source of manifestation.

Translation
Sight, visible form and the reflected image of the sun within the aperture of the eye all work together to reveal one another. But the original sun standing in the sky is self-manifested. Similarly, the Supreme Soul, the original cause of all entities, who is thus separate from all of them, acts by the illumination of His own transcendental experience as the ultimate source of manifestation of all mutually manifesting objects.

Text 32
एवं त्वगादि श्रवणादि चक्षु- ।
र्जिह्वादि नासादि च चित्तयुक्तम् ॥ ३२ ॥
evaṁ tvag-ādi śravaṇādi cakṣur
jihvādi nāsādi ca citta-yuktam
Synonyms
evam — in the same way; tvak-ādi — the skin, the sensation of touch and the demigod of the wind, Vāyu; śravaṇa-ādi — the ears, the sensation of sound and the demigods of the directions; cakṣuḥ — the eyes (described in the previous verse); jihvā-adi — the tongue, the sensation of taste and the god of water, Varuṇa; nāsa-ādi — the nose, the sensation of smell and the Aśvinī-kumāras; ca — also; citta-yuktam — along with consciousness (implying not only conditioned consciousness together with the object of that consciousness and the presiding Deity Vāsudeva, but also the mind together with the object of thought and the moon-god Candra, intelligence with the object of intelligence and Lord Brahmā, and false ego together with the identification of false ego and Lord Rudra).

Translation
Similarly, the sense organs, namely the skin, ears, eyes, tongue and nose — as well as the functions of the subtle body, namely conditioned consciousness, mind, intelligence and false ego — can all be analyzed in terms of the threefold distinction of sense, object of perception and presiding deity.

Text 33
योऽसौ गुणक्षोभकृतो विकार:
प्रधानमूलान्महत: प्रसूत: ।
अहं त्रिवृन्मोहविकल्पहेतु-
र्वैकारिकस्तामस ऐन्द्रियश्च ॥ ३३ ॥
yo ’sau guṇa-kṣobha-kṛto vikāraḥ
pradhāna-mūlān mahataḥ prasūtaḥ
ahaṁ tri-vṛn moha-vikalpa-hetur
vaikārikas tāmasa aindriyaś ca
Synonyms
yaḥ asau — this; guṇa — of the modes of nature; kṣobha — by the agitation; kṛtaḥ — caused; vikāraḥ — transformation; pradhāna-mūlāt — which is generated from the pradhāna, the unmanifest form of the total material nature; mahataḥ — from the mahat-tattva; prasūtaḥ — generated; aham — false ego; tri-vṛt — in three phases; moha — of bewilderment; vikalpa — and material variety; hetuḥ — the cause; vaikārikaḥ — in the mode of goodness; tāmasaḥ — in the mode of ignorance; aindriyaḥ — in the mode of passion; ca — and.

Translation
When the three modes of nature are agitated, the resultant transformation appears as the element false ego in three phases — goodness, passion and ignorance. Generated from the mahat-tattva, which is itself produced from the unmanifest pradhāna, this false ego becomes the cause of all material illusion and duality.

Text 34
आत्मा परिज्ञानमयो विवादो
ह्यस्तीति नास्तीति भिदार्थनिष्ठ: ।
व्यर्थोऽपि नैवोपरमेत पुंसां
मत्त: परावृत्तधियां स्वलोकात् ॥ ३४ ॥
ātmāparijñāna-mayo vivādo
hy astīti nāstīti bhidārtha-niṣṭhaḥ
vyartho ’pi naivoparameta puṁsāṁ
mattaḥ parāvṛtta-dhiyāṁ sva-lokāt
Synonyms
ātma — of the Supreme Soul; aparijñāna-mayaḥ — based on lack of full knowledge; vivādaḥ — speculative argument; hi — indeed; asti — (this world) is real; iti — thus saying; na asti — it is not real; iti — thus saying; bhidā — material differences; artha-niṣṭhaḥ — having as its focus of discussion; vyarthaḥ — worthless; api — although; na — does not; eva — certainly; uparameta — cease; puṁsām — for persons; mattaḥ — from Me; parāvṛtta — who have turned; dhiyām — their attention; sva-lokāt — who am nondifferent from them.

Translation
The speculative argument of philosophers — “This world is real,” “No, it is not real” — is based upon incomplete knowledge of the Supreme Soul and is simply aimed at understanding material dualities. Although such argument is useless, persons who have turned their attention away from Me, their own true Self, are unable to give it up.

Texts 35-36
श्रीउद्धव उवाच
त्वत्त: परावृत्तधिय: स्वकृतै: कर्मभि: प्रभो ।
उच्चावचान् यथा देहान् गृह्णन्ति विसृजन्ति च ॥ ३५ ॥
तन्ममाख्याहि गोविन्द दुर्विभाव्यमनात्मभि: ।
न ह्येतत् प्रायशो लोके विद्वांस: सन्ति वञ्चिता: ॥ ३६ ॥
śrī-uddhava uvāca
tvattaḥ parāvṛtta-dhiyaḥ
sva-kṛtaiḥ karmabhiḥ prabho
uccāvacān yathā dehān
gṛhṇanti visṛjanti ca
tan mamākhyāhi govinda
durvibhāvyam anātmabhiḥ
na hy etat prāyaśo loke
vidvāṁsaḥ santi vañcitāḥ
Synonyms
śrī-uddhavaḥ uvāca — Śrī Uddhava said; tvattaḥ — from You; parāvṛtta — diverted; dhiyaḥ — whose minds; sva-kṛtaiḥ — done by them; karmabhiḥ — by the fruitive activities; prabho — O supreme master; ucca-avacān — higher and lower; yathā — in which way; dehān — material bodies; gṛhṇanti — they accept; visṛjanti — give up; ca — and; tat — that; mama — to me; ākhyāhi — please explain; govinda — O Govinda; durvibhāvyam — impossible to understand; anātmabhiḥ — by those who are not intelligent; na — not; hi — indeed; etat — about this; prāyaśaḥ — for the most part; loke — in this world; vidvāṁsaḥ — knowledgeable; santi — they are; vañcitāḥ — who are cheated (by material illusion).

Translation
Śrī Uddhava said: O supreme master, the intelligence of those dedicated to fruitive activities is certainly deviated from You. Please explain to me how such persons accept superior and inferior bodies by their materialistic activities and then give up such bodies. O Govinda, this topic is very difficult for foolish persons to understand. Being cheated by illusion in this world, they generally do not become aware of these facts.

Text 37
श्रीभगवानुवाच
मन: कर्ममयं नृणामिन्द्रियै: पञ्चभिर्युतम् ।
लोकाल्ल‍ोकं प्रयात्यन्य आत्मा तदनुवर्तते ॥ ३७ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
manaḥ karma-mayaṁ ṇṝṇām
indriyaiḥ pañcabhir yutam
lokāl lokaṁ prayāty anya
ātmā tad anuvartate
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; manaḥ — the mind; karma-mayam — shaped by fruitive work; nṝṇām — of persons; indriyaiḥ — along with the senses; pañcabhiḥ — five; yutam — conjoined; lokāt — from one world; lokam — to another world; prayāti — travels; anyaḥ — separate; ātmā — the soul; tat — that mind; anuvartate — follows.

Translation
Lord Kṛṣṇa said: The material mind of men is shaped by the reactions of fruitive work. Along with the five senses, it travels from one material body to another. The spirit soul, although different from this mind, follows it.

Text 38
ध्यायन् मनोऽनु विषयान् द‍ृष्टान् वानुश्रुतानथ ।
उद्यत् सीदत् कर्मतन्त्रं स्मृतिस्तदनु शाम्यति ॥ ३८ ॥
dhyāyan mano ’nu viṣayān
dṛṣṭān vānuśrutān atha
udyat sīdat karma-tantraṁ
smṛtis tad anu śāmyati
Synonyms
dhyāyat — meditating; manaḥ — the mind; anu — regularly; viṣayān — on the sense objects; dṛṣṭān — seen; vā — or; anuśrutān — heard from Vedic authority; atha — subsequently; udyat — rising; sīdat — dissolving; karma-tantram — bound to the reactions of fruitive work; smṛtiḥ — remembrance; tat anu — after that; śāmyati — is destroyed.

Translation
The mind, bound to the reactions of fruitive work, always meditates on the objects of the senses, both those that are seen in this world and those that are heard about from Vedic authority. Consequently, the mind appears to come into being and to suffer annihilation along with its objects of perception, and thus its ability to distinguish past and future is lost.

Text 39
विषयाभिनिवेशेन नात्मानं यत् स्मरेत् पुन: ।
जन्तोर्वै कस्यचिद्धेतोर्मृत्युरत्यन्तविस्मृति: ॥ ३९ ॥
viṣayābhiniveśena
nātmānaṁ yat smaret punaḥ
jantor vai kasyacid dhetor
mṛtyur atyanta-vismṛtiḥ
Synonyms
viṣaya — in (new) objects of perception; abhiniveśena — because of absorption; na — not; ātmānam — his previous self; yat — the situation in which; smaret — remembers; punaḥ — any more; jantoḥ — of the living entity; vai — indeed; kasyacit hetoḥ — for any reason or other; mṛtyuḥ — known as death; atyanta — total; vismṛtiḥ — forgetfulness.

Translation
When the living entity passes from the present body to the next body, which is created by his own karma, he becomes absorbed in the pleasurable and painful sensations of the new body and completely forgets the experience of the previous body. This total forgetfulness of one’s previous material identity, which comes about for one reason or another, is called death.

Text 40
जन्म त्वात्मतया पुंस: सर्वभावेन भूरिद ।
विषयस्वीकृतिं प्राहुर्यथा स्वप्नमनोरथ: ॥ ४० ॥
janma tv ātmatayā puṁsaḥ
sarva-bhāvena bhūri-da
viṣaya-svīkṛtiṁ prāhur
yathā svapna-manorathaḥ
Synonyms
janma — birth; tu — and; ātmatayā — by identification with oneself; puṁsaḥ — of a person; sarva-bhāvena — completely; bhūri-da — O most charitable Uddhava; viṣaya — of the body; svī-kṛtim — the acceptance; prāhuḥ — is called; yathā — just as; svapna — a dream; manaḥ-rathaḥ — or a mental fantasy.

Translation
O most charitable Uddhava, what is called birth is simply a person’s total identification with a new body. One accepts the new body just as one completely accepts the experience of a dream or a fantasy as reality.

Text 41
स्वप्नं मनोरथं चेत्थं प्राक्तनं न स्मरत्यसौ ।
तत्र पूर्वमिवात्मानमपूर्वम् चानुपश्यति ॥ ४१ ॥
svapnaṁ manorathaṁ cetthaṁ
prāktanaṁ na smaraty asau
tatra pūrvam ivātmānam
apūrvam cānupaśyati
Synonyms
svapnam — a dream; manaḥ-ratham — a daydream; ca — and; ittham — thus; prāktanam — previous; na smarati — does not remember; asau — he; tatra — in that (present body); pūrvam — the previous; iva — as if; ātmānam — himself; apūrvam — having no past; ca — and; anupaśyati — he views.

Translation
Just as a person experiencing a dream or daydream does not remember his previous dreams or daydreams, a person situated in his present body, although having existed prior to it, thinks that he has only recently come into being.

Text 42
इन्द्रियायनसृष्‍ट्येदं त्रैविध्यं भाति वस्तुनि ।
बहिरन्तर्भिदाहेतुर्जनोऽसज्जनकृद् यथा ॥ ४२ ॥
indriyāyana-sṛṣṭyedaṁ
trai-vidhyaṁ bhāti vastuni
bahir-antar-bhidā-hetur
jano ’saj-jana-kṛd yathā
Synonyms
indriya-ayana — by the resting place of the senses (the mind); sṛṣṭyā — because of the creation (of identification with a new body); idam — this; trai-vidhyam — threefold variety (of high, middle and low class); bhāti — appears; vastuni — in the reality (the soul); bahiḥ — external; antaḥ — and internal; bhidā — of the differences; hetuḥ — the cause; janaḥ — a person; asat-jana — of a bad person; kṛt — the progenitor; yathā — as.

Translation
Because the mind, which is the resting place of the senses, has created the identification with a new body, the threefold material variety of high, middle and low class appears as if present within the reality of the soul. Thus the self creates external and internal duality, just as a man might give birth to a bad son.

Text 43
नित्यदा ह्यङ्ग भूतानि भवन्ति न भवन्ति च ।
कालेनालक्ष्यवेगेन सूक्ष्मत्वात्तन्न द‍ृश्यते ॥ ४३ ॥
nityadā hy aṅga bhūtāni
bhavanti na bhavanti ca
kālenālakṣya-vegena
sūkṣmatvāt tan na dṛśyate
Synonyms
nityadā — constantly; hi — indeed; aṅga — My dear Uddhava; bhūtāni — created bodies; bhavanti — come into being; na bhavanti — go out of being; ca — and; kālena — by time; alakṣya — imperceptible; vegena — whose speed; sūkṣmatvāt — because of being very subtle; tat — that; na dṛśyate — is not seen.

Translation
My dear Uddhava, material bodies are constantly undergoing creation and destruction by the force of time, whose swiftness is imperceptible. But because of the subtle nature of time, no one sees this.

Text 44
यथार्चिषां स्रोतसां च फलानां वा वनस्पते: ।
तथैव सर्वभूतानां वयोऽवस्थादय: कृता: ॥ ४४ ॥
yathārciṣāṁ srotasāṁ ca
phalānāṁ vā vanaspateḥ
tathaiva sarva-bhūtānāṁ
vayo-’vasthādayaḥ kṛtāḥ
Synonyms
yathā — as; arciṣām — of the flames of a candle; srotasām — of the currents of a river; ca — and; phalānām — of fruits; vā — or; vanaspateḥ — of a tree; tathā — thus; eva — certainly; sarva-bhūtānām — of all material bodies; vayaḥ — of different ages; avasthā — situations; ādayaḥ — and so on; kṛtāḥ — are created.

Translation
The different stages of transformation of all material bodies occur just like those of the flame of a candle, the current of a river, or the fruits of a tree.

Text 45
सोऽयं दीपोऽर्चिषां यद्वत्स्रोतसां तदिदं जलम् ।
सोऽयं पुमानिति नृणां मृषा गीर्धीर्मृषायुषाम् ॥ ४५ ॥
so ’yaṁ dīpo ’rciṣāṁ yadvat
srotasāṁ tad idaṁ jalam
so ’yaṁ pumān iti nṛṇāṁ
mṛṣā gīr dhīr mṛṣāyuṣām
Synonyms
saḥ — this; ayam — the same; dīpaḥ — light; arciṣām — of the radiation of a lamp; yadvat — just as; srotasām — of the currents flowing in a river; tat — that; idam — the same; jalam — water; saḥ — this; ayam — the same; pumān — person; iti — thus; nṛṇām — of men; mṛṣā — false; gīḥ — statement; dhīḥ — thought; mṛṣā-āyuṣām — of those who are wasting their life.

Translation
Although the illumination of a lamp consists of innumerable rays of light undergoing constant creation, transformation and destruction, a person with illusory intelligence who sees the light for a moment will speak falsely, saying, “This is the light of the lamp.” As one observes a flowing river, ever-new water passes by and goes far away, yet a foolish person, observing one point in the river, falsely states, “This is the water of the river.” Similarly, although the material body of a human being is constantly undergoing transformation, those who are simply wasting their lives falsely think and say that each particular stage of the body is the person’s real identity.

Text 46
मा स्वस्य कर्मबीजेन जायते सोऽप्ययं पुमान् ।
म्रियते वामरो भ्रान्त्या यथाग्निर्दारुसंयुत: ॥ ४६ ॥
mā svasya karma-bījena
jāyate so ’py ayaṁ pumān
mriyate vāmaro bhrāntyā
yathāgnir dāru-saṁyutaḥ
Synonyms
mā — does not; svasya — of the self; karma-bījena — by the seed of his activities; jāyate — take birth; saḥ — he; api — indeed; ayam — this; pumān — personality; mriyate — dies; vā — or; amaraḥ — immortal; bhrāntyā — because of illusion; yathā — as; agniḥ — fire; dāru — with wood; saṁyutaḥ — joined.

Translation
A person does not actually take birth out of the seed of past activities, nor, being immortal, does he die. By illusion the living being appears to be born and to die, just as fire in connection with firewood appears to begin and then cease to exist.

Text 47
निषेकगर्भजन्मानि बाल्यकौमारयौवनम् ।
वयोमध्यं जरा मृत्युरित्यवस्थास्तनोर्नव ॥ ४७ ॥
niṣeka-garbha-janmāni
bālya-kaumāra-yauvanam
vayo-madhyaṁ jarā mṛtyur
ity avasthās tanor nava
Synonyms
niṣeka — impregnation; garbha — gestation; janmāni — and birth; bālya — infancy; kaumāra — childhood; yauvanam — and youth; vayaḥ-madhyam — middle age; jarā — old age; mṛtyuḥ — death; iti — thus; avasthāḥ — ages; tanoḥ — of the body; nava — nine.

Translation
Impregnation, gestation, birth, infancy, childhood, youth, middle age, old age and death are the nine ages of the body.

Text 48
एता मनोरथमयीर्हान्यस्योच्चावचास्तनू: ।
गुणसङ्गादुपादत्ते क्व‍‍चित् कश्चिज्जहाति च ॥ ४८ ॥
etā manoratha-mayīr
hānyasyoccāvacās tanūḥ
guṇa-saṅgād upādatte
kvacit kaścij jahāti ca
Synonyms
etāḥ — these; manaḥ-rathaḥ-mayīḥ — achieved by meditation of the mind; ha — certainly; anyasya — of the body (who is separate from the self); ucca — greater; avacāḥ — and lesser; tanūḥ — bodily conditions; guṇa-saṅgāt — because of associating with the modes of nature; upādatte — he accepts; kvacit — sometimes; kaścit — someone; jahāti — gives up; ca — and.

Translation
Although the material body is different from the self, because of the ignorance due to material association one falsely identifies oneself with the superior and inferior bodily conditions. Sometimes a fortunate person is able to give up such mental concoction.

Text 49
आत्मन: पितृपुत्राभ्यामनुमेयौ भवाप्ययौ ।
न भवाप्ययवस्तूनामभिज्ञो द्वयलक्षण: ॥ ४९ ॥
ātmanaḥ pitṛ-putrābhyām
anumeyau bhavāpyayau
na bhavāpyaya-vastūnām
abhijño dvaya-lakṣaṇaḥ
Synonyms
ātmanaḥ — one’s own; pitṛ — from the father or ancestors; putrābhyām — and the son; anumeyau — can be surmised; bhava — birth; apyayau — and death; na — is no longer; bhava-apyaya-vastūnām — of all that is subject to generation and destruction; abhijñaḥ — one who is in proper knowledge; dvaya — by these dualities; lakṣaṇaḥ — characterized.

Translation
By the death of one’s father or grandfather one can surmise one’s own death, and by the birth of one’s son one can understand the condition of one’s own birth. A person who thus realistically understands the creation and destruction of material bodies is no longer subject to these dualities.

Text 50
तरोर्बीजविपाकाभ्यां यो विद्वाञ्जन्मसंयमौ ।
तरोर्विलक्षणो द्रष्टा एवं द्रष्टा तनो: पृथक् ॥ ५० ॥
taror bīja-vipākābhyāṁ
yo vidvāñ janma-saṁyamau
taror vilakṣaṇo draṣṭā
evaṁ draṣṭā tanoḥ pṛthak
Synonyms
taroḥ — of a tree; bīja — (birth from) its seed; vipākābhyām — (destruction subsequent to) maturity; yaḥ — one who; vidvān — in knowledge; janma — of birth; saṁyamau — and death; taroḥ — from the tree; vilakṣaṇaḥ — distinct; draṣṭā — the witness; evam — in the same way; draṣṭā — the witness; tanoḥ — of the material body; pṛthak — is separate.

Translation
One who observes the birth of a tree from its seed and the ultimate death of the tree after maturity certainly remains a distinct observer separate from the tree. In the same way, the witness of the birth and death of the material body remains separate from it.

Text 51
प्रकृतेरेवमात्मानमविविच्याबुध: पुमान् ।
तत्त्वेन स्पर्शसम्मूढ: संसारं प्रतिपद्यते ॥ ५१ ॥
prakṛter evam ātmānam
avivicyābudhaḥ pumān
tattvena sparśa-sammūḍhaḥ
saṁsāraṁ pratipadyate
Synonyms
prakṛteḥ — from material nature; evam — in this way; ātmānam — the self; avivicya — failing to distinguish; abudhaḥ — the unintelligent; pumān — person; tattvena — because of thinking (material things) to be real; sparśa — by material contact; sammūḍhaḥ — completely bewildered; saṁsāram — the cycle of material existence; pratipadyate — attains.

Translation
An unintelligent man, failing to distinguish himself from material nature, thinks nature to be real. By contact with it he becomes completely bewildered and enters into the cycle of material existence.

Text 52
सत्त्वसङ्गाद‍ृषीन्देवान् रजसासुरमानुषान् ।
तमसा भूततिर्यक्त्वं भ्रामितो याति कर्मभि: ॥ ५२ ॥
sattva-saṅgād ṛṣīn devān
rajasāsura-mānuṣān
tamasā bhūta-tiryaktvaṁ
bhrāmito yāti karmabhiḥ
Synonyms
sattva-saṅgāt — by association with the mode of goodness; ṛṣīn — to the sages; devān — to the demigods; rajasā — by the mode of passion; asura — to the demons; mānuṣān — and to human beings; tamasā — by the mode of ignorance; bhūta — to the ghostly spirits; tiryaktvam — or the animal kingdom; bhrāmitaḥ — made to wander; yāti — he goes; karmabhiḥ — because of his fruitive activities.

Translation
Made to wander because of his fruitive work, the conditioned soul, by contact with the mode of goodness, takes birth among the sages or demigods. By contact with the mode of passion he becomes a demon or human being, and by association with the mode of ignorance he takes birth as a ghost or in the animal kingdom.

Text 53
नृत्यतो गायत: पश्यन् यथैवानुकरोति तान् ।
एवं बुद्धिगुणान् पश्यन्ननीहोऽप्यनुकार्यते ॥ ५३ ॥
nṛtyato gāyataḥ paśyan
yathaivānukaroti tān
evaṁ buddhi-guṇān paśyann
anīho ’py anukāryate
Synonyms
nṛtyataḥ — persons who are dancing; gāyataḥ — and singing; paśyan — observing; yathā — just as; eva — indeed; anukaroti — imitates; tān — them; evam — thus; buddhi — of the material intelligence; guṇān — the acquired qualities; paśyan — seeing; anīhaḥ — although not himself engaged in activity; api — nevertheless; anukāryate — is made to imitate.

Translation
Just as one may imitate persons whom one sees dancing and singing, similarly the soul, although never the doer of material activities, becomes captivated by material intelligence and is thus forced to imitate its qualities.

Texts 54-55
यथाम्भसा प्रचलता तरवोऽपि चला इव ।
चक्षुषा भ्राम्यमाणेन द‍ृश्यते भ्रमतीव भू: ॥ ५४ ॥
यथा मनोरथधियो विषयानुभवो मृषा ।
स्वप्नद‍ृष्टाश्च दाशार्ह तथा संसार आत्मन: ॥ ५५ ॥
yathāmbhasā pracalatā
taravo ’pi calā iva
cakṣuṣā bhrāmyamāṇena
dṛśyate bhramatīva bhūḥ
yathā manoratha-dhiyo
viṣayānubhavo mṛṣā
svapna-dṛṣṭāś ca dāśārha
tathā saṁsāra ātmanaḥ
Synonyms
yathā — as; ambhasā — by water; pracalatā — moving, agitated; taravaḥ — trees; api — indeed; calāḥ — moving; iva — as if; cakṣuṣā — by the eyes; bhrāmyamāṇena — which are being turned about; dṛśyate — appears; bhramatī — moving; iva — as if; bhūḥ — the earth; yathā — as; manaḥ-ratha — of a mental fantasy; dhiyaḥ — the ideas; viṣaya — of sense gratification; anubhavaḥ — the experience; mṛṣā — false; svapna-dṛṣṭāḥ — things seen in a dream; ca — and; dāśārha — O descendant of Daśārha; tathā — thus; saṁsāraḥ — the material life; ātmanaḥ — of the soul.

Translation
The soul’s material life, his experience of sense gratification, is actually false, O descendant of Daśārha, just like trees’ appearance of quivering when the trees are reflected in agitated water, or like the earth’s appearance of spinning due to one’s spinning his eyes around, or like the world of a fantasy or dream.

Text 56
अर्थे ह्यविद्यमानेऽपि संसृतिर्न निवर्तते ।
ध्यायतो विषयानस्य स्वप्नेऽनर्थागमो यथा ॥ ५६ ॥
arthe hy avidyamāne ’pi
saṁsṛtir na nivartate
dhyāyato viṣayān asya
svapne ’narthāgamo yathā
Synonyms
arthe — in truth; hi — certainly; avidyamāne — not existing; api — even though; saṁsṛtiḥ — material existence; na nivartate — does not stop; dhyāyataḥ — who is meditating; viṣayān — on the objects of sense gratification; asya — for him; svapne — in a dream; anartha — of unwanted things; āgamaḥ — the coming; yathā — just as.

Translation
For one who is meditating on sense gratification, material life, although lacking factual existence, does not go away, just as the unpleasant experiences of a dream do not.

Text 57
तस्मादुद्धव मा भुङ्‍क्ष्व विषयानसदिन्द्रियै: ।
आत्माग्रहणनिर्भातं पश्य वैकल्पिकं भ्रमम् ॥ ५७ ॥
tasmād uddhava mā bhuṅkṣva
viṣayān asad-indriyaiḥ
ātmāgrahaṇa-nirbhātaṁ
paśya vaikalpikaṁ bhramam
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; uddhava — My dear Uddhava; mā bhuṅkṣva — do not enjoy; viṣayān — the objects of sense gratification; asat — impure; indriyaiḥ — with senses; ātma — of the self; agrahaṇa — inability to realize; nirbhātam — in which is manifest; paśya — see it; vaikalpikam — based on material duality; bhramam — the illusion.

Translation
Therefore, O Uddhava, do not try to enjoy sense gratification with the material senses. See how illusion based on material dualities prevents one from realizing the self.

Texts 58-59
क्षिप्तोऽवमानितोऽसद्भ‍ि: प्रलब्धोऽसूयितोऽथवा ।
ताडित: सन्निरुद्धो वा वृत्त्या वा परिहापित: ॥ ५८ ॥
निष्ठ्युतो मूत्रितो वाज्ञैर्बहुधैवं प्रकम्पित: ।
श्रेयस्काम: कृच्छ्रगत आत्मनात्मानमुद्धरेत् ॥ ५९ ॥
kṣipto ’vamānito ’sadbhiḥ
pralabdho ’sūyito ’tha vā
tāḍitaḥ sanniruddho vā
vṛttyā vā parihāpitaḥ
niṣṭhyuto mūtrito vājñair
bahudhaivaṁ prakampitaḥ
śreyas-kāmaḥ kṛcchra-gata
ātmanātmānam uddharet
Synonyms
kṣiptaḥ — insulted; avamānitaḥ — neglected; asadbhiḥ — by bad men; pralabdhaḥ — ridiculed; asūyitaḥ — envied; atha vā — or else; tāḍitaḥ — chastised; sanniruddhaḥ — tied up; vā — or; vṛttyā — of his means of livelihood; vā — or; parihāpitaḥ — deprived; niṣṭhyutaḥ — spat upon; mūtritaḥ — polluted with urine; vā — or; ajñaiḥ — by foolish men; bahudhā — repeatedly; evam — thus; prakampitaḥ — agitated; śreyaḥ-kāmaḥ — one who desires the highest goal in life; kṛcchra-gataḥ — experiencing difficulty; ātmanā — by his intelligence; ātmānam — himself; uddharet — should save.

Translation
Even though neglected, insulted, ridiculed or envied by bad men, or even though repeatedly agitated by being beaten, tied up or deprived of one’s occupation, spat upon or polluted with urine by ignorant people, one who desires the highest goal in life should in spite of all these difficulties use his intelligence to keep himself safe on the spiritual platform.

Text 60
श्रीउद्धव उवाच
यथैवमनुबुध्येयं वद नो वदतां वर ॥ ६० ॥
śrī-uddhava uvāca
yathaivam anubudhyeyaṁ
vada no vadatāṁ vara
Synonyms
śrī-uddhavaḥ uvāca — Śrī Uddhava said; yathā — how; evam — thus; anubudhyeyam — I may properly understand; vada — please speak; naḥ — to us; vadatām — of all speakers; vara — O You who are the best.

Translation
Śrī Uddhava said: O best of all speakers, please explain to me how I may properly understand this.

Text 61
सुदु:सहमिमं मन्ये आत्मन्यसदतिक्रमम् ।
विदुषामपि विश्वात्मन् प्रकृतिर्हि बलीयसी ।
ऋते त्वद्धर्मनिरतान् शान्तांस्ते चरणालयान् ॥ ६१ ॥
su-duḥsaham imaṁ manya
ātmany asad-atikramam
viduṣām api viśvātman
prakṛtir hi balīyasī
ṛte tvad-dharma-niratān
śāntāṁs te caraṇālayān
Synonyms
su-duḥsaham — most difficult to tolerate; imam — this; manye — I consider; ātmani — upon oneself; asat — by ignorant people; atikramam — the attacks; viduṣām — for those who are learned; api — even; viśva-ātman — O soul of the universe; prakṛtiḥ — one’s conditioned personality; hi — certainly; balīyasī — very strong; ṛte — except for; tvat-dharma — in Your devotional service; niratān — those who are fixed; śāntān — peaceful; te — Your; caraṇa-ālayān — who reside at the lotus feet.

Translation
O soul of the universe, the conditioning of one’s personality in material life is very strong, and therefore it is very difficult even for learned men to tolerate the offenses committed against them by ignorant people. Only Your devotees, who are fixed in Your loving service and who have achieved peace by residing at Your lotus feet, are able to tolerate such offenses.