Text 1
श्रीउद्धव उवाच
क्रियायोगं समाचक्ष्व भवदाराधनं प्रभो ।
यस्मात्त्वां ये यथार्चन्ति सात्वता: सात्वतर्षभ ॥ १ ॥
śrī-uddhava uvāca
kriyā-yogaṁ samācakṣva
bhavad-ārādhanaṁ prabho
yasmāt tvāṁ ye yathārcanti
sātvatāḥ sātvatarṣabha
Synonyms
śrī-uddhavaḥ uvāca — Śrī Uddhava said; kriyā-yogam — the prescribed method of activity; samācakṣva — please explain; bhavat — of You; ārādhanam — the Deity worship; prabho — O Lord; yasmāt — based on what kind of form; tvām — You; ye — who; yathā — in what manner; arcanti — they worship; sātvatāḥ — the devotees; sātvata-ṛṣabha — O master of the devotees.

Translation
Śrī Uddhava said: My dear Lord, O master of the devotees, please explain to me the prescribed method of worshiping You in Your Deity form. What are the qualifications of those devotees who worship the Deity, on what basis is such worship established, and what is the specific method of worship?

Text 2
एतद् वदन्ति मुनयो मुहुर्नि:श्रेयसं नृणाम् ।
नारदो भगवान् व्यास आचार्योऽङ्गिरस: सुत: ॥ २ ॥
etad vadanti munayo
muhur niḥśreyasaṁ nṛṇām
nārado bhagavān vyāsa
ācāryo ’ṅgirasaḥ sutaḥ
Synonyms
etat — this; vadanti — they say; munayaḥ — the great sages; muhuḥ — repeatedly; niḥśreyasam — the highest goal of life; nṛṇām — for men; nāradaḥ — Nārada Muni; bhagavān vyāsaḥ — Śrīla Vedavyāsa; ācāryaḥ — my spiritual master; aṅgirasaḥ — of Aṅgirā; sutaḥ — the son.

Translation
All the great sages repeatedly declare that such worship brings the greatest benefit possible in human life. This is the opinion of Nārada Muni, the great Vyāsadeva and my own spiritual master, Bṛhaspati.

Texts 3-4
नि:सृतं ते मुखाम्भोजाद् यदाह भगवानज: ।
पुत्रेभ्यो भृगुमुख्येभ्यो देव्यै च भगवान् भव: ॥ ३ ॥
एतद् वै सर्ववर्णानामाश्रमाणां च सम्मतम् ।
श्रेयसामुत्तमं मन्ये स्‍त्रीशूद्राणां च मानद ॥ ४ ॥
niḥsṛtaṁ te mukhāmbhojād
yad āha bhagavān ajaḥ
putrebhyo bhṛgu-mukhyebhyo
devyai ca bhagavān bhavaḥ
etad vai sarva-varṇānām
āśramāṇāṁ ca sammatam
śreyasām uttamaṁ manye
strī-śūdrāṇāṁ ca māna-da
Synonyms
niḥsṛtam — emanated; te — Your; mukha-ambhojāt — from the lotus mouth; yat — which; āha — spoke; bhagavān — the great lord; ajaḥ — self-born Brahmā; putrebhyaḥ — to his sons; bhṛgu-mukhyebhyaḥ — headed by Bhṛgu; devyai — to the goddess Pārvatī; ca — and; bhagavān bhavaḥ — Lord Śiva; etat — this (process of Deity worship); vai — indeed; sarva-varṇānām — by all the occupational classes of society; āśramāṇām — and spiritual orders; ca — also; sammatam — approved; śreyasām — of different kinds of benefit in life; uttamam — the topmost; manye — I think; strī — for women; śūdrāṇām — and low-class workers; ca — also; māna-da — O magnanimous Lord.

Translation
O most magnanimous Lord, the instructions on this process of Deity worship first emanated from Your lotus mouth. Then they were spoken by the great Lord Brahmā to his sons, headed by Bhṛgu, and by Lord Śiva to his wife, Pārvatī. This process is accepted by and appropriate for all the occupational and spiritual orders of society. Therefore I consider worship of You in Your Deity form to be the most beneficial of all spiritual practices, even for women and śūdras.

Text 5
एतत् कमलपत्राक्ष कर्मबन्धविमोचनम् ।
भक्ताय चानुरक्ताय ब्रूहि विश्वेश्वरेश्वर ॥ ५ ॥
etat kamala-patrākṣa
karma-bandha-vimocanam
bhaktāya cānuraktāya
brūhi viśveśvareśvara
Synonyms
etat — this; kamala-patra-akṣa — O lotus-eyed Lord; karma-bandha — from the bondage of material work; vimocanam — the means of liberation; bhaktāya — to Your devotee; anuraktāya — who is very attached; brūhi — please speak; viśva-īśvara — of all the lords of the universe; īśvara — O Supreme Lord.

Translation
O lotus-eyed one, O Supreme Lord of all lords of the universe, please explain to Your devoted servant this means of liberation from the bondage of work.

Text 6
श्रीभगवानुवाच
न ह्यन्तोऽनन्तपारस्य कर्मकाण्डस्य चोद्धव ।
सङ्‌क्षिप्तं वर्णयिष्यामि यथावदनुपूर्वश: ॥ ६ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
na hy anto ’nanta-pārasya
karma-kāṇḍasya coddhava
saṅkṣiptaṁ varṇayiṣyāmi
yathāvad anupūrvaśaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; na — there is not; hi — indeed; antaḥ — any end; ananta-pārasya — of the boundless; karma-kāṇḍasya — Vedic prescriptions for the execution of worship; ca — and; uddhava — O Uddhava; saṅkṣiptam — in brief; varṇayiṣyāmi — I shall explain; yathā-vat — in a suitable manner; anupūrvaśaḥ — in the appropriate order.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, there is no end to the innumerable Vedic prescriptions for executing Deity worship; so I shall explain this topic to you briefly, one step at a time.

Text 7
वैदिकस्तान्त्रिको मिश्र इति मे त्रिविधो मख: ।
त्रयाणामीप्सितेनैव विधिना मां समर्चरेत् ॥ ७ ॥
vaidikas tāntriko miśra
iti me tri-vidho makhaḥ
trayāṇām īpsitenaiva
vidhinā māṁ samarcaret
Synonyms
vaidikaḥ — according to the four Vedas; tāntrikaḥ — according to practical, explanatory literatures; miśraḥ — mixed; iti — thus; me — of Me; tri-vidhaḥ — of three kinds; makhaḥ — sacrifice; trayāṇām — of the three; īpsitena — that which one feels to be most suitable; eva — certainly; vidhinā — by the process; mām — Me; samarcaret — one should properly worship.

Translation
One should carefully worship Me by selecting one of the three methods by which I receive sacrifice: Vedic, tantric or mixed.

Text 8
यदा स्वनिगमेनोक्तं द्विजत्वं प्राप्य पूरुष: ।
यथा यजेत मां भक्त्या श्रद्धया तन्निबोध मे ॥ ८ ॥
yadā sva-nigamenoktaṁ
dvijatvaṁ prāpya pūruṣaḥ
yathā yajeta māṁ bhaktyā
śraddhayā tan nibodha me
Synonyms
yadā — when; sva — specified according to one’s qualification; nigamena — by the Vedas; uktam — enjoined; dvijatvam — the status of becoming twice-born; prāpya — achieving; pūruṣaḥ — a person; yathā — in which way; yajeta — he should execute worship; mām — unto Me; bhaktyā — with devotion; śraddhayā — with faith; tat — that; nibodha — please hear; me — from Me.

Translation
Now please listen faithfully as I explain exactly how a person who has achieved twice-born status through the relevant Vedic prescriptions should worship Me with devotion.

Text 9
अर्चायां स्थण्डिलेऽग्नौ वा सूर्ये वाप्सु हृदि द्विज: ।
द्रव्येण भक्तियुक्तोऽर्चेत् स्वगुरुं माममायया ॥ ९ ॥
arcāyāṁ sthaṇḍile ’gnau vā
sūrye vāpsu hṛdi dvijaḥ
dravyeṇa bhakti-yukto ’rcet
sva-guruṁ mām amāyayā
Synonyms
arcāyām — within the Deity form; sthaṇḍile — in the earth; agnau — in fire; vā — or; sūrye — in the sun; vā — or; apsu — in water; hṛdi — in the heart; dvijaḥ — the brāhmaṇa; dravyeṇa — by various paraphernalia; bhakti-yuktaḥ — endowed with devotion; arcet — he should worship; sva-gurum — his worshipable Lord; mām — Me; amāyayā — without any deception.

Translation
A twice-born person should worship Me, his worshipable Lord, without duplicity, offering appropriate paraphernalia in loving devotion to My Deity form or to a form of Me appearing upon the ground, in fire, in the sun, in water or within the worshiper’s own heart.

Text 10
पूर्वं स्‍नानं प्रकुर्वीत धौतदन्तोऽङ्गशुद्धये ।
उभयैरपि च स्‍नानं मन्त्रैर्मृद्ग्रहणादिना ॥ १० ॥
pūrvaṁ snānaṁ prakurvīta
dhauta-danto ’ṅga-śuddhaye
ubhayair api ca snānaṁ
mantrair mṛd-grahaṇādinā
Synonyms
pūrvam — first; snānam — bath; prakurvīta — one should perform; dhauta — having cleaned; dantaḥ — his teeth; aṅga — of the body; śuddhaye — for purification; ubhayaiḥ — with both kinds; api ca — also; snānam — bathing; mantraiḥ — with mantras; mṛt-grahaṇa-ādinā — by smearing with earth and so on.

Translation
One should first purify his body by cleansing his teeth and bathing. Then one should perform a second cleansing by smearing the body with earth and chanting both Vedic and tantric mantras.

Text 11
सन्ध्योपास्त्यादिकर्माणि वेदेनाचोदितानि मे ।
पूजां तै: कल्पयेत् सम्यक् सङ्कल्प: कर्मपावनीम् ॥ ११ ॥
sandhyopāstyādi-karmāṇi
vedenācoditāni me
pūjāṁ taiḥ kalpayet samyak-
saṅkalpaḥ karma-pāvanīm
Synonyms
sandhyā — at the three junctures of the day (dawn, noon and sunset); upāsti — worship (by chanting the Gāyatrī mantra); ādi — and so on; karmāṇi — prescribed duties; vedena — by the Vedas; ācoditāni — recommended; me — My; pūjām — worship; taiḥ — by these activities; kalpayet — one should perform; samyak-saṅkalpaḥ — who has perfectly fixed his determination (that the object of his endeavor will be the Personality of Godhead); karma — the reaction of fruitive work; pāvanīm — which eradicates.

Translation
Fixing the mind on Me, one should worship Me by his various prescribed duties, such as chanting the Gāyatrī mantra at the three junctures of the day. Such performances are enjoined by the Vedas and purify the worshiper of reactions to fruitive activities.

Text 12
शैली दारुमयी लौही लेप्या लेख्या च सैकती ।
मनोमयी मणिमयी प्रतिमाष्टविधा स्मृता ॥ १२ ॥
śailī dāru-mayī lauhī
lepyā lekhyā ca saikatī
mano-mayī maṇi-mayī
pratimāṣṭa-vidhā smṛtā
Synonyms
śailī — made of stone; dāru-mayī — made of wood; lauhī — made of metal; lepyā — made of clay, sandalwood and other substances laid down as a paste; lekhyā — painted; ca — and; saikatī — made of sand; manaḥ-mayī — conceived of in the mind; maṇi-mayī — made of jewels; pratimā — the Deity; aṣṭa-vidhā — in eight varieties; smṛtā — it is remembered.

Translation
The Deity form of the Lord is said to appear in eight varieties — stone, wood, metal, earth, paint, sand, the mind or jewels.

Text 13
चलाचलेति द्विविधा प्रतिष्ठा जीवमन्दिरम् ।
उद्वासावाहने न स्त: स्थिरायामुद्धवार्चने ॥ १३ ॥
calācaleti dvi-vidhā
pratiṣṭhā jīva-mandiram
udvāsāvāhane na staḥ
sthirāyām uddhavārcane
Synonyms
calā — movable; acalā — immovable; iti — thus; dvi-vidhā — of two varieties; pratiṣṭhā — the installation; jīva-mandiram — of the Deity, who is the shelter of all living entities; udvāsa — sending away; āvāhane — and calling forth; na staḥ — are not done; sthirāyām — for the permanently established Deity; uddhava — My dear Uddhava; arcane — in His worship.

Translation
The Deity form of the Lord, who is the shelter of all living entities, can be established in two ways: temporarily or permanently. But a permanent Deity, having been called, can never be sent away, My dear Uddhava.

Text 14
अस्थिरायां विकल्प: स्यात् स्थण्डिले तु भवेद् द्वयम् ।
स्‍नपनं त्वविलेप्यायामन्यत्र परिमार्जनम् ॥ १४ ॥
asthirāyāṁ vikalpaḥ syāt
sthaṇḍile tu bhaved dvayam
snapanaṁ tv avilepyāyām
anyatra parimārjanam
Synonyms
asthirāyām — in the case of the temporarily installed Deity; vikalpaḥ — an option (as to whether the Deity is to be called and sent away); syāt — there is; sthaṇḍile — in the case of the Deity traced upon the ground; tu — but; bhavet — do occur; dvayam — these two rituals; snapanam — the bathing; tu — but; avilepyāyām — in the case when the Deity is not made out of clay (or paint or wood); anyatra — in the other cases; parimārjanam — thorough cleansing, but without water.

Translation
The Deity that is temporarily established can optionally be called forth and sent away, but these two rituals should always be performed when the Deity is traced upon the ground. Bathing should be done with water except if the Deity is made of clay, paint or wood, in which cases a thorough cleansing without water is enjoined.

Text 15
द्रव्यै: प्रसिद्धैर्मद्याग: प्रतिमादिष्वमायिन: ।
भक्तस्य च यथालब्धैर्हृदि भावेन चैव हि ॥ १५ ॥
dravyaiḥ prasiddhair mad-yāgaḥ
pratimādiṣv amāyinaḥ
bhaktasya ca yathā-labdhair
hṛdi bhāvena caiva hi
Synonyms
dravyaiḥ — with items of paraphernalia; prasiddhaiḥ — excellent; mat-yāgaḥ — My worship; pratimā-ādiṣu — in the different Deity forms; amāyinaḥ — who has no material desire; bhaktasya — of a devotee; ca — and; yathā-labdhaiḥ — by whatever paraphernalia he can easily obtain; hṛdi — in the heart; bhāvena — by mental conception; ca — and; eva hi — certainly.

Translation
One should worship Me in My Deity forms by offering the most excellent paraphernalia. But a devotee completely freed from material desire may worship Me with whatever he is able to obtain, and may even worship Me within his heart with mental paraphernalia.

Texts 16-17
स्‍नानालङ्करणं प्रेष्ठमर्चायामेव तूद्धव ।
स्थण्डिले तत्त्वविन्यासो वह्नावाज्यप्लुतं हवि: ॥ १६ ॥
सूर्ये चाभ्यर्हणं प्रेष्ठं सलिले सलिलादिभि: ।
श्रद्धयोपाहृतं प्रेष्ठं भक्तेन मम वार्यपि ॥ १७ ॥
snānālaṅkaraṇaṁ preṣṭham
arcāyām eva tūddhava
sthaṇḍile tattva-vinyāso
vahnāv ājya-plutaṁ haviḥ
sūrye cābhyarhaṇaṁ preṣṭhaṁ
salile salilādibhiḥ
śraddhayopāhṛtaṁ preṣṭhaṁ
bhaktena mama vāry api
Synonyms
snāna — bathing; alaṅkaraṇam — and decorating with clothing and ornaments; preṣṭham — is most appreciated; arcāyām — for the Deity form; eva — certainly; tu — and; uddhava — O Uddhava; sthaṇḍile — for the Deity drawn upon the ground; tattva-vinyāsaḥ — establishing the expansions and potencies of the Lord within the various limbs of the Deity by chanting the respective mantras; vahnau — for the sacrificial fire; ājya — in ghee; plutam — drenched; haviḥ — the oblations of sesame, barley and so on; sūrye — for the sun; ca — and; abhyarhaṇam — the yoga meditation of twelve āsanas and offerings of arghya; preṣṭham — most dear; salile — for the water; salila-ādibhiḥ — by offerings of water and so on; śraddhayā — with faith; upāhṛtam — presented; preṣṭham — most dear; bhaktena — by the devotee; mama — My; vāri — water; api — even.

Translation
In worshiping the temple Deity, my dear Uddhava, bathing and decoration are the most pleasing offerings. For the Deity traced on sacred ground, the process of tattva-vinyāsa is most dear. Oblations of sesame and barley soaked in ghee are the preferred offering to the sacrificial fire, whereas worship consisting of upasthāna and arghya is preferred for the sun. One should worship Me in the form of water by offering water itself. Actually, whatever is offered to Me with faith by My devotee — even if only a little water — is most dear to Me.

Text 18
भूर्यप्यभक्तोपाहृतं न मे तोषाय कल्पते ।
गन्धो धूप: सुमनसो दीपोऽन्नाद्यं च किं पुन: ॥ १८ ॥
bhūry apy abhaktopāhṛtaṁ
na me toṣāya kalpate
gandho dhūpaḥ sumanaso
dīpo ’nnādyaṁ ca kiṁ punaḥ
Synonyms
bhūri — opulent; api — even; abhakta — by a nondevotee; upāhṛtam — offered; na — does not; me — My; toṣāya — satisfaction; kalpate — create; gandhaḥ — fragrance; dhūpaḥ — incense; sumanasaḥ — flowers; dīpaḥ — lamps; anna-ādyam — foodstuffs; ca — and; kim punaḥ — what to speak of.

Translation
Even very opulent presentations do not satisfy Me if they are offered by nondevotees. But I am pleased by any insignificant offering made by My loving devotees, and I am certainly most pleased when nice presentations of fragrant oil, incense, flowers and palatable foods are offered with love.

Text 19
शुचि: सम्भृतसम्भार: प्राग्दर्भै: कल्पितासन: ।
आसीन: प्रागुदग् वार्चेदर्चायां त्वथ सम्मुख: ॥ १९ ॥
śuciḥ sambhṛta-sambhāraḥ
prāg-darbhaiḥ kalpitāsanaḥ
āsīnaḥ prāg udag vārced
arcāyāṁ tv atha sammukhaḥ
Synonyms
śuciḥ — clean; sambhṛta — having collected; sambhāraḥ — the paraphernalia; prāk — their tips facing the east; darbhaiḥ — with blades of kuśa grass; kalpita — having arranged; āsanaḥ — his own seat; āsīnaḥ — sitting; prāk — facing the east; udak — facing the north; vā — or; arcet — he should perform the worship; arcāyām — of the Deity; tu — but; atha — or else; sammukhaḥ — directly facing.

Translation
After cleansing himself and collecting all the paraphernalia, the worshiper should arrange his own seat with blades of kuśa grass whose tips point eastward. He should then sit facing either east or north, or else, if the Deity is fixed in one place, he should sit directly facing the Deity.

Text 20
कृतन्यास: कृतन्यासां मदर्चां पाणिना मृजेत् ।
कलशं प्रोक्षणीयं च यथावदुपसाधयेत् ॥ २० ॥
kṛta-nyāsaḥ kṛta-nyāsāṁ
mad-arcāṁ pāṇināmṛjet
kalaśaṁ prokṣaṇīyaṁ ca
yathāvad upasādhayet
Synonyms
kṛta-nyāsaḥ — having sanctified his own body (by touching various parts and chanting appropriate mantras while meditating on the corresponding forms of the Supreme Lord); kṛta-nyāsām — (the Deity) upon which the same process has been applied; mat-arcām — My Deity manifestation; pāṇinā — with his hand; āmṛjet — should clean (by removing remnants of old offerings); kalaśam — the ritual pot filled with auspicious substances; prokṣaṇīyam — the vessel containing water for sprinkling; ca — and; yathā-vat — appropriately; upasādhayet — he should prepare.

Translation
The devotee should sanctify the various parts of his body by touching them and chanting mantras. He should do the same for My Deity form, and then with his hands he should clean the Deity of old flowers and the remnants of previous offerings. He should properly prepare the sacred pot and the vessel containing water for sprinkling.

Text 21
तदद्भ‍िर्देवयजनं द्रव्याण्यात्मानमेव च ।
प्रोक्ष्य पात्राणि त्रीण्यद्भ‍िस्तैस्तैर्द्रव्यैश्च साधयेत् ॥ २१ ॥
tad-adbhir deva-yajanaṁ
dravyāṇy ātmānam eva ca
prokṣya pātrāṇi trīṇy adbhis
tais tair dravyaiś ca sādhayet
Synonyms
tat — of the vessel for sprinkling; adbhiḥ — with the water; deva-yajanam — the place where the Deity is worshiped; dravyāṇi — the paraphernalia; ātmānam — one’s own body; eva — indeed; ca — also; prokṣya — sprinkling; pātrāṇi — the vessels; trīṇi — three; adbhiḥ — with water; taiḥ taiḥ — with those available; dravyaiḥ — auspicious items; ca — and; sādhayet — he should arrange.

Translation
Then, with the water of that prokṣaṇīya vessel he should sprinkle the area where the Deity is being worshiped, the offerings that are going to be presented, and his own body. Next he should decorate with various auspicious substances three vessels filled with water.

Text 22
पाद्यार्घ्याचमनीयार्थं त्रीणि पात्राणि देशिक: ।
हृदा शीर्ष्णाथ शिखया गायत्र्या चाभिमन्त्रयेत् ॥ २२ ॥
pādyārghyācamanīyārthaṁ
trīṇi pātrāṇi deśikaḥ
hṛdā śīrṣṇātha śikhayā
gāyatryā cābhimantrayet
Synonyms
pādya — of the water offered to the Lord for bathing His feet; arghya — the water offered to the Lord as a token of respectful greeting; ācamanīya — and the water offered to the Lord for washing His mouth; artham — placed there for the purpose; trīṇi — three; pātrāṇi — the vessels; deśikaḥ — the worshiper; hṛdā — by the “heart” mantra; śīrṣṇā — by the “head” mantra; atha — and; śikhayā — by the “crown” mantra; gāyatryā — and by the Gāyatrī mantra; ca — also; abhimantrayet — he should perform purification by chanting.

Translation
The worshiper should then purify those three vessels. He should sanctify the vessel holding water for washing the Lord’s feet by chanting hṛdayāya namaḥ, the vessel containing water for arghya by chanting śirase svāhā, and the vessel containing water for washing the Lord’s mouth by chanting śikhāyai vaṣaṭ. Also, the Gāyatrī mantra should be chanted for all three vessels.

Text 23
पिण्डे वाय्वग्निसंशुद्धे हृत्पद्मस्थां परां मम ।
अण्वीं जीवकलां ध्यायेन्नादान्ते सिद्धभाविताम् ॥ २३ ॥
piṇḍe vāyv-agni-saṁśuddhe
hṛt-padma-sthāṁ parāṁ mama
aṇvīṁ jīva-kalāṁ dhyāyen
nādānte siddha-bhāvitām
Synonyms
piṇḍe — within the body; vāyu — by air; agni — and by fire; saṁśuddhe — which has become completely purified; hṛt — of the heart; padma — upon the lotus; sthām — situated; parām — the transcendental form; mama — of Mine; aṇvīm — very subtle; jīva-kalām — the Personality of Godhead, from whom all living entities expand; dhyāyet — he should meditate upon; nāda-ante — at the end of the vibration of om; siddha — by perfected sages; bhāvitām — experienced.

Translation
The worshiper should meditate upon My subtle form — which is situated within the worshiper’s own body, now purified by air and fire — as the source of all living entities. This form of the Lord is experienced by self-realized sages in the last part of the vibration of the sacred syllable om.

Text 24
तयात्मभूतया पिण्डे व्याप्ते सम्पूज्य तन्मय: ।
आवाह्यार्चादिषु स्थाप्य न्यस्ताङ्गं मां प्रपूजयेत् ॥ २४ ॥
tayātma-bhūtayā piṇḍe
vyāpte sampūjya tan-mayaḥ
āvāhyārcādiṣu sthāpya
nyastāṅgaṁ māṁ prapūjayet
Synonyms
tayā — by that form meditated upon; ātma-bhūtayā — conceived of according to one’s own realization; piṇḍe — in the physical body; vyāpte — which has become pervaded; sampūjya — perfectly worshiping that form; tat-mayaḥ — surcharged by His presence; āvāhya — inviting; arcā-ādiṣu — within the various Deities being worshiped; sthāpya — establishing Him; nyasta-aṅgam — having touched the Deity’s various limbs with the chanting of appropriate mantras; mām — to Me; prapūjayet — he should carry out all the details of worship.

Translation
The devotee conceives of the Supersoul, whose presence surcharges the devotee’s body, in the form corresponding to his realization. Thus the devotee worships the Lord to his full capacity and becomes fully absorbed in Him. By touching the various limbs of the Deity and chanting appropriate mantras, the devotee should invite the Supersoul to join the Deity’s form, and then the devotee should worship Me.

Texts 25-26
पाद्योपस्पर्शार्हणादीनुपचारान् प्रकल्पयेत् ।
धर्मादिभिश्च नवभि: कल्पयित्वासनं मम ॥ २५ ॥
पद्ममष्टदलं तत्र कर्णिकाकेसरोज्ज्वलम् ।
उभाभ्यां वेदतन्त्राभ्यां मह्यं तूभयसिद्धये ॥ २६ ॥
pādyopasparśārhaṇādīn
upacārān prakalpayet
dharmādibhiś ca navabhiḥ
kalpayitvāsanaṁ mama
padmam aṣṭa-dalaṁ tatra
karṇikā-kesarojjvalam
ubhābhyāṁ veda-tantrābhyāṁ
mahyaṁ tūbhaya-siddhaye
Synonyms
pādya — water for washing the Lord’s feet; upasparśa — water for washing the Lord’s mouth; arhaṇa — water presented as arghya; ādīn — and other paraphernalia; upacārān — the offerings; prakalpayet — one should make; dharma-ādibhiḥ — with the personifications of religion, knowledge, renunciation and opulence; ca — and; navabhiḥ — with the nine (energies of the Lord); kalpayitvā — having imagined; āsanam — the seat; mama — My; padmam — a lotus; aṣṭa-dalam — having eight petals; tatra — therein; karṇikā — in the whorl; kesara — with saffron filaments; ujjvalam — effulgent; ubhābhyām — by both means; veda-tantrābhyām — of the Vedas and tantras; mahyam — to Me; tu — and; ubhaya — of both (enjoyment and liberation); siddhaye — for the achievement.

Translation
The worshiper should first imagine My seat as decorated with the personified deities of religion, knowledge, renunciation and opulence and with My nine spiritual energies. He should think of the Lord’s sitting place as an eight-petaled lotus, effulgent on account of the saffron filaments within its whorl. Then, following the regulations of both the Vedas and the tantras, he should offer Me water for washing the feet, water for washing the mouth, arghya and other items of worship. By this process he achieves both material enjoyment and liberation.

Text 27
सुदर्शनं पाञ्चजन्यं गदासीषुधनुर्हलान् ।
मुषलं कौस्तुभं मालां श्रीवत्सं चानुपूजयेत् ॥ २७ ॥
sudarśanaṁ pāñcajanyaṁ
gadāsīṣu-dhanur-halān
muṣalaṁ kaustubhaṁ mālāṁ
śrīvatsaṁ cānupūjayet
Synonyms
sudarśanam — the Lord’s disc; pāñcajanyam — the Lord’s conchshell; gadā — His club; asi — sword; iṣu — arrows; dhanuḥ — bow; halān — and plow; muṣalam — His muṣala weapon; kaustubham — the Kaustubha gem; mālām — His garland; śrīvatsam — the decoration of Śrīvatsa on His chest; ca — and; anupūjayet — one should worship one after another.

Translation
One should worship, in order, the Lord’s Sudarśana disc, His Pāñcajanya conchshell, His club, sword, bow, arrows and plow, His muṣala weapon, His Kaustubha gem, His flower garland and the Śrīvatsa curl of hair on His chest.

Text 28
नन्दं सुनन्दं गरुडं प्रचण्डं चण्डमेव च ।
महाबलं बलं चैव कुमुदं कमुदेक्षणम् ॥ २८ ॥
nandaṁ sunandaṁ garuḍaṁ
pracaṇḍaṁ caṇḍam eva ca
mahābalaṁ balaṁ caiva
kumudaṁ kumudekṣaṇam
Synonyms
nandam sunandam garuḍam — named Nanda, Sunanda and Garuḍa; pracaṇḍam caṇḍam — Pracaṇḍa and Caṇḍa; eva — indeed; ca — also; mahā-balam balam — Mahābala and Bala; ca — and; eva — indeed; kumudam kumuda-īkṣaṇam — Kumuda and Kumudekṣaṇa.

Translation
One should worship the Lord’s associates Nanda and Sunanda, Garuḍa, Pracaṇḍa and Caṇḍa, Mahābala and Bala, and Kumuda and Kumudekṣaṇa.

Text 29
दुर्गां विनायकं व्यासं विष्वक्सेनं गुरून्सुरान् ।
स्वे स्वे स्थाने त्वभिमुखान् पूजयेत् प्रोक्षणादिभि: ॥ २९ ॥
durgāṁ vināyakaṁ vyāsaṁ
viṣvaksenaṁ gurūn surān
sve sve sthāne tv abhimukhān
pūjayet prokṣaṇādibhiḥ
Synonyms
durgām — the Lord’s spiritual energy; vināyakam — the original Gaṇeśa; vyāsam — the compiler of the Vedas; viṣvaksenam — Viṣvaksena; gurūn — one’s spiritual masters; surān — the demigods; sve sve — each in his own; sthāne — place; tu — and; abhimukhān — all facing the Deity; pūjayet — one should worship; prokṣaṇa-ādibhiḥ — by the various prescriptions beginning with sprinkling of water for purification.

Translation
With offerings such as prokṣaṇa one should worship Durgā, Vināyaka, Vyāsa, Viṣvaksena, the spiritual masters and the various demigods. All these personalities should be in their proper places facing the Deity of the Lord.

Texts 30-31
चन्दनोशीरकर्पूरकुङ्कुमागुरुवासितै: ।
सलिलै: स्‍नापयेन्मन्त्रैर्नित्यदा विभवे सति ॥ ३० ॥
स्वर्णघर्मानुवाकेन महापुरुषविद्यया ।
पौरुषेणापि सूक्तेन सामभी राजनादिभि: ॥ ३१ ॥
candanośīra-karpūra-
kuṅkumāguru-vāsitaiḥ
salilaiḥ snāpayen mantrair
nityadā vibhave sati
svarṇa-gharmānuvākena
mahāpuruṣa-vidyayā
pauruṣeṇāpi sūktena
sāmabhī rājanādibhiḥ
Synonyms
candana — with sandalwood paste; uśīra — the fragrant uśīra root; karpūra — camphor; kuṅkuma — vermilion; aguru — aloes wood; vāsitaiḥ — which are perfumed; salilaiḥ — by different kinds of water; snāpayet — one should bathe the Deity; mantraiḥ — with mantras; nityadā — every day; vibhave — assets; sati — to the extent that there are; svarṇa-gharma-anuvākena — by the chapter of the Vedas known as Svarṇa-gharma; mahā-puruṣa-vidyayā — by the incantation called Mahāpuruṣa; pauruṣeṇa — by the Puruṣa-sūkta; api — also; sūktena — the Vedic hymn; sāmabhiḥ — by songs from the Sāma Veda; rājana-ādibhiḥ — known as Rājana and so on.

Translation
The worshiper should bathe the Deity every day, as opulently as his assets permit, using waters scented with sandalwood, uśīra root, camphor, kuṅkuma and aguru. He should also chant various Vedic hymns, such as the anuvāka known as Svarṇa-gharma, the Mahāpuruṣa-vidyā, the Puruṣa-sūkta and various songs of the Sāma Veda, such as the Rājana and the Rohiṇya.

Text 32
वस्त्र‍ोपवीताभरणपत्रस्रग्गन्धलेपनै: ।
अलङ्कुर्वीत सप्रेम मद्भ‍क्तो मां यथोचितम् ॥ ३२ ॥
vastropavītābharaṇa-
patra-srag-gandha-lepanaiḥ
alaṅkurvīta sa-prema
mad-bhakto māṁ yathocitam
Synonyms
vastra — with clothing; upavīta — a brāhmaṇa thread; ābharaṇa — ornaments; patra — decorations drawn on various parts of the body with tilaka; srak — garlands; gandha-lepanaiḥ — and smearing of fragrant oils; alaṅkurvīta — he should decorate; sa-prema — with love; mat-bhaktaḥ — My devotee; mām — Me; yathā ucitam — as is enjoined.

Translation
My devotee should then lovingly decorate Me with clothing, a brāhmaṇa thread, various ornaments, marks of tilaka and garlands, and he should anoint My body with fragrant oils, all in the prescribed manner.

Text 33
पाद्यमाचमनीयं च गन्धं सुमनसोऽक्षतान् ।
धूपदीपोपहार्याणि दद्यान्मे श्रद्धयार्चक: ॥ ३३ ॥
pādyam ācamanīyaṁ ca
gandhaṁ sumanaso ’kṣatān
dhūpa-dīpopahāryāṇi
dadyān me śraddhayārcakaḥ
Synonyms
pādyam — water for washing the feet; ācamanīyam — water for washing the mouth; ca — and; gandham — fragrances; sumanasaḥ — flowers; akṣatān — unbroken grains; dhūpa — incense; dīpa — lamps; upahāryāṇi — such items of paraphernalia; dadyāt — he should present; me — to Me; śraddhayā — with faith; arcakaḥ — the worshiper.

Translation
The worshiper should faithfully present Me with water for washing My feet and mouth, fragrant oils, flowers and unbroken grains, along with incense, lamps and other offerings.

Text 34
गुडपायससर्पींषि शष्कुल्यापूपमोदकान् ।
संयावदधिसूपांश्च नैवेद्यं सति कल्पयेत् ॥ ३४ ॥
guḍa-pāyasa-sarpīṁṣi
śaṣkuly-āpūpa-modakān
saṁyāva-dadhi-sūpāṁś ca
naivedyaṁ sati kalpayet
Synonyms
guḍa — sugar candy; pāyasa — sweet rice; sarpīṁṣi — and ghee; śaṣkulī — a kind of large, ear-shaped cake made of rice flour, sugar and sesame and fried in ghee; āpūpa — various kinds of sweet cakes; modakān — small conical steamed dumplings made of rice flour and filled with sweet coconut and sugar; saṁyāva — an oblong cake made of wheat, ghee and milk and covered with sugar and spices; dadhi — yogurt; sūpān — vegetable soups; ca — and; naivedyam — offerings of food; sati — if he has sufficient means; kalpayet — the devotee should arrange.

Translation
Within his means, the devotee should arrange to offer Me sugar candy, sweet rice, ghee, śaṣkulī [rice-flour cakes], āpūpa [various sweet cakes], modaka [steamed rice-flour dumplings filled with sweet coconut and sugar], saṁyāva [wheat cakes made with ghee and milk and covered with sugar and spices], yogurt, vegetable soups and other palatable foods.

Text 35
अभ्यङ्गोन्मर्दनादर्शदन्तधावाभिषेचनम् ।
अन्नाद्यगीतनृत्यानि पर्वणि स्युरुतान्वहम् ॥ ३५ ॥
abhyaṅgonmardanādarśa-
danta-dhāvābhiṣecanam
annādya-gīta-nṛtyāni
parvaṇi syur utānv-aham
Synonyms
abhyaṅga — with ointment; unmardana — massaging; ādarśa — offering a mirror; danta-dhāva — washing the teeth; abhiṣecanam — bathing; anna — offering food that can be eaten without chewing; ādya — offering food that is chewed; gītā — singing; nṛtyāni — and dancing; parvaṇi — on special holidays; syuḥ — these offerings should be made; uta — or else (if it is within one’s means); anu-aham — every day.

Translation
On special occasions, and daily if possible, the Deity should be massaged with ointment, shown a mirror, offered a eucalyptus stick for brushing His teeth, bathed with the five kinds of nectar, offered all kinds of opulent foods, and entertained with singing and dancing.

Text 36
विधिना विहिते कुण्डे मेखलागर्तवेदिभि: ।
अग्निमाधाय परित: समूहेत् पाणिनोदितम् ॥ ३६ ॥
vidhinā vihite kuṇḍe
mekhalā-garta-vedibhiḥ
agnim ādhāya paritaḥ
samūhet pāṇinoditam
Synonyms
vidhinā — according to scriptural injunctions; vihite — constructed; kuṇḍe — in the sacrificial arena; mekhalā — with the paraphernalia of the sacred belt; garta — the sacrificial pit; vedibhiḥ — and the altar mound; agnim — the fire; ādhāya — establishing; paritaḥ — on all sides; samūhet — one should build up; pāṇinā — with his hands; uditam — blazing.

Translation
In an arena constructed according to scriptural injunctions, the devotee should perform a fire sacrifice, utilizing the sacred belt, the sacrificial pit and the altar mound. When igniting the sacrificial fire, the devotee should bring it to a blaze with wood piled up by his own hands.

Text 37
परिस्तीर्याथ पर्युक्षेदन्वाधाय यथाविधि ।
प्रोक्षण्यासाद्य द्रव्याणि प्रोक्ष्याग्नौ भावयेत माम् ॥ ३७ ॥
paristīryātha paryukṣed
anvādhāya yathā-vidhi
prokṣaṇyāsādya dravyāṇi
prokṣyāgnau bhāvayeta mām
Synonyms
paristīrya — scattering (kuśa grass); atha — then; paryukṣet — he should sprinkle with water; anvādhāya — performing the ritual of anvādhāna (placing wood into the fire with recitations of om bhūr bhuvaḥ svaḥ); yathā-vidhi — according to the standard prescription; prokṣaṇyā — by the water in the ācamana vessel; āsādya — having arranged; dravyāṇi — the items to be offered as oblations; prokṣya — sprinkling them; agnau — within the fire; bhāvayeta — he should meditate; mām — on Me.

Translation
After spreading kuśa grass on the ground and sprinkling it with water, one should perform the anvādhāna ritual according to the prescribed rules. Then one should arrange the items to be offered as oblations and should sanctify them with water from the sprinkling vessel. The worshiper should next meditate upon Me within the fire.

Texts 38-41
तप्तजाम्बूनदप्रख्यं शङ्खचक्रगदाम्बुजै: ।
लसच्चतुर्भुजं शान्तं पद्मकिञ्जल्कवाससम् ॥ ३८ ॥
स्फुरत्किरीटकटककटिसूत्रवराङ्गदम् ।
श्रीवत्सवक्षसं भ्राजत्कौस्तुभं वनमालिनम् ॥ ३९ ॥
ध्यायन्नभ्यर्च्य दारूणि हविषाभिघृतानि च ।
प्रास्याज्यभागावाघारौ दत्त्वा चाज्यप्लुतं हवि: ॥ ४० ॥
जुहुयान्मूलमन्त्रेण षोडशर्चावदानत: ।
धर्मादिभ्यो यथान्यायं मन्त्रै: स्विष्टिकृतं बुध: ॥ ४१ ॥
tapta-jāmbūnada-prakhyaṁ
śaṅkha-cakra-gadāmbujaiḥ
lasac-catur-bhujaṁ śāntaṁ
padma-kiñjalka-vāsasam
sphurat-kirīṭa-kaṭaka
kaṭi-sūtra-varāṅgadam
śrīvatsa-vakṣasaṁ bhrājat-
kaustubhaṁ vana-mālinam
dhyāyann abhyarcya dārūṇi
haviṣābhighṛtāni ca
prāsyājya-bhāgāv āghārau
dattvā cājya-plutaṁ haviḥ
juhuyān mūla-mantreṇa
ṣoḍaśarcāvadānataḥ
dharmādibhyo yathā-nyāyaṁ
mantraiḥ sviṣṭi-kṛtaṁ budhaḥ
Synonyms
tapta — molten; jāmbū-nada — of gold; prakhyam — the color; śaṅkha — with His conchshell; cakra — disc; gadā — club; ambujaiḥ — and lotus flower; lasat — brilliant; catuḥ-bhujam — having four arms; śāntam — peaceful; padma — of a lotus; kiñjalka — colored like the filaments; vāsasam — His garment; sphurat — shining; kirīṭa — helmet; kaṭaka — bracelets; kaṭi-sūtra — belt; vara-aṅgadam — fine ornaments on the arms; śrī-vatsa — the emblem of the goddess of fortune; vakṣasam — upon His chest; bhrājat — effulgent; kaustubham — the Kaustubha gem; vana-mālinam — wearing a flower garland; dhyāyan — meditating upon Him; abhyarcya — performing worship of Him; dārūṇi — pieces of dry wood; haviṣā — with the purified butter; abhighṛtāni — soaked; ca — and; prāsya — throwing into the fire; ājya — of the ghee; bhāgau — the two designated portions; āghārau — in the course of performing the āghāra ritual; dattvā — offering; ca — and; ājya — with ghee; plutam — drenched; haviḥ — various oblations; juhuyāt — one should offer into the fire; mūla-mantreṇa — with the primary mantras naming each deity; ṣoḍaśa-ṛcā — with the hymn Puruṣa-sūkta, consisting of sixteen lines of verse; avadānataḥ — pouring an oblation after each line; dharma-ādibhyaḥ — to the demigods, beginning with Yamarāja; yathā-nyāyam — in the proper order; mantraiḥ — with the specific mantras naming each demigod; sviṣṭi-kṛtam — the ritual of this name; budhaḥ — the intelligent devotee.

Translation
The intelligent devotee should meditate upon that form of the Lord whose color is like molten gold, whose four arms are resplendent with the conchshell, disc, club and lotus flower, and who is always peaceful and dressed in a garment colored like the filaments within a lotus flower. His helmet, bracelets, belt and fine arm ornaments shine brilliantly. The symbol of Śrīvatsa is on His chest, along with the glowing Kaustubha gem and a garland of forest flowers. The devotee should then worship that Lord by taking pieces of firewood soaked in the sacrificial ghee and throwing them into the fire. He should perform the ritual of āghāra, presenting into the fire the various items of oblation drenched in ghee. He should then offer to sixteen demigods, beginning with Yamarāja, the oblation called sviṣṭi-kṛt, reciting the basic mantras of each deity and the sixteen-line Puruṣa-sūkta hymn. Pouring one oblation after each line of the Puruṣa-sūkta, he should utter the particular mantra naming each deity.

Text 42
अभ्यर्च्याथ नमस्कृत्य पार्षदेभ्यो बलिं हरेत् ।
मूलमन्त्रं जपेद् ब्रह्म स्मरन्नारायणात्मकम् ॥ ४२ ॥
abhyarcyātha namaskṛtya
pārṣadebhyo baliṁ haret
mūla-mantraṁ japed brahma
smaran nārāyaṇātmakam
Synonyms
abhyarcya — having thus worshiped; atha — then; namaskṛtya — offering his obeisances by bowing down; pārṣadebhyaḥ — unto the Lord’s personal associates; balim — offerings; haret — he should present; mūla-mantram — the basic mantra for the Deity; japet — he should chant quietly; brahma — the Absolute Truth; smaran — remembering; nārāyaṇa-ātmakam — as the Supreme Personality, Lord Nārāyaṇa.

Translation
Having thus worshiped the Lord in the sacrificial fire, the devotee should offer his obeisances to the Lord’s personal associates by bowing down and should then present offerings to them. He should then chant quietly the mūla-mantra of the Deity of the Lord, remembering the Absolute Truth as the Supreme Personality, Nārāyaṇa.

Text 43
दत्त्वाचमनमुच्छेषं विष्वक्सेनाय कल्पयेत् ।
मुखवासं सुरभिमत् ताम्बूलाद्यमथार्हयेत् ॥ ४३ ॥
dattvācamanam uccheṣaṁ
viṣvaksenāya kalpayet
mukha-vāsaṁ surabhimat
tāmbūlādyam athārhayet
Synonyms
dattvā — offering; ācamanam — water for washing the Lord’s mouth; uccheṣam — the remnants of His food; viṣvaksenāya — to the personal associate of Lord Viṣṇu, Viṣvaksena; kalpayet — one should give; mukha-vāsam — cologne for the mouth; surabhi-mat — fragrant; tāmbūla-ādyam — betel-nut preparation; atha — then; arhayet — one should present.

Translation
Once again he should offer the Deity water for washing His mouth, and he should give the remnants of the Lord’s food to Viṣvaksena. Then he should present the Deity with fragrant perfume for the mouth and prepared betel nut.

Text 44
उपगायन् गृणन् नृत्यन् कर्माण्यभिनयन् मम ।
मत्कथा: श्रावयन् श‍ृण्वन् मुहूर्तं क्षणिको भवेत् ॥ ४४ ॥
upagāyan gṛṇan nṛtyan
karmāṇy abhinayan mama
mat-kathāḥ śrāvayan śṛṇvan
muhūrtaṁ kṣaṇiko bhavet
Synonyms
upagāyan — singing along; gṛṇan — loudly vibrating; nṛtyan — dancing; karmāṇi — transcendental activities; abhinayan — imitating by acting out; mama — My; mat-kathāḥ — stories about Me; śrāvayan — causing others to hear; śṛṇvan — hearing himself; muhūrtam — for some time; kṣaṇikaḥ — absorbed in the celebration; bhavet — he should become.

Translation
Singing along with others, chanting loudly and dancing, acting out My transcendental pastimes, and hearing and telling stories about Me, the devotee should for some time absorb himself in such festivity.

Text 45
स्तवैरुच्चावचै: स्तोत्रै: पौराणै: प्राकृतैरपि ।
स्तुत्वा प्रसीद भगवन्निति वन्देत दण्डवत् ॥ ४५ ॥
stavair uccāvacaiḥ stotraiḥ
paurāṇaiḥ prākṛtair api
stutvā prasīda bhagavann
iti vandeta daṇḍa-vat
Synonyms
stavaiḥ — with prayers from the scriptures; ucca-avacaiḥ — of greater and lesser varieties; stotraiḥ — and with prayers written by human authors; paurāṇaiḥ — from the Purāṇas; prākṛtaiḥ — from ordinary sources; api — also; stutvā — thus praying to the Lord; prasīda — please show Your mercy; bhagavan — O Lord; iti — thus saying; vandeta — one should pay homage; daṇḍa-vat — falling down on the ground like a rod.

Translation
The devotee should offer homage to the Lord with all kinds of hymns and prayers, both from the Purāṇas and from other ancient scriptures, and also from ordinary traditions. Praying, “O Lord, please be merciful to me!” he should fall down flat like a rod to offer his obeisances.

Text 46
शिरो मत्पादयो: कृत्वा बाहुभ्यां च परस्परम् ।
प्रपन्नं पाहि मामीश भीतं मृत्युग्रहार्णवात् ॥ ४६ ॥
śiro mat-pādayoḥ kṛtvā
bāhubhyāṁ ca parasparam
prapannaṁ pāhi mām īśa
bhītaṁ mṛtyu-grahārṇavāt
Synonyms
śiraḥ — his head; mat-pādayoḥ — at My two feet; kṛtvā — placing; bāhubhyām — with the hands; ca — and; parasparam — together (grasping the feet of the Deity); prapannam — who am surrendered; pāhi — please protect; mām — me; īśa — O Lord; bhītam — afraid; mṛtyu — of death; graha — the mouth; arṇavāt — of this material ocean.

Translation
Placing his head at the feet of the Deity, he should then stand with folded hands before the Lord and pray, “O my Lord, please protect me, who am surrendered unto You. I am most fearful of this ocean of material existence, standing as I am in the mouth of death.”

Text 47
इति शेषां मया दत्तां शिरस्याधाय सादरम् ।
उद्वासयेच्चेदुद्वास्यं ज्योतिर्ज्योतिषि तत् पुन: ॥ ४७ ॥
iti śeṣāṁ mayā dattāṁ
śirasy ādhāya sādaram
udvāsayec ced udvāsyaṁ
jyotir jyotiṣi tat punaḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus praying; śeṣām — the remnants; mayā — by Me; dattām — given; śirasi — on one’s head; ādhāya — placing; sa-ādaram — respectfully; udvāsayet — should send the Deity away; cet — if; udvāsyam — if such is meant to be performed; jyotiḥ — the light; jyotiṣi — within the light; tat — that; punaḥ — once again.

Translation
Praying in this way, the devotee should respectfully place upon his head the remnants I offer to him. And if the particular Deity is meant to be sent away at the end of the worship, then this should be performed, the devotee once again placing the light of the Deity’s presence inside the light of the lotus within his own heart.

Text 48
अर्चादिषु यदा यत्र श्रद्धा मां तत्र चार्चयेत् ।
सर्वभूतेष्वात्मनि च सर्वात्माहमवस्थित: ॥ ४८ ॥
arcādiṣu yadā yatra
śraddhā māṁ tatra cārcayet
sarva-bhūteṣv ātmani ca
sarvātmāham avasthitaḥ
Synonyms
arcā-ādiṣu — in the Deity form and other manifestations of the Supreme Lord; yadā — whenever; yatra — in whichever form; śraddhā — faith develops; mām — Me; tatra — there; ca — and; arcayet — he should worship; sarva-bhūteṣu — within all created beings; ātmani — separately, in My original form; ca — also; sarva-ātmā — the original soul of all; aham — I am; avasthitaḥ — so situated.

Translation
Whenever one develops faith in Me — in My form as the Deity or in other bona fide manifestations — one should worship Me in that form. I certainly exist both within all created beings and also separately in My original form, since I am the Supreme Soul of all.

Text 49
एवं क्रियायोगपथै: पुमान् वैदिकतान्त्रिकै: ।
अर्चन्नुभयत: सिद्धिं मत्तो विन्दत्यभीप्सिताम् ॥ ४९ ॥
evaṁ kriyā-yoga-pathaiḥ
pumān vaidika-tāntrikaiḥ
arcann ubhayataḥ siddhiṁ
matto vindaty abhīpsitām
Synonyms
evam — in this way; kriyā-yoga — of regulated Deity worship; pathaiḥ — by the processes; pumān — a person; vaidika-tāntrikaiḥ — presented in the Vedas and tantras; arcan — worshiping; ubhayataḥ — in both this life and the next; siddhim — perfection; mattaḥ — from Me; vindati — he achieves; abhīpsitām — desired.

Translation
By worshiping Me through the various methods prescribed in the Vedas and tantras, one will gain from Me his desired perfection in both this life and the next.

Text 50
मदर्चां सम्प्रतिष्ठाप्य मन्दिरं कारयेद् द‍ृढम् ।
पुष्पोद्यानानि रम्याणि पूजायात्रोत्सवाश्रितान् ॥ ५० ॥
mad-arcāṁ sampratiṣṭhāpya
mandiraṁ kārayed dṛḍham
puṣpodyānāni ramyāṇi
pūjā-yātrotsavāśritān
Synonyms
mat-arcām — My Deity form; sampratiṣṭhāpya — properly establishing; mandiram — a temple; kārayet — he should construct; dṛḍham — strong; puṣpa-udyānāni — flower gardens; ramyāṇi — beautiful; pūjā — for regular, daily worship; yātrā — special festivals; utsava — and yearly holidays; āśritān — set aside.

Translation
The devotee should more fully establish My Deity by solidly constructing a temple, along with beautiful gardens. These gardens should be set aside to provide flowers for the regular daily worship, special Deity processions and holiday observances.

Text 51
पूजादीनां प्रवाहार्थं महापर्वस्वथान्वहम् ।
क्षेत्रापणपुरग्रामान् दत्त्वा मत्सार्ष्टितामियात् ॥ ५१ ॥
pūjādīnāṁ pravāhārthaṁ
mahā-parvasv athānv-aham
kṣetrāpaṇa-pura-grāmān
dattvā mat-sārṣṭitām iyāt
Synonyms
pūjā-ādīnām — of the regular worship and special festivals; pravāha-artham — in order to assure the continuance; mahā-parvasu — on auspicious occasions; atha — and; anu-aham — daily; kṣetra — land; āpaṇa — shops; pura — cities; grāmān — and villages; dattvā — bestowing as a gift to the Deity; mat-sārṣṭitām — opulence equal to Mine; iyāt — he achieves.

Translation
One who offers the Deity gifts of land, markets, cities and villages so that the regular daily worship and special festivals of the Deity may go on continually will achieve opulence equal to My own.

Text 52
प्रतिष्ठया सार्वभौमं सद्मना भुवनत्रयम् ।
पूजादिना ब्रह्मलोकं त्रिभिर्मत्साम्यतामियात् ॥ ५२ ॥
pratiṣṭhayā sārvabhaumaṁ
sadmanā bhuvana-trayam
pūjādinā brahma-lokaṁ
tribhir mat-sāmyatām iyāt
Synonyms
pratiṣṭhayā — by having installed the Deity; sārva-bhaumam — sovereignty over the entire earth; sadmanā — by building a temple for the Lord; bhuvana-trayam — rulership over the three worlds; pūjā-ādinā — by worship and other service; brahma-lokam — the planet of Lord Brahmā; tribhiḥ — by all three; mat-sāmyatām — the status of equality with Me (by having a transcendental, spiritual body similar to Mine); iyāt — he attains.

Translation
By installing the Deity of the Lord one becomes king of the entire earth, by building a temple for the Lord one becomes ruler of the three worlds, by worshiping and serving the Deity one goes to the planet of Lord Brahmā, and by performing all three of these activities one achieves a transcendental form like My own.

Text 53
मामेव नैरपेक्ष्येण भक्तियोगेन विन्दति ।
भक्तियोगं स लभत एवं य: पूजयेत माम् ॥ ५३ ॥
mām eva nairapekṣyeṇa
bhakti-yogena vindati
bhakti-yogaṁ sa labhata
evaṁ yaḥ pūjayeta mām
Synonyms
mām — Me; eva — indeed; nairapekṣyeṇa — by being free from motivation; bhakti-yogena — by the performance of devotional service; vindati — achieves; bhakti-yogam — devotional service; saḥ — he; labhate — receives; evam — thus; yaḥ — whom; pūjayeta — worships; mām — Me.

Translation
But one who simply engages in devotional service with no consideration of fruitive results attains Me. Thus whoever worships Me according to the process I have described will ultimately attain pure devotional service unto Me.

Text 54
य: स्वदत्तां परैर्दत्तां हरेत सुरविप्रयो: ।
वृत्तिं स जायते विड्भुग् वर्षाणामयुतायुतम् ॥ ५४ ॥
yaḥ sva-dattāṁ parair dattāṁ
hareta sura-viprayoḥ
vṛttiṁ sa jāyate viḍ-bhug
varṣāṇām ayutāyutam
Synonyms
yaḥ — who; sva-dattām — given previously by himself; paraiḥ — by others; dattām — given; hareta — takes away; sura-viprayoḥ — belonging to the demigods or brāhmaṇas; vṛttim — property; saḥ — he; jāyate — takes birth; viṭ-bhuk — as a stool-eating worm; varṣāṇām — for years; ayuta — ten thousand; ayutam — times ten thousand.

Translation
Anyone who steals the property of the demigods or the brāhmaṇas, whether originally given to them by himself or someone else, must live as a worm in stool for one hundred million years.

Text 55
कर्तुश्च सारथेर्हेतोरनुमोदितुरेव च ।
कर्मणां भागिन: प्रेत्य भूयो भूयसि तत् फलम् ॥ ५५ ॥
kartuś ca sārather hetor
anumoditur eva ca
karmaṇāṁ bhāginaḥ pretya
bhūyo bhūyasi tat-phalam
Synonyms
kartuḥ — of the performer; ca — and; sāratheḥ — of the assistant; hetoḥ — of the instigator; anumodituḥ — of the person who approves; eva ca — also; karmaṇām — of the fruitive reactions; bhāginaḥ — of the shareholder; pretya — in the next life; bhūyaḥ — more grievously; bhūyasi — to the extent that the action is grievous; tat — (must suffer) of that; phalam — the result.

Translation
Not only the performer of the theft but also anyone who assists him, instigates the crime, or simply approves of it must also share the reaction in the next life. According to their degree of participation, they each must suffer a proportionate consequence.