Text 1
श्रीभगवानुवाच
परस्वभावकर्माणि न प्रशंसेन्न गर्हयेत् ।
विश्वमेकात्मकं पश्यन् प्रकृत्या पुरुषेण च ॥ १ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
para-svabhāva-karmāṇi
na praśaṁsen na garhayet
viśvam ekātmakaṁ paśyan
prakṛtyā puruṣeṇa ca
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; para — anyone else’s; svabhāva — nature; karmāṇi — and activities; na praśaṁset — one should not praise; na garhayet — one should not criticize; viśvam — the world; eka-ātmakam — based on one reality; paśyan — seeing; prakṛtyā — along with nature; puruṣeṇa — with the enjoying soul; ca — also.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: One should neither praise nor criticize the conditioned nature and activities of other persons. Rather, one should see this world as simply the combination of material nature and the enjoying souls, all based on the one Absolute Truth.

Text 2
परस्वभावकर्माणि य: प्रशंसति निन्दति ।
स आशु भ्रश्यते स्वार्थादसत्यभिनिवेशत: ॥ २ ॥
para-svabhāva-karmāṇi
yaḥ praśaṁsati nindati
sa āśu bhraśyate svārthād
asaty abhiniveśataḥ
Synonyms
para — another’s; svabhāva — personality; karmāṇi — and work; yaḥ — who; praśaṁsati — praises; nindati — criticizes; saḥ — he; āśu — quickly; bhraśyate — falls down; sva-arthāt — from his own interest; asati — in unreality; abhiniveśataḥ — because of becoming entangled.

Translation
Whoever indulges in praising or criticizing the qualities and behavior of others will quickly become deviated from his own best interest by his entanglement in illusory dualities.

Text 3
तैजसे निद्रयापन्ने पिण्डस्थो नष्टचेतन: ।
मायां प्राप्नोति मृत्युं वा तद्वन्नानार्थद‍ृक् पुमान् ॥ ३ ॥
taijase nidrayāpanne
piṇḍa-stho naṣṭa-cetanaḥ
māyāṁ prāpnoti mṛtyuṁ vā
tadvan nānārtha-dṛk pumān
Synonyms
taijase — when the senses, which are the products of false ego in the mode of passion; nidrayā — by sleep; āpanne — are overcome; piṇḍa — in the shell of the material body; sthaḥ — (the soul) who is situated; naṣṭa-cetanaḥ — having lost his consciousness; māyām — the illusion of dreaming; prāpnoti — he experiences; mṛtyum — the deathlike condition of deep sleep; vā — or; tadvat — in the same way; nānā-artha — in terms of material varieties; dṛk — who sees; pumān — a person.

Translation
Just as the embodied spirit soul loses external consciousness when his senses are overcome by the illusion of dreaming or the deathlike state of deep sleep, so a person experiencing material duality must encounter illusion and death.

Text 4
किं भद्रं किमभद्रं वा द्वैतस्यावस्तुन: कियत् ।
वाचोदितं तदनृतं मनसा ध्यातमेव च ॥ ४ ॥
kiṁ bhadraṁ kim abhadraṁ vā
dvaitasyāvastunaḥ kiyat
vācoditaṁ tad anṛtaṁ
manasā dhyātam eva ca
Synonyms
kim — what; bhadram — good; kim — what; abhadram — bad; vā — or; dvaitasya — of this duality; avastunaḥ — insubstantial; kiyat — how much; vācā — by words; uditam — generated; tat — that; anṛtam — false; manasā — by the mind; dhyātam — meditated upon; eva — indeed; ca — and.

Translation
That which is expressed by material words or meditated upon by the material mind is not ultimate truth. What, therefore, is actually good or bad within this insubstantial world of duality, and how can the extent of such good and bad be measured?

Text 5
छायाप्रत्याह्वयाभासा ह्यसन्तोऽप्यर्थकारिण: ।
एवं देहादयो भावा यच्छन्त्यामृत्युतो भयम् ॥ ५ ॥
chāyā-pratyāhvayābhāsā
hy asanto ’py artha-kāriṇaḥ
evaṁ dehādayo bhāvā
yacchanty ā-mṛtyuto bhayam
Synonyms
chāyā — shadows; pratyāhvaya — echoes; ābhāsāḥ — and false appearances; hi — indeed; asantaḥ — nonexistent; api — although; artha — ideas; kāriṇaḥ — creating; evam — in the same way; deha-ādayaḥ — the body and so on; bhāvāḥ — material conceptions; yacchanti — they give; ā-mṛtyutaḥ — up to the point of death; bhayam — fear.

Translation
Although shadows, echoes and mirages are only illusory reflections of real things, such reflections do cause a semblance of meaningful or comprehensible perception. In the same way, although the identification of the conditioned soul with the material body, mind and ego is illusory, this identification generates fear within him even up to the moment of death.

Texts 6-7
आत्मैव तदिदं विश्वं सृज्यते सृजति प्रभु: ।
त्रायते त्राति विश्वात्मा ह्रियते हरतीश्वर: ॥ ६ ॥
तस्मान्न ह्यात्मनोऽन्यस्मादन्यो भावो निरूपित: ।
निरूपितेऽयं त्रिविधा निर्मूला भातिरात्मनि ।
इदं गुणमयं विद्धि त्रिविधं मायया कृतम् ॥ ७ ॥
ātmaiva tad idaṁ viśvaṁ
sṛjyate sṛjati prabhuḥ
trāyate trāti viśvātmā
hriyate haratīśvaraḥ
tasmān na hy ātmano ’nyasmād
anyo bhāvo nirūpitaḥ
nirūpite ’yaṁ tri-vidhā
nirmūlā bhātir ātmani
idaṁ guṇa-mayaṁ viddhi
tri-vidhaṁ māyayā kṛtam
Synonyms
ātmā — the Supreme Soul; eva — alone; tat idam — this; viśvam — universe; sṛjyate — is created; sṛjati — and creates; prabhuḥ — the Supreme Lord; trāyate — is protected; trāti — protects; viśva-ātmā — the Soul of all that be; hriyate — is withdrawn; harati — withdraws; īśvaraḥ — the supreme controller; tasmāt — than Him; na — no; hi — indeed; ātmanaḥ — than the Soul; anyasmāt — who is distinct; anyaḥ — other; bhāvaḥ — entity; nirūpitaḥ — is ascertained; nirūpite — thus established; ayam — this; tri-vidhā — threefold; nirmūlā — without basis; bhātiḥ — appearance; ātmani — within the Supersoul; idam — this; guṇa-mayam — consisting of the modes of nature; viddhi — you should know; tri-vidham — threefold; māyayā — by the illusory energy; kṛtam — created.

Translation
The Supersoul alone is the ultimate controller and creator of this world, and thus He alone is also the created. Similarly, the Soul of all existence Himself both maintains and is maintained, withdraws and is withdrawn. No other entity can be properly ascertained as separate from Him, the Supreme Soul, who nonetheless is distinct from everything and everyone else. The appearance of the threefold material nature, which is perceived within Him, has no actual basis. Rather, you should understand that this material nature, composed of the three modes, is simply the product of His illusory potency.

Text 8
एतद् विद्वान् मदुदितं ज्ञानविज्ञाननैपुणम् ।
न निन्दति न च स्तौति लोके चरति सूर्यवत् ॥ ८ ॥
etad vidvān mad-uditaṁ
jñāna-vijñāna-naipuṇam
na nindati na ca stauti
loke carati sūrya-vat
Synonyms
etat — this; vidvān — one who knows; mat — by Me; uditam — described; jñāna — in knowledge; vijñāna — and realization; naipuṇam — the status of being fixed; na nindati — does not criticize; na ca — nor; stauti — praise; loke — within the world; carati — he wanders; sūrya-vat — just like the sun.

Translation
One who has properly understood the process of becoming firmly fixed in theoretical and realized knowledge, as described herein by Me, does not indulge in material criticism or praise. Like the sun, he wanders freely throughout this world.

Text 9
प्रत्यक्षेणानुमानेन निगमेनात्मसंविदा ।
आद्यन्तवदसज्ज्ञात्वा नि:सङ्गो विचरेदिह ॥ ९ ॥
pratyakṣeṇānumānena
nigamenātma-saṁvidā
ādy-antavad asaj jñātvā
niḥsaṅgo vicared iha
Synonyms
pratyakṣeṇa — by direct perception; anumānena — by logical deduction; nigamena — by the statements of scripture; ātma-saṁvidā — and by one’s own realization; ādi-anta-vat — having a beginning and an end; asat — unreal; jñātvā — knowing; niḥsaṅgaḥ — free from attachment; vicaret — one should move about; iha — in this world.

Translation
By direct perception, logical deduction, scriptural testimony and personal realization, one should know that this world has a beginning and an end and so is not the ultimate reality. Thus one should live in this world without attachment.

Text 10
श्रीउद्धव उवाच
नैवात्मनो न देहस्य संसृतिर्द्रष्टृद‍ृश्ययो: ।
अनात्मस्वद‍ृशोरीश कस्य स्यादुपलभ्यते ॥ १० ॥
śrī-uddhava uvāca
naivātmano na dehasya
saṁsṛtir draṣṭṛ-dṛśyayoḥ
anātma-sva-dṛśor īśa
kasya syād upalabhyate
Synonyms
śrī-uddhavaḥ uvāca — Śrī Uddhava said; na — there is not; eva — indeed; ātmanaḥ — of the self; na — nor; dehasya — of the body; saṁsṛtiḥ — material existence; draṣṭṛ-dṛśyayoḥ — of the seer or the seen; anātma — of that which is not spirit; sva-dṛśoḥ — or of him who has innate knowledge; īśa — O Lord; kasya — of whom; syāt — may be; upalabhyate — which is experienced.

Translation
Śrī Uddhava said: My dear Lord, it is not possible for this material existence to be the experience of either the soul, who is the seer, or of the body, which is the seen object. On the one hand, the spirit soul is innately endowed with perfect knowledge, and on the other hand, the material body is not a conscious, living entity. To whom, then, does this experience of material existence pertain?

Text 11
आत्माव्ययोऽगुण: शुद्ध: स्वयंज्योतिरनावृत: ।
अग्निवद्दारुवदचिद्देह: कस्येह संसृति: ॥ ११ ॥
ātmāvyayo ’guṇaḥ śuddhaḥ
svayaṁ-jyotir anāvṛtaḥ
agni-vad dāru-vad acid
dehaḥ kasyeha saṁsṛtiḥ
Synonyms
ātmā — the spirit soul; avyayaḥ — inexhaustible; aguṇaḥ — transcendental to the material modes; śuddhaḥ — pure; svayam-jyotiḥ — self-luminous; anāvṛtaḥ — uncovered; agni-vat — like fire; dāru-vat — like firewood; acit — nonliving; dehaḥ — the material body; kasya — of which; iha — in this world; saṁsṛtiḥ — the experience of material life.

Translation
The spirit soul is inexhaustible, transcendental, pure, self-luminous and never covered by anything material. It is like fire. But the nonliving material body, like firewood, is dull and unaware. So in this world, who is it that actually undergoes the experience of material life?

Text 12
श्रीभगवानुवाच
यावद् देहेन्द्रियप्राणैरात्मन: सन्निकर्षणम् ।
संसार: फलवांस्तावदपार्थोऽप्यविवेकिन: ॥ १२ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
yāvad dehendriya-prāṇair
ātmanaḥ sannikarṣaṇam
saṁsāraḥ phalavāṁs tāvad
apārtho ’py avivekinaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; yāvat — as long as; deha — by the body; indriya — senses; prāṇaiḥ — and vital force; ātmanaḥ — of the soul; sannikarṣaṇam — attraction; saṁsāraḥ — material existence; phala-vān — fruitful; tāvat — for that duration; apārthaḥ — meaningless; api — although; avivekinaḥ — for the undiscriminating.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: As long as the foolish spirit soul remains attracted to the material body, senses and vital force, his material existence continues to flourish, although it is ultimately meaningless.

Text 13
अर्थे ह्यविद्यमानेऽपि संसृतिर्न निवर्तते ।
ध्यायतो विषयानस्य स्वप्नेऽनर्थागमो यथा ॥ १३ ॥
arthe hy avidyamāne ’pi
saṁsṛtir na nivartate
dhyāyato viṣayān asya
svapne ’narthāgamo yathā
Synonyms
arthe — real cause; hi — certainly; avidyamāne — not existing; api — although; saṁsṛtiḥ — the material existential condition; na — not; nivartate — does cease; dhyāyataḥ — contemplating; viṣayān — objects of the senses; asya — of the living entity; svapne — in a dream; anartha — of disadvantages; āgamaḥ — arrival; yathā — like.

Translation
Actually, the living entity is transcendental to material existence. But because of his mentality of lording it over material nature, his material existential condition does not cease, and, just as in a dream, he is affected by all sorts of disadvantages.

Text 14
यथा ह्यप्रतिबुद्धस्य प्रस्वापो बह्वनर्थभृत् ।
स एव प्रतिबुद्धस्य न वै मोहाय कल्पते ॥ १४ ॥
yathā hy apratibuddhasya
prasvāpo bahv-anartha-bhṛt
sa eva pratibuddhasya
na vai mohāya kalpate
Synonyms
yathā — as; hi — indeed; apratibuddhasya — for one who has not awakened; prasvāpaḥ — sleep; bahu — many; anartha — undesirable experiences; bhṛt — presenting; saḥ — that same dream; eva — indeed; pratibuddhasya — for one who has awakened; na — not; vai — certainly; mohāya — confusion; kalpate — generates.

Translation
Although while dreaming a person experiences many undesirable things, upon awakening he is no longer confused by the dream experiences.

Text 15
शोकहर्षभयक्रोधलोभमोहस्पृहादय: ।
अहङ्कारस्य द‍ृश्यन्ते जन्म मृत्युश्च नात्मन: ॥ १५ ॥
śoka-harṣa-bhaya-krodha-
lobha-moha-spṛhādayaḥ
ahaṅkārasya dṛśyante
janma-mṛtyuś ca nātmanaḥ
Synonyms
śoka — lamentation; harṣa — elation; bhaya — fear; krodha — anger; lobha — greed; moha — confusion; spṛhā — hankering; ādayaḥ — and so on; ahaṅkārasya — of false ego; dṛśyante — they appear; janma — birth; mṛtyuḥ — death; ca — and; na — not; ātmanaḥ — of the soul.

Translation
Lamentation, elation, fear, anger, greed, confusion and hankering, as well as birth and death, are experiences of the false ego and not of the pure soul.

Text 16
देहेन्द्रियप्राणमनोऽभिमानो
जीवोऽन्तरात्मा गुणकर्ममूर्ति: ।
सूत्रं महानित्युरुधेव गीत:
संसार आधावति कालतन्त्र: ॥ १६ ॥
dehendriya-prāṇa-mano-’bhimāno
jīvo ’ntar-ātmā guṇa-karma-mūrtiḥ
sūtraṁ mahān ity urudheva gītaḥ
saṁsāra ādhāvati kāla-tantraḥ
Synonyms
deha — with the material body; indriya — senses; prāṇa — life air; manaḥ — and mind; abhimānaḥ — who is falsely identifying; jīvaḥ — the living entity; antaḥ — situated within; ātmā — the soul; guṇa — according to his material qualities; karma — and work; mūrtiḥ — assuming his form; sūtram — the sūtra-tattva; mahān — the original form of material nature; iti — thus; urudhā — in many different ways; iva — indeed; gītaḥ — described; saṁsāre — in material life; ādhāvati — he runs about; kāla — of time; tantraḥ — under the strict control.

Translation
The living entity who falsely identifies with his body, senses, life air and mind, and who dwells within these coverings, assumes the form of his own materially conditioned qualities and work. He is designated variously in relation to the total material energy, and thus, under the strict control of supreme time, he is forced to run here and there within material existence.

Text 17
अमूलमेतद् बहुरूपरूपितं
मनोवच:प्राणशरीरकर्म ।
ज्ञानासिनोपासनया शितेन-
च्छित्त्वा मुनिर्गां विचरत्यतृष्ण: ॥ १७ ॥
amūlam etad bahu-rūpa-rūpitaṁ
mano-vacaḥ-prāṇa-śarīra-karma
jñānāsinopāsanayā śitena
cchittvā munir gāṁ vicaraty atṛṣṇaḥ
Synonyms
amūlam — without foundation; etat — this (false ego); bahu-rūpa — in many forms; rūpitam — ascertained; manaḥ — of the mind; vacaḥ — speech; prāṇa — the life air; śarīra — and the gross body; karma — the functions; jñāna — of transcendental knowledge; asinā — by the sword; upāsanayā — through devotional worship (of the spiritual master); śitena — which has been sharpened; chittvā — cutting off; muniḥ — a sober sage; gām — this earth; vicarati — wanders; atṛṣṇaḥ — free from material desires.

Translation
Although the false ego has no factual basis, it is perceived in many forms — as the functions of the mind, speech, life air and bodily faculties. But with the sword of transcendental knowledge, sharpened by worship of a bona fide spiritual master, a sober sage will cut off this false identification and live in this world free from all material attachment.

Text 18
ज्ञानं विवेको निगमस्तपश्च
प्रत्यक्षमैतिह्यमथानुमानम् ।
आद्यन्तयोरस्य यदेव केवलं
कालश्च हेतुश्च तदेव मध्ये ॥ १८ ॥
jñānaṁ viveko nigamas tapaś ca
pratyakṣam aitihyam athānumānam
ādy-antayor asya yad eva kevalaṁ
kālaś ca hetuś ca tad eva madhye
Synonyms
jñānam — transcendental knowledge; vivekaḥ — discrimination; nigamaḥ — the scripture; tapaḥ — austerity; ca — and; pratyakṣam — direct perception; aitihyam — the historical accounts of the Purāṇas; atha — and; anumānam — logic; ādi — in the beginning; antayoḥ — and the end; asya — of this creation; yat — which; eva — indeed; kevalam — alone; kālaḥ — the controlling factor of time; ca — and; hetuḥ — the ultimate cause; ca — and; tat — that; eva — alone; madhye — in the middle.

Translation
Real spiritual knowledge is based on the discrimination of spirit from matter, and it is cultivated by scriptural evidence, austerity, direct perception, reception of the Purāṇas’ historical narrations, and logical inference. The Absolute Truth, which alone was present before the creation of the universe and which alone will remain after its destruction, is also the time factor and the ultimate cause. Even in the middle stage of this creation’s existence, the Absolute Truth alone is the actual reality.

Text 19
यथा हिरण्यं स्वकृतं पुरस्तात्
पश्चाच्च सर्वस्य हिरण्मयस्य ।
तदेव मध्ये व्यवहार्यमाणं
नानापदेशैरहमस्य तद्वत् ॥ १९ ॥
yathā hiraṇyaṁ sv-akṛtaṁ purastāt
paścāc ca sarvasya hiraṇ-mayasya
tad eva madhye vyavahāryamāṇaṁ
nānāpadeśair aham asya tadvat
Synonyms
yathā — just as; hiraṇyam — gold; su-akṛtam — unmanifest as manufactured products; purastāt — previously; paścāt — subsequently; ca — and; sarvasya — of everything; hiraṇ-mayasya — that is made of gold; tat — that gold; eva — alone; madhye — in the middle; vyavahāryamāṇam — being utilized; nānā — various; apadeśaiḥ — in terms of designations; aham — I; asya — of this created universe; tadvat — in the same way.

Translation
Gold alone is present before its manufacture into gold products, the gold alone remains after the products’ destruction, and the gold alone is the essential reality while it is being utilized under various designations. Similarly, I alone exist before the creation of this universe, after its destruction and during its maintenance.

Text 20
विज्ञानमेतत्‍त्रियवस्थमङ्ग
गुणत्रयं कारणकार्यकर्तृ ।
समन्वयेन व्यतिरेकतश्च
येनैव तुर्येण तदेव सत्यम् ॥ २० ॥
vijñānam etat triy-avastham aṅga
guṇa-trayaṁ kāraṇa-kārya-kartṛ
samanvayena vyatirekataś ca
yenaiva turyeṇa tad eva satyam
Synonyms
vijñānam — (the mind, whose symptom is) full knowledge; etat — this; tri-avastham — existing in three conditions (wakeful consciousness, sleep and deep sleep); aṅga — My dear Uddhava; guṇa-trayam — manifesting through the three modes of nature; kāraṇa — as the subtle cause (adhyātma); kārya — the gross product (adhibhūta); kartṛ — and the producer (adhidaiva); samanvayena — in each of them, one after another; vyatirekataḥ — as separate; ca — and; yena — by which; eva — indeed; turyeṇa — fourth factor; tat — that; eva — alone; satyam — is the Absolute Truth.

Translation
The material mind manifests in three phases of consciousness — wakefulness, sleep and deep sleep — which are products of the three modes of nature. The mind further appears in three different roles — the perceiver, the perceived and the regulator of perception. Thus the mind is manifested variously throughout these threefold designations. But it is the fourth factor, existing separately from all this, that alone constitutes the Absolute Truth.

Text 21
न यत् पुरस्तादुत यन्न पश्चा-
न्मध्ये च तन्न व्यपदेशमात्रम् ।
भूतं प्रसिद्धं च परेण यद् यत्
तदेव तत् स्यादिति मे मनीषा ॥ २१ ॥
na yat purastād uta yan na paścān
madhye ca tan na vyapadeśa-mātram
bhūtaṁ prasiddhaṁ ca pareṇa yad yat
tad eva tat syād iti me manīṣā
Synonyms
na — does not exist; yat — that which; purastāt — previously; uta — nor; yat — which; na — not; paścāt — afterward; madhye — in between; ca — and; tat — that; na — does not exist; vyapadeśa-mātram — merely a designation; bhūtam — created; prasiddham — made known; ca — and; pareṇa — by another; yat yat — whatever; tat — that; eva — only; tat — that other; syāt — actually is; iti — thus; me — My; manīṣā — idea.

Translation
That which did not exist in the past and will not exist in the future also has no existence of its own for the period of its duration, but is only a superficial designation. In My opinion, whatever is created and revealed by something else is ultimately only that other thing.

Text 22
अविद्यमानोऽप्यवभासते यो
वैकारिको राजससर्ग एष: ।
ब्रह्म स्वयंज्योतिरतो विभाति
ब्रह्मेन्द्रियार्थात्मविकारचित्रम् ॥ २२ ॥
avidyamāno ’py avabhāsate yo
vaikāriko rājasa-sarga eṣaḥ
brahma svayaṁ jyotir ato vibhāti
brahmendriyārthātma-vikāra-citram
Synonyms
avidyamānaḥ — actually not existing; api — although; avabhāsate — appears; yaḥ — which; vaikārikaḥ — manifestation of transformations; rājasa — of the mode of passion; sargaḥ — the creation; eṣaḥ — this; brahma — the Absolute Truth (on the other hand); svayam — established in Himself; jyotiḥ — luminous; ataḥ — therefore; vibhāti — becomes manifest; brahma — the Absolute Truth; indriya — of the senses; artha — their objects; ātma — the mind; vikāra — and of the transformations of the five gross elements; citram — as the variety.

Translation
Although thus not existing in reality, this manifestation of transformations created from the mode of passion appears real because the self-manifested, self-luminous Absolute Truth exhibits Himself in the form of the material variety of the senses, the sense objects, the mind and the elements of physical nature.

Text 23
एवं स्फुटं ब्रह्मविवेकहेतुभि:
परापवादेन विशारदेन ।
छित्त्वात्मसन्देहमुपारमेत
स्वानन्दतुष्टोऽखिलकामुकेभ्य: ॥ २३ ॥
evaṁ sphuṭaṁ brahma-viveka-hetubhiḥ
parāpavādena viśāradena
chittvātma-sandeham upārameta
svānanda-tuṣṭo ’khila-kāmukebhyaḥ
Synonyms
evam — in this way; sphuṭam — clearly; brahma — of the Absolute Truth; viveka-hetubhiḥ — by discriminating, logical arguments; para — of misidentification with other conceptions; apavādena — by refutation; viśāradena — expert; chittvā — cutting off; ātma — regarding the identity of the self; sandeham — doubt; upārameta — one should desist; sva-ānanda — in his own transcendental ecstasy; tuṣṭaḥ — satisfied; akhila — from all; kāmukebhyaḥ — things of lust.

Translation
Thus clearly understanding by discriminating logic the unique position of the Absolute Truth, one should expertly refute one’s misidentification with matter and cut to pieces all doubts about the identity of the self. Becoming satisfied in the soul’s natural ecstasy, one should desist from all lusty engagements of the material senses.

Text 24
नात्मा वपु: पार्थिवमिन्द्रियाणि
देवा ह्यसुर्वायुर्जलम् हुताश: ।
मनोऽन्नमात्रं धिषणा च सत्त्व-
महङ्कृति: खं क्षितिरर्थसाम्यम् ॥ २४ ॥
nātmā vapuḥ pārthivam indriyāṇi
devā hy asur vāyur jalam hutāśaḥ
mano ’nna-mātraṁ dhiṣaṇā ca sattvam
ahaṅkṛtiḥ khaṁ kṣitir artha-sāmyam
Synonyms
na — is not; ātmā — the self; vapuḥ — the body; pārthivam — made of earth; indriyāṇi — the senses; devāḥ — the presiding demigods; hi — indeed; asuḥ — the living air; vāyuḥ — the external air; jalam — water; huta-āśaḥ — fire; manaḥ — the mind; anna-mātram — being only matter; dhiṣaṇā — intelligence; ca — and; sattvam — material consciousness; ahaṅkṛtiḥ — false ego; kham — the ether; kṣitiḥ — earth; artha — the objects of sense perception; sāmyam — and the original, undifferentiated state of nature.

Translation
The material body made of earth is not the true self; nor are the senses, their presiding demigods or the air of life; nor is the external air, water or fire or one’s mind. All these are simply matter. Similarly, neither one’s intelligence, material consciousness nor ego, nor the elements of ether or earth, nor the objects of sense perception, nor even the primeval state of material equilibrium can be considered the actual identity of the soul.

Text 25
समाहितै: क: करणैर्गुणात्मभि-र्गुणो भवेन्मत्सुविविक्तधाम्न: ।
विक्षिप्यमाणैरुत किं नु दूषणंघनैरुपेतैर्विगतै रवे: किम् ॥ २५ ॥
samāhitaiḥ kaḥ karaṇair guṇātmabhir
guṇo bhaven mat-suvivikta-dhāmnaḥ
vikṣipyamāṇair uta kiṁ nu dūṣaṇaṁ
ghanair upetair vigatai raveḥ kim
Synonyms
samāhitaiḥ — which are perfectly concentrated in meditation; kaḥ — what; karaṇaiḥ — by senses; guṇa-ātmabhiḥ — which are basically manifestations of the modes of nature; guṇaḥ — virtue; bhavet — will be; mat — My; su-vivikta — who has properly ascertained; dhāmnaḥ — the personal identity; vikṣipyamāṇaiḥ — which are being agitated; uta — on the other hand; kim — what; nu — indeed; dūṣaṇam — blame; ghanaiḥ — by clouds; upetaiḥ — which have come; vigataiḥ — or which have gone away; raveḥ — of the sun; kim — what.

Translation
For one who has properly realized My personal identity as the Supreme Godhead, what credit is there if his senses — mere products of the material modes — are perfectly concentrated in meditation? And on the other hand, what blame is incurred if his senses happen to become agitated? Indeed, what does it mean to the sun if the clouds come and go?

Text 26
यथा नभो वाय्वनलाम्बुभूगुणै-
र्गतागतैर्वर्तुगुणैर्न सज्जते ।
तथाक्षरं सत्त्वरजस्तमोमलै-
रहंमते: संसृतिहेतुभि: परम् ॥ २६ ॥
yathā nabho vāyv-analāmbu-bhū-guṇair
gatāgatair vartu-guṇair na sajjate
tathākṣaraṁ sattva-rajas-tamo-malair
ahaṁ-mateḥ saṁsṛti-hetubhiḥ param
Synonyms
yathā — just as; nabhaḥ — the sky; vāyu — of air; anala — fire; ambu — water; bhū — and earth; guṇaiḥ — by the qualities; gata-āgataiḥ — which come and go; vā — or; ṛtu-guṇaiḥ — by the qualities of the seasons (such as heat and cold); na sajjate — is not entangled; tathā — similarly; akṣaram — the Absolute Truth; sattva-rajaḥ-tamaḥ — of the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance; malaiḥ — by the contaminations; aham-mateḥ — of the conception of false ego; saṁsṛti-hetubhiḥ — by the causes of material existence; param — the Supreme.

Translation
The sky may display the various qualities of the air, fire, water and earth that pass through it, as well as such qualities as heat and cold, which continually come and go with the seasons. Yet the sky is never entangled with any of these qualities. Similarly, the Supreme Absolute Truth is never entangled with the contaminations of goodness, passion and ignorance, which cause the material transformations of the false ego.

Text 27
तथापि सङ्ग: परिवर्जनीयो
गुणेषु मायारचितेषु तावत् ।
मद्भ‍‍क्तियोगेन द‍ृढेन यावद्
रजो निरस्येत मन:कषाय: ॥ २७ ॥
tathāpi saṅgaḥ parivarjanīyo
guṇeṣu māyā-raciteṣu tāvat
mad-bhakti-yogena dṛḍhena yāvad
rajo nirasyeta manaḥ-kaṣāyaḥ
Synonyms
tathā api — nevertheless; saṅgaḥ — association; parivarjanīyaḥ — must be rejected; guṇeṣu — with the modes; māyā-raciteṣu — produced by the illusory material energy; tāvat — for that long; mat-bhakti-yogena — by devotional service to Me; dṛḍhena — firm; yāvat — until; rajaḥ — passionate attraction; nirasyeta — is eliminated; manaḥ — of the mind; kaṣāyaḥ — the dirt.

Translation
Nevertheless, until by firmly practicing devotional service to Me one has completely eliminated from his mind all contamination of material passion, one must very carefully avoid associating with the material modes, which are produced by My illusory energy.

Text 28
यथामयोऽसाधुचिकित्सितो नृणां
पुन: पुन: सन्तुदति प्ररोहन् ।
एवं मनोऽपक्व‍कषायकर्म
कुयोगिनं विध्यति सर्वसङ्गम् ॥ २८ ॥
yathāmayo ’sādhu cikitsito nṛṇāṁ
punaḥ punaḥ santudati prarohan
evaṁ mano ’pakva-kaṣāya-karma
kuyoginaṁ vidhyati sarva-saṅgam
Synonyms
yathā — as; āmayaḥ — a disease; asādhu — imperfectly; cikitsitaḥ — treated; nṛṇām — of men; punaḥ punaḥ — again and again; santudati — gives distress; prarohan — rising up; evam — in the same way; manaḥ — the mind; apakva — unpurified; kaṣāya — of contamination; karma — from its activities; ku-yoginam — the imperfect yogī; vidhyati — torments; sarva-saṅgam — who is full of all kinds of material attachment.

Translation
Just as an improperly treated disease recurs and gives repeated distress to the patient, the mind that is not completely purified of its perverted tendencies will remain attached to material things and repeatedly torment the imperfect yogī.

Text 29
कुयोगिनो ये विहितान्तरायै-
र्मनुष्यभूतैस्‍त्रिदशोपसृष्टै: ।
ते प्राक्तनाभ्यासबलेन भूयो
युञ्जन्ति योगं न तु कर्मतन्त्रम् ॥ २९ ॥
kuyogino ye vihitāntarāyair
manuṣya-bhūtais tridaśopasṛṣṭaiḥ
te prāktanābhyāsa-balena bhūyo
yuñjanti yogaṁ na tu karma-tantram
Synonyms
ku-yoginaḥ — those practitioners of yoga whose knowledge is not complete; ye — who; vihita — imposed; antarāyaiḥ — by obstructions; manuṣya-bhūtaiḥ — in the form of human beings (their relatives, disciples and so on); tridaśa — by the demigods; upasṛṣṭaiḥ — sent; te — they; prāktana — of the previous life; abhyāsa — of the accumulated practice; balena — on the strength; bhūyaḥ — once again; yuñjanti — engage; yogam — in spiritual practice; na — never; tu — however; karma-tantram — the entanglement of fruitive work.

Translation
Sometimes the progress of imperfect transcendentalists is checked by attachment to family members, disciples or others, who are sent by envious demigods for that purpose. But on the strength of their accumulated advancement, such imperfect transcendentalists will resume their practice of yoga in the next life. They will never again be trapped in the network of fruitive work.

Text 30
करोति कर्म क्रियते च जन्तु:
केनाप्यसौ चोदित आनिपातात् ।
न तत्र विद्वान् प्रकृतौ स्थितोऽपि
निवृत्ततृष्ण: स्वसुखानुभूत्या ॥ ३० ॥
karoti karma kriyate ca jantuḥ
kenāpy asau codita ā-nipātāt
na tatra vidvān prakṛtau sthito ’pi
nivṛtta-tṛṣṇaḥ sva-sukhānubhūtyā
Synonyms
karoti — he performs; karma — material work; kriyate — is acted upon; ca — also; jantuḥ — the living entity; kena api — by some force or other; asau — he; coditaḥ — impelled; ā-nipātāt — up to the point of death; na — not; tatra — there; vidvān — a wise person; prakṛtau — in material nature; sthitaḥ — situated; api — even though; nivṛtta — having given up; tṛṣṇaḥ — material desire; sva — by his own; sukha — of happiness; anubhūtyā — experience.

Translation
An ordinary living entity performs material work and is transformed by the reaction to such work. Thus he is driven by various desires to continue working fruitively up to the very moment of his death. A wise person, however, having experienced his own constitutional bliss, gives up all material desires and does not engage in fruitive work.

Text 31
तिष्ठन्तमासीनमुत व्रजन्तं
शयानमुक्षन्तमदन्तमन्नम् ।
स्वभावमन्यत् किमपीहमान-
मात्मानमात्मस्थमतिर्न वेद ॥ ३१ ॥
tiṣṭhantam āsīnam uta vrajantaṁ
śayānam ukṣantam adantam annam
svabhāvam anyat kim apīhamānam
ātmānam ātma-stha-matir na veda
Synonyms
tiṣṭhantam — standing; āsīnam — sitting; uta — or; vrajantam — walking; śayānam — lying down; ukṣantam — urinating; adantam — eating; annam — food; sva-bhāvam — manifested from his conditioned nature; anyat — other; kim api — whatever; īhamānam — executing; ātmānam — his own bodily self; ātma-stha — fixed in the true self; matiḥ — whose consciousness; na veda — he does not recognize.

Translation
The wise man, whose consciousness is fixed in the self, does not even notice his own bodily activities. While standing, sitting, walking, lying down, urinating, eating or performing other bodily functions, he understands that the body is acting according to its own nature.

Text 32
यदि स्म पश्यत्यसदिन्द्रियार्थं
नानानुमानेन विरुद्धमन्यत् ।
न मन्यते वस्तुतया मनीषी
स्वाप्नं यथोत्थाय तिरोदधानम् ॥ ३२ ॥
yadi sma paśyaty asad-indriyārthaṁ
nānānumānena viruddham anyat
na manyate vastutayā manīṣī
svāpnaṁ yathotthāya tirodadhānam
Synonyms
yadi — if; sma — ever; paśyati — he sees; asat — impure; indriya-artham — sense objects; nānā — of their being based on duality; anumānena — by the logical inference; viruddham — refuted; anyat — separate from true reality; na manyate — does not accept; vastutayā — as real; manīṣī — the intelligent man; svāpnam — of a dream; yathā — as if; utthāya — waking; tirodadhānam — which is in the process of disappearing.

Translation
Although a self-realized soul may sometimes see an impure object or activity, he does not accept it as real. By logically understanding impure sense objects to be based on illusory material duality, the intelligent person sees them to be contrary to and distinct from reality, in the same way that a man awakening from sleep views his fading dream.

Text 33
पूर्वं गृहीतं गुणकर्मचित्र-
मज्ञानमात्मन्यविविक्तमङ्ग ।
निवर्तते तत् पुनरीक्षयैव
न गृह्यते नापि विसृज्य आत्मा ॥ ३३ ॥
pūrvaṁ gṛhītaṁ guṇa-karma-citram
ajñānam ātmany aviviktam aṅga
nivartate tat punar īkṣayaiva
na gṛhyate nāpi visṛjya ātmā
Synonyms
pūrvam — previously; gṛhītam — accepted; guṇa — of the modes of nature; karma — by the activities; citram — made varied; ajñānam — the ignorance; ātmani — upon the soul; aviviktam — imposed as identical; aṅga — My dear Uddhava; nivartate — ceases; tat — that; punaḥ — again; īkṣayā — by knowledge; eva — alone; na gṛhyate — is not accepted; na — nor; api — indeed; visṛjya — being rejected; ātmā — the soul.

Translation
Material nescience, which expands into many varieties by the activities of the modes of nature, is wrongly accepted by the conditioned soul to be identical with the self. But through the cultivation of spiritual knowledge, My dear Uddhava, this same nescience fades away at the time of liberation. The eternal self, on the other hand, is never assumed and never abandoned.

Text 34
यथा हि भानोरुदयो नृचक्षुषां
तमो निहन्यान्न तु सद् विधत्ते ।
एवं समीक्षा निपुणा सती मे
हन्यात्तमिस्रं पुरुषस्य बुद्धे: ॥ ३४ ॥
yathā hi bhānor udayo nṛ-cakṣuṣāṁ
tamo nihanyān na tu sad vidhatte
evaṁ samīkṣā nipuṇā satī me
hanyāt tamisraṁ puruṣasya buddheḥ
Synonyms
yathā — as; hi — indeed; bhānoḥ — of the sun; udayaḥ — the rising; nṛ — human; cakṣuṣām — of eyes; tamaḥ — the darkness; nihanyāt — destroys; na — not; tu — but; sat — objects that exist; vidhatte — creates; evam — similarly; samīkṣā — full realization; nipuṇā — potent; satī — true; me — of Me; hanyāt — destroys; tamisram — the darkness; puruṣasya — of a person; buddheḥ — in the intelligence.

Translation
When the sun rises it destroys the darkness covering men’s eyes, but it does not create the objects they then see before them, which in fact were existing all along. Similarly, potent and factual realization of Me will destroy the darkness covering a person’s true consciousness.

Text 35
एष स्वयंज्योतिरजोऽप्रमेयो
महानुभूति: सकलानुभूति: ।
एकोऽद्वितीयो वचसां विरामे
येनेषिता वागसवश्चरन्ति ॥ ३५ ॥
eṣa svayaṁ-jyotir ajo ’prameyo
mahānubhūtiḥ sakalānubhūtiḥ
eko ’dvitīyo vacasāṁ virāme
yeneṣitā vāg-asavaś caranti
Synonyms
eṣaḥ — this (Supersoul); svayam-jyotiḥ — self-luminous; ajaḥ — unborn; aprameyaḥ — impossible to measure; mahā-anubhūtiḥ — full of transcendental consciousness; sakala-anubhūtiḥ — aware of everything; ekaḥ — one; advitīyaḥ — without a second; vacasām virāme — (realized only) when material words cease; yena — by whom; īṣitāḥ — impelled; vāk — speech; asavaḥ — and the life airs; caranti — move.

Translation
The Supreme Lord is self-luminous, unborn and immeasurable. He is pure transcendental consciousness and perceives everything. One without a second, He is realized only after ordinary words cease. By Him the power of speech and the life airs are set into motion.

Text 36
एतावानात्मसम्मोहो यद् विकल्पस्तु केवले ।
आत्मनृते स्वमात्मानमवलम्बो न यस्य हि ॥ ३६ ॥
etāvān ātma-sammoho
yad vikalpas tu kevale
ātman ṛte svam ātmānam
avalambo na yasya hi
Synonyms
etāvān — whatever; ātma — of the self; sammohaḥ — delusion; yat — which; vikalpaḥ — idea of duality; tu — but; kevale — in the unique; ātman — in the self; ṛte — without; svam — that very; ātmānam — self; avalambaḥ — basis; na — there is not; yasya — of which (duality); hi — indeed.

Translation
Whatever apparent duality is perceived in the self is simply the confusion of the mind. Indeed, such supposed duality has no basis to rest upon apart from one’s own soul.

Text 37
यन्नामाकृतिभिर्ग्राह्यं पञ्चवर्णमबाधितम् ।
व्यर्थेनाप्यर्थवादोऽयं द्वयं पण्डितमानिनाम् ॥ ३७ ॥
yan nāmākṛtibhir grāhyaṁ
pañca-varṇam abādhitam
vyarthenāpy artha-vādo ’yaṁ
dvayaṁ paṇḍita-māninām
Synonyms
yat — which; nāma — by names; ākṛtibhiḥ — and forms; grāhyam — perceivable; pañca-varṇam — consisting of the five material elements; abādhitam — undeniable; vyarthena — in vain; api — indeed; artha-vādaḥ — the imaginative interpretation; ayam — this; dvayam — duality; paṇḍita-māninām — of so-called scholars.

Translation
The duality of the five material elements is perceived only in terms of names and forms. Those who say this duality is real are pseudoscholars vainly proposing fanciful theories without basis in fact.

Text 38
योगिनोऽपक्व‍योगस्य युञ्जत: काय उत्थितै: ।
उपसर्गैर्विहन्येत तत्रायं विहितो विधि: ॥ ३८ ॥
yogino ’pakva-yogasya
yuñjataḥ kāya utthitaiḥ
upasargair vihanyeta
tatrāyaṁ vihito vidhiḥ
Synonyms
yoginaḥ — of the yogī; apakva-yogasya — who is immature in the practice of yoga; yuñjataḥ — trying to engage; kāyaḥ — the body; utthitaiḥ — which have arisen; upasargaiḥ — by disturbances; vihanyeta — may be frustrated; tatra — in that connection; ayam — this; vihitaḥ — is prescribed; vidhiḥ — recommended process.

Translation
The physical body of the endeavoring yogī who is not yet mature in his practice may sometimes be overcome by various disturbances. Therefore the following process is recommended.

Text 39
योगधारणया कांश्चिदासनैर्धारणान्वितै: ।
तपोमन्त्रौषधै: कांश्चिदुपसर्गान् विनिर्दहेत् ॥ ३९ ॥
yoga-dhāraṇayā kāṁścid
āsanair dhāraṇānvitaiḥ
tapo-mantrauṣadhaiḥ kāṁścid
upasargān vinirdahet
Synonyms
yoga-dhāraṇayā — by yogic meditation; kāṁścit — some disturbances; āsanaiḥ — by prescribed postures; dhāraṇā-anvitaiḥ — together with meditation on controlled breathing; tapaḥ — by special austerities; mantra — magical chants; auṣadhaiḥ — and medicinal herbs; kāṁścit — some; upasargān — obstructions; vinirdahet — can be eradicated.

Translation
Some of these obstructions may be counteracted by yogic meditation or by sitting postures, practiced together with concentration on controlled breathing, and others may be counteracted by special austerities, mantras or medicinal herbs.

Text 40
कांश्चिन्ममानुध्यानेन नामसङ्कीर्तनादिभि: ।
योगेश्वरानुवृत्त्या वा हन्यादशुभदान् शनै: ॥ ४० ॥
kāṁścin mamānudhyānena
nāma-saṅkīrtanādibhiḥ
yogeśvarānuvṛttyā vā
hanyād aśubha-dān śanaiḥ
Synonyms
kāṁścit — some; mama — of Me; anudhyānena — by constant thought; nāma — of the holy names; saṅkīṛtana — by the loud chanting; ādibhiḥ — and so on; yoga-īśvara — of the great masters of yoga; anuvṛttyā — by following in the footsteps; vā — or; hanyāt — may be destroyed; aśubha-dān — (the obstructions) that create inauspicious situations; śanaiḥ — gradually.

Translation
These inauspicious disturbances can be gradually removed by constant remembrance of Me, by congregational hearing and chanting of My holy names, or by following in the footsteps of the great masters of yoga.

Text 41
केचिद् देहमिमं धीरा: सुकल्पं वयसि स्थिरम् ।
विधाय विविधोपायैरथ युञ्जन्ति सिद्धये ॥ ४१ ॥
kecid deham imaṁ dhīrāḥ
su-kalpaṁ vayasi sthiram
vidhāya vividhopāyair
atha yuñjanti siddhaye
Synonyms
kecit — some; deham — the material body; imam — this; dhīrāḥ — self-controlled; su-kalpam — fit; vayasi — in youth; sthiram — fixed; vidhāya — making; vividha — by various; upāyaiḥ — means; atha — thus; yuñjanti — they engage; siddhaye — for the achievement of material perfections.

Translation
By various methods, some yogīs free the body from disease and old age and keep it perpetually youthful. Thus they engage in yoga for the purpose of achieving material mystic perfections.

Text 42
न हि तत् कुशलाद‍ृत्यं तदायासो ह्यपार्थक: ।
अन्तवत्त्वाच्छरीरस्य फलस्येव वनस्पते: ॥ ४२ ॥
na hi tat kuśalādṛtyaṁ
tad-āyāso hy apārthakaḥ
antavattvāc charīrasya
phalasyeva vanaspateḥ
Synonyms
na — not; hi — indeed; tat — that; kuśala — by those expert in transcendental knowledge; ādṛtyam — to be respected; tat — of that; āyāsaḥ — the endeavor; hi — certainly; apārthakaḥ — useless; anta-vattvāt — because of being subject to destruction; śarīrasya — on the part of the material body; phalasya — of the fruit; iva — just as; vanaspateḥ — of a tree.

Translation
This mystic bodily perfection is not valued very highly by those expert in transcendental knowledge. Indeed, they consider endeavor for such perfection useless, since the soul, like a tree, is permanent, but the body, like a tree’s fruit, is subject to destruction.

Text 43
योगं निषेवतो नित्यं कायश्चेत् कल्पतामियात् ।
तच्छ्रद्दध्यान्न मतिमान्योगमुत्सृज्य मत्पर: ॥ ४३ ॥
yogaṁ niṣevato nityaṁ
kāyaś cet kalpatām iyāt
tac chraddadhyān na matimān
yogam utsṛjya mat-paraḥ
Synonyms
yogam — the practice of yoga; niṣevataḥ — of one executing; nityam — regularly; kāyaḥ — the material body; cet — even if; kalpatām — fitness; iyāt — attains; tat — in that; śraddadhyāt — take faith; na — does not; mati-mān — who is intelligent; yogam — the system of mystic yoga; utsṛjya — giving up; mat-paraḥ — the devotee dedicated to Me.

Translation
Although the physical body may be improved by various processes of yoga, an intelligent person who has dedicated his life to Me does not place his faith in the prospect of perfecting his physical body through yoga, and in fact he gives up such procedures.

Text 44
योगचर्यामिमां योगी विचरन् मदपाश्रय: ।
नान्तरायैर्विहन्येत नि:स्पृह: स्वसुखानुभू: ॥ ४४ ॥
yoga-caryām imāṁ yogī
vicaran mad-apāśrayaḥ
nāntarāyair vihanyeta
niḥspṛhaḥ sva-sukhānubhūḥ
Synonyms
yoga-caryām — the prescribed process of yoga; imām — this; yogī — the practitioner; vicaran — executing; mat-apāśrayaḥ — having taken shelter of Me; na — not; antarāyaiḥ — by obstacles; vihanyeta — is checked; niḥspṛhaḥ — free from hankering; sva — of the soul; sukha — the happiness; anubhūḥ — experiencing within.

Translation
The yogī who has taken shelter of Me remains free from hankering because he experiences the happiness of the soul within. Thus while executing this process of yoga, he is never defeated by obstacles.