Text 1
श्रीउद्धव उवाच
सुदुस्तरामिमां मन्ये योगचर्यामनात्मन: ।
यथाञ्जसा पुमान् सिद्ध्येत् तन्मे ब्रूह्यञ्जसाच्युत ॥ १ ॥
śrī-uddhava uvāca
su-dustarām imāṁ manye
yoga-caryām anātmanaḥ
yathāñjasā pumān siddhyet
tan me brūhy añjasācyuta
Synonyms
śrī-uddhavaḥ uvāca — Śrī Uddhava said; su-dustarām — very difficult to execute; imām — this; manye — I think; yoga-caryām — process of yoga; anātmanaḥ — for one who has not controlled his mind; yathā — how; añjasā — easily; pumān — a person; siddhyet — may accomplish it; tat — that; me — to me; brūhi — please tell; añjasā — in a simple manner; acyuta — O infallible Lord.

Translation
Śrī Uddhava said: My dear Lord Acyuta, I fear that the method of yoga described by You is very difficult for one who cannot control his mind. Therefore please explain to me in simple terms how someone can more easily execute it.

Text 2
प्रायश: पुण्डरीकाक्ष युञ्जन्ते योगिनो मन: ।
विषीदन्त्यसमाधानान्मनोनिग्रहकर्शिता: ॥ २ ॥
prāyaśaḥ puṇḍarīkākṣa
yuñjanto yogino manaḥ
viṣīdanty asamādhānān
mano-nigraha-karśitāḥ
Synonyms
prāyaśaḥ — for the most part; puṇḍarīka-akṣa — O lotus-eyed Lord; yuñjantaḥ — who engage; yoginaḥ — yogīs; manaḥ — the mind; viṣīdanti — become frustrated; asamādhānāt — because of inability to attain trance; manaḥ-nigraha — by the attempt to subdue the mind; karśitāḥ — weary.

Translation
O lotus-eyed Lord, generally those yogīs who try to steady the mind experience frustration because of their inability to perfect the state of trance. Thus they weary in their attempt to bring the mind under control.

Text 3
अथात आनन्ददुघं पदाम्बुजं
हंसा: श्रयेरन्नरविन्दलोचन ।
सुखं नु विश्वेश्वर योगकर्मभि-
स्त्वन्माययामी विहता न मानिन: ॥ ३ ॥
athāta ānanda-dughaṁ padāmbujaṁ
haṁsāḥ śrayerann aravinda-locana
sukhaṁ nu viśveśvara yoga-karmabhis
tvan-māyayāmī vihatā na māninaḥ
Synonyms
atha — now; ataḥ — therefore; ānanda-dugham — the source of all ecstasy; pada-ambujam — Your lotus feet; haṁsāḥ — the swanlike men; śrayeran — take shelter of; aravinda-locana — O lotus-eyed; sukham — happily; nu — indeed; viśva-īśvara — Lord of the universe; yoga-karmabhiḥ — because of their practice of mysticism and fruitive work; tvat-māyayā — by Your material energy; amī — these; vihatāḥ — defeated; na — do not (take shelter); māninaḥ — those who are falsely proud.

Translation
Therefore, O lotus-eyed Lord of the universe, swanlike men happily take shelter of Your lotus feet, the source of all transcendental ecstasy. But those who take pride in their accomplishments in yoga and karma fail to take shelter of You and are defeated by Your illusory energy.

Text 4
किं चित्रमच्युत तवैतदशेषबन्धोदासेष्वनन्यशरणेषु यदात्मसात्त्वम् ।
योऽरोचयत् सह मृगै: स्वयमीश्वराणांश्रीमत्किरीटतटपीडितपादपीठ: ॥ ४ ॥
kiṁ citram acyuta tavaitad aśeṣa-bandho
dāseṣv ananya-śaraṇesu yad ātma-sāttvam
yo ’rocayat saha mṛgaiḥ svayam īśvarāṇāṁ
śrīmat-kirīṭa-taṭa-pīḍita-pāda-pīṭhaḥ
Synonyms
kim — what; citram — wonder; acyuta — O infallible Lord; tava — Your; etat — this; aśeṣa-bandho — O friend of all; dāseṣu — for the servants; ananya-śaraṇeṣu — who have taken no other shelter; yat — which; ātma-sāttvam — intimacy with You; yaḥ — who; arocayat — acted affectionately; saha — with; mṛgaiḥ — the animals (monkeys); svayam — Yourself; īśvarāṇām — of the great demigods; śrīmat — effulgent; kirīṭa — of the helmets; taṭa — by the edges; pīḍita — shaken; pāda-pīṭhaḥ — whose footstool.

Translation
My dear infallible Lord, it is not very astonishing that You intimately approach Your servants who have taken exclusive shelter of You. After all, during Your appearance as Lord Rāmacandra, even while great demigods like Brahmā were vying to place the effulgent tips of their helmets upon the cushion where Your lotus feet rested, You displayed special affection for monkeys such as Hanumān because they had taken exclusive shelter of You.

Text 5
तं त्वाखिलात्मदयितेश्वरमाश्रितानां
सर्वार्थदं स्वकृतविद् विसृजेत को नु ।
को वा भजेत् किमपि विस्मृतयेऽनु भूत्यै
किं वा भवेन्न तव पादरजोजुषां न: ॥ ५ ॥
taṁ tvākhilātma-dayiteśvaram āśritānāṁ
sarvārtha-daṁ sva-kṛta-vid visṛjeta ko nu
ko vā bhajet kim api vismṛtaye ’nu bhūtyai
kiṁ vā bhaven na tava pāda-rajo-juṣāṁ naḥ
Synonyms
tam — that; tvā — You; akhila — of all; ātma — the Supreme Soul; dayita — the most dear; īśvaram — and the supreme controller; āśrītānām — of those who take shelter of You; sarva-artha — of all perfections; dam — the bestower; sva-kṛta — the benefit you have given; vit — who knows; visṛjeta — can reject; kaḥ — who; nu — indeed; kaḥ — who; vā — or; bhajet — can accept; kim api — anything; vismṛtaye — for forgetfulness; anu — consequently; bhūtyai — for sense gratification; kim — what; vā — or; bhavet — is; na — not; tava — Your; pāda — of the lotus feet; rajaḥ — the dust; juṣām — for those who are serving; naḥ — ourselves.

Translation
Who, then, could dare reject You, the very Soul, the most dear object of worship, and the Supreme Lord of all — You who give all possible perfections to the devotees who take shelter of You? Who could be so ungrateful, knowing the benefits You bestow? Who would reject You and accept something for the sake of material enjoyment, which simply leads to forgetfulness of You? And what lack is there for us who are engaged in the service of the dust of Your lotus feet?

Text 6
नैवोपयन्त्यपचितिं कवयस्तवेश
ब्रह्मायुषापि कृतमृद्धमुद: स्मरन्त: ।
योऽन्तर्बहिस्तनुभृतामशुभं विधुन्वन्न
आचार्यचैत्त्यवपुषा स्वगतिं व्यनक्ति ॥ ६ ॥
naivopayanty apacitiṁ kavayas taveśa
brahmāyuṣāpi kṛtam ṛddha-mudaḥ smarantaḥ
yo ’ntar bahis tanu-bhṛtām aśubhaṁ vidhunvann
ācārya-caittya-vapuṣā sva-gatiṁ vyanakti
Synonyms
na eva — not at all; upayanti — are able to express; apacitim — their gratitude; kavayaḥ — learned devotees; tava — Your; īśa — O Lord; brahma-āyuṣā — with a lifetime equal to Lord Brahmā’s; api — in spite of; kṛtam — magnanimous work; ṛddha — increased; mudaḥ — joy; smarantaḥ — remembering; yaḥ — who; antaḥ — within; bahiḥ — outside; tanu-bhṛtām — of those who are embodied; aśubham — misfortune; vidhunvan — dissipating; ācārya — of the spiritual master; caittya — of the Supersoul; vapuṣā — by the forms; sva — own; gatim — path; vyanakti — shows.

Translation
O my Lord! Transcendental poets and experts in spiritual science could not fully express their indebtedness to You, even if they were endowed with the prolonged lifetime of Brahmā, for You appear in two features — externally as the ācārya and internally as the Supersoul — to deliver the embodied living being by directing him how to come to You.

Text 7
श्रीशुक उवाच
इत्युद्धवेनात्यनुरक्तचेतसा
पृष्टो जगत्क्रीडनक: स्वशक्तिभि: ।
गृहीतमूर्तित्रय ईश्वरेश्वरो
जगाद सप्रेममनोहरस्मित: ॥ ७ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
ity uddhavenāty-anurakta-cetasā
pṛṣṭo jagat-krīḍanakaḥ sva-śaktibhiḥ
gṛhīta-mūrti-traya īśvareśvaro
jagāda sa-prema-manohara-smitaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti — thus; uddhavena — by Uddhava; ati-anurakta — extremely attached; cetasā — whose heart; pṛṣṭaḥ — asked; jagat — the universe; krīḍanakaḥ — whose plaything; sva-śaktibhiḥ — by His own energies; gṛhīta — who has assumed; mūrti — personal forms; trayaḥ — three; īśvara — of all controllers; īśvaraḥ — the supreme controller; jagāda — He spoke; sa-prema — loving; manaḥ-hara — attractive; smitaḥ — whose smile.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus questioned by the most affectionate Uddhava, Lord Kṛṣṇa, the supreme controller of all controllers, who takes the entire universe as His plaything and assumes the three forms of Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva, began to reply, lovingly displaying His all-attractive smile.

Text 8
श्रीभगवानुवाच
हन्त ते कथयिष्यामि मम धर्मान् सुमङ्गलान् ।
यान् श्रद्धयाचरन् मर्त्यो मृत्युं जयति दुर्जयम् ॥ ८ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
hanta te kathayiṣyāmi
mama dharmān su-maṅgalān
yān śraddhayācaran martyo
mṛtyuṁ jayati durjayam
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; hanta — yes; te — to you; kathayiṣyāmi — I shall speak; mama — relating to Me; dharmān — religious principles; su-maṅgalān — most auspicious; yān — which; śraddhayā — with faith; ācaran — executing; martyaḥ — a mortal human being; mṛtyum — death; jayati — conquers; durjayam — unconquerable.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Yes, I shall describe to you the principles of devotion to Me, by executing which a mortal human being will conquer unconquerable death.

Text 9
कुर्यात् सर्वाणि कर्माणि मदर्थं शनकै: स्मरन् ।
मय्यर्पितमनश्चित्तो मद्धर्मात्ममनोरति: ॥ ९ ॥
kuryāt sarvāṇi karmāṇi
mad-arthaṁ śanakaiḥ smaran
mayy arpita-manaś-citto
mad-dharmātma-mano-ratiḥ
Synonyms
kuryāt — one should perform; sarvāṇi — all; karmāṇi — prescribed activities; mat-artham — for Me; śanakaiḥ — without becoming impetuous; smaran — remembering; mayi — unto Me; arpita — who has offered; manaḥ-cittaḥ — his mind and his intelligence; mat-dharma — My devotional service; ātma-manaḥ — of his own mind; ratiḥ — the attraction.

Translation
Always remembering Me, one should perform all his duties for Me without becoming impetuous. With mind and intelligence offered to Me, one should fix his mind in attraction to My devotional service.

Text 10
देशान् पुण्यानाश्रयेत मद्भ‍क्तै: साधुभि: श्रितान् ।
देवासुरमनुष्येषु मद्भ‍क्ताचरितानि च ॥ १० ॥
deśān puṇyān āśrayeta
mad-bhaktaiḥ sādhubhiḥ śritān
devāsura-manuṣyeṣu
mad-bhaktācaritāni ca
Synonyms
deśān — places; puṇyān — sacred; āśrayeta — he should take shelter of; mat-bhaktaiḥ — by My devotees; sādhubhiḥ — saintly; śritān — resorted to; deva — among the demigods; asura — demons; manuṣyeṣu — and human beings; mat-bhakta — of My devotees; ācaritāni — the activities; ca — and.

Translation
One should take shelter of holy places where My saintly devotees reside, and one should be guided by the exemplary activities of My devotees, who appear among the demigods, demons and human beings.

Text 11
पृथक् सत्रेण वा मह्यं पर्वयात्रामहोत्सवान् ।
कारयेद् गीतनृत्याद्यैर्महाराजविभूतिभि: ॥ ११ ॥
pṛthak satreṇa vā mahyaṁ
parva-yātrā-mahotsavān
kārayed gīta-nṛtyādyair
mahārāja-vibhūtibhiḥ
Synonyms
pṛthak — alone; satreṇa — in assembly; vā — or; mahyam — for Me; parva — monthly observances, such as Ekādaśī; yātrā — special gatherings; mahā-utsavān — and festivals; kārayet — one should arrange to perform; gīta — with singing; nṛtya-ādyaiḥ — dancing and so on; mahā-rāja — royal; vibhūtibhiḥ — with signs of opulence.

Translation
Either alone or in public gatherings, with singing, dancing and other exhibitions of royal opulence, one should arrange to celebrate those holy days, ceremonies and festivals set aside specially for My worship.

Text 12
मामेव सर्वभूतेषु बहिरन्तरपावृतम् ।
ईक्षेतात्मनि चात्मानं यथा खममलाशय: ॥ १२ ॥
mām eva sarva-bhūteṣu
bahir antar apāvṛtam
īkṣetātmani cātmānaṁ
yathā kham amalāśayaḥ
Synonyms
mām — Me; eva — indeed; sarva-bhūteṣu — within all living beings; bahiḥ — externally; antaḥ — internally; apāvṛtam — uncovered; īkṣeta — one should see; ātmani — within himself; ca — also; ātmānam — the Supreme Soul; yathā — as; kham — the sky; amala-āśayaḥ — having a pure heart.

Translation
With a pure heart one should see Me, the Supreme Soul within all beings and also within oneself, to be both unblemished by anything material and also present everywhere, both externally and internally, just like the omnipresent sky.

Texts 13-14
इति सर्वाणि भूतानि मद्भ‍ावेन महाद्युते ।
सभाजयन् मन्यमानो ज्ञानं केवलमाश्रित: ॥ १३ ॥
ब्राह्मणे पुक्कसे स्तेने ब्रह्मण्येऽर्के स्फुलिङ्गके ।
अक्रूरे क्रूरके चैव समद‍ृक् पण्डितो मत: ॥ १४ ॥
iti sarvāṇi bhūtāni
mad-bhāvena mahā-dyute
sabhājayan manyamāno
jñānaṁ kevalam āśritaḥ
brāhmaṇe pukkase stene
brahmaṇye ’rke sphuliṅgake
akrūre krūrake caiva
sama-dṛk paṇḍito mataḥ
Synonyms
iti — in this way; sarvāṇi — to all; bhūtāni — living beings; mat-bhāvena — with the sense of My presence; mahā-dyute — O greatly effulgent Uddhava; sabhājayan — giving respect; manyamānaḥ — so considering; jñānam — knowledge; kevalam — transcendental; āśritaḥ — taking shelter of; brāhmaṇe — in the brāhmaṇa; pukkase — in the outcaste of the Pukkasa tribe; stene — in the thief; brahmaṇye — in the man who respects brahminical culture; arke — in the sun; sphuliṅgake — in the spark of the fire; akrūre — in the gentle; krūrake — in the cruel; ca — also; eva — indeed; sama-dṛk — having equal vision; paṇḍitaḥ — a learned scholar; mataḥ — is considered.

Translation
O brilliant Uddhava, one who thus views all living entities with the idea that I am present within each of them, and who by taking shelter of this divine knowledge offers due respect to everyone, is considered actually wise. Such a man sees equally the brāhmaṇa and the outcaste, the thief and the charitable promoter of brahminical culture, the sun and the tiny sparks of fire, the gentle and the cruel.

Text 15
नरेष्वभीक्ष्णं मद्भ‍ावं पुंसो भावयतोऽचिरात् ।
स्पर्धासूयातिरस्कारा: साहङ्कारा वियन्ति हि ॥ १५ ॥
nareṣv abhīkṣṇaṁ mad-bhāvaṁ
puṁso bhāvayato ’cirāt
spardhāsūyā-tiraskārāḥ
sāhaṅkārā viyanti hi
Synonyms
nareṣu — in all persons; abhīkṣṇam — constantly; mat-bhāvam — the personal presence of Me; puṁsaḥ — of the person; bhāvayataḥ — who is meditating upon; acirāt — quickly; spardhā — the tendency to feel rivalry (against equals); asūyā — envy (of superiors); tiraskārāḥ — and abuse (of inferiors); sa — along with; ahaṅkārāḥ — false ego; viyanti — they disappear; hi — indeed.

Translation
For him who constantly meditates upon My presence within all persons, the bad tendencies of rivalry, envy and abusiveness, along with false ego, are very quickly destroyed.

Text 16
विसृज्य स्मयमानान् स्वान् द‍ृशं व्रीडां च दैहिकीम् ।
प्रणमेद् दण्डवद् भूमावाश्वचाण्डालगोखरम् ॥ १६ ॥
visṛjya smayamānān svān
dṛśaṁ vrīḍāṁ ca daihikīm
praṇamed daṇḍa-vad bhūmāv
ā-śva-cāṇḍāla-go-kharam
Synonyms
visṛjya — giving up; smayamānān — who are laughing; svān — one’s own friends; dṛśam — the outlook; vrīḍām — the embarrassment; ca — and; daihikīm — of the bodily conception; praṇamet — one should offer obeisances; daṇḍa-vat — falling down like a rod; bhūmau — upon the ground; ā — even; śva — to the dogs; cāṇḍāla — outcastes; go — cows; kharam — and asses.

Translation
Disregarding the ridicule of one’s companions, one should give up the bodily conception and its accompanying embarrassment. One should offer obeisances before all — even the dogs, outcastes, cows and asses — falling flat upon the ground like a rod.

Text 17
यावत् सर्वेषु भूतेषु मद्भ‍ावो नोपजायते ।
तावदेवमुपासीत वाङ्‍मन:कायवृत्तिभि: ॥ १७ ॥
yāvat sarveṣu bhūteṣu
mad-bhāvo nopajāyate
tāvad evam upāsīta
vāṅ-manaḥ-kāya-vṛttibhiḥ
Synonyms
yāvat — as long as; sarveṣu — in all; bhūteṣu — living entities; mat-bhāvaḥ — the vision of My presence; na upajāyate — does not fully develop; tāvat — for that long; evam — in this way; upāsīta — one must worship; vāk — of his speech; manaḥ — mind; kāya — and body; vṛttibhiḥ — by the functions.

Translation
Until one has fully developed the ability to see Me within all living beings, one must continue to worship Me by this process with the activities of his speech, mind and body.

Text 18
सर्वं ब्रह्मात्मकं तस्य विद्ययात्ममनीषया ।
परिपश्यन्नुपरमेत् सर्वतो मुक्तसंशय: ॥ १८ ॥
sarvaṁ brahmātmakaṁ tasya
vidyayātma-manīṣayā
paripaśyann uparamet
sarvato mukta-saṁśayaḥ
Synonyms
sarvam — everything; brahma-ātmakam — based on the Absolute Truth; tasya — for him; vidyayā — by transcendental knowledge; ātma-manīṣayā — by realization of the Supreme Soul; paripaśyan — seeing everywhere; uparamet — he should desist from material activities; sarvataḥ — in all cases; mukta-saṁśayaḥ — freed from doubts.

Translation
By such transcendental knowledge of the all-pervading Personality of Godhead, one is able to see the Absolute Truth everywhere. Freed thus from all doubts, one gives up fruitive activities.

Text 19
अयं हि सर्वकल्पानां सध्रीचीनो मतो मम ।
मद्भ‍ाव: सर्वभूतेषु मनोवाक्कायवृत्तिभि: ॥ १९ ॥
ayaṁ hi sarva-kalpānāṁ
sadhrīcīno mato mama
mad-bhāvaḥ sarva-bhūteṣu
mano-vāk-kāya-vṛttibhiḥ
Synonyms
ayam — this; hi — indeed; sarva — of all; kalpānām — processes; sadhrīcīnaḥ — the most appropriate; mataḥ — is considered; mama — by Me; mat-bhāvaḥ — seeing Me; sarva-bhūteṣu — within all living entities; manaḥ-vāk-kāya-vṛttibhiḥ — by the functions of one’s mind, words and body.

Translation
Indeed, I consider this process — using one’s mind, words and bodily functions for realizing Me within all living beings — to be the best possible method of spiritual enlightenment.

Text 20
न ह्यङ्गोपक्रमे ध्वंसो मद्धर्मस्योद्धवाण्वपि ।
मया व्यवसित: सम्यङ्निर्गुणत्वादनाशिष: ॥ २० ॥
na hy aṅgopakrame dhvaṁso
mad-dharmasyoddhavāṇv api
mayā vyavasitaḥ samyaṅ
nirguṇatvād anāśiṣaḥ
Synonyms
na — there is not; hi — indeed; aṅga — My dear Uddhava; upakrame — in the attempt; dhvaṁsaḥ — destruction; mat-dharmasya — of My devotional service; uddhava — My dear Uddhava; aṇu — the slightest; api — even; mayā — by Me; vyavasitaḥ — established; samyak — perfectly; nirguṇa-tvāt — because of its being transcendental; anāśiṣaḥ — having no ulterior motive.

Translation
My dear Uddhava, because I have personally established it, this process of devotional service unto Me is transcendental and free from any material motivation. Certainly a devotee never suffers even the slightest loss by adopting this process.

Text 21
यो यो मयि परे धर्म: कल्प्यते निष्फलाय चेत् ।
तदायासो निरर्थ: स्याद् भयादेरिव सत्तम ॥ २१ ॥
yo yo mayi pare dharmaḥ
kalpyate niṣphalāya cet
tad-āyāso nirarthaḥ syād
bhayāder iva sattama
Synonyms
yaḥ yaḥ — whatever; mayi — unto Me; pare — the Supreme; dharmaḥ — is religion; kalpyate — tends; niṣphalāya — toward becoming free from the result of material work; cet — if; tat — of that; āyāsaḥ — the endeavor; nirarthaḥ — futile; syāt — may be; bhaya-ādeḥ — of fear and so on; iva — as; sat-tama — O best of saintly persons.

Translation
O Uddhava, greatest of saints, in a dangerous situation an ordinary person cries, becomes fearful and laments, although such useless emotions do not change the situation. But activities offered to Me without personal motivation, even if they are externally useless, amount to the actual process of religion.

Text 22
एषा बुद्धिमतां बुद्धिर्मनीषा च मनीषिणाम् ।
यत् सत्यमनृतेनेह मर्त्येनाप्नोति मामृतम् ॥ २२ ॥
eṣā buddhimatāṁ buddhir
manīṣā ca manīṣiṇām
yat satyam anṛteneha
martyenāpnoti māmṛtam
Synonyms
eṣā — this; buddhi-matām — of the intelligent; buddhiḥ — the intelligence; manīṣā — the cleverness; ca — and; manīṣiṇām — of the clever; yat — which; satyam — the real; anṛtena — by the false; iha — in this life; martyena — by the mortal; āpnoti — obtains; mā — Me; amṛtam — the immortal.

Translation
This process is the supreme intelligence of the intelligent and the cleverness of the most clever, for by following it one can in this very life make use of the temporary and unreal to achieve Me, the eternal reality.

Text 23
एष तेऽभिहित: कृत्‍स्‍नो ब्रह्मवादस्य सङ्ग्रह: ।
समासव्यासविधिना देवानामपि दुर्गम: ॥ २३ ॥
eṣa te ’bhihitaḥ kṛtsno
brahma-vādasya saṅgrahaḥ
samāsa-vyāsa-vidhinā
devānām api durgamaḥ
Synonyms
eṣaḥ — this; te — unto you; abhihitaḥ — has been described; kṛtsnaḥ — completely; brahma-vādasya — of the science of the Absolute Truth; saṅgrahaḥ — the survey; samāsa — in brief; vyāsa — in detail; vidhinā — by both means; devānām — for the demigods; api — even; durgamaḥ — inaccessible.

Translation
Thus have I related to you — both in brief and in detail — a complete survey of the science of the Absolute Truth. Even for the demigods, this science is very difficult to comprehend.

Text 24
अभीक्ष्णशस्ते गदितं ज्ञानं विस्पष्टयुक्तिमत् ।
एतद् विज्ञाय मुच्येत पुरुषो नष्टसंशय: ॥ २४ ॥
abhīkṣṇaśas te gaditaṁ
jñānaṁ vispaṣṭa-yuktimat
etad vijñāya mucyeta
puruṣo naṣṭa-saṁśayaḥ
Synonyms
abhīkṣṇaśaḥ — repeatedly; te — to you; gaditam — spoken; jñānam — knowledge; vispaṣṭa — clear; yukti — logical arguments; mat — having; etat — this; vijñāya — properly understanding; mucyeta — will become liberated; puruṣaḥ — a person; naṣṭa — destroyed; saṁśayaḥ — his doubts.

Translation
I have repeatedly spoken this knowledge to you with clear reasoning. Anyone who properly understands it will become free from all doubts and attain liberation.

Text 25
सुविविक्तं तव प्रश्न‍ं मयैतदपि धारयेत् ।
सनातनं ब्रह्मगुह्यं परं ब्रह्माधिगच्छति ॥ २५ ॥
su-viviktaṁ tava praśnaṁ
mayaitad api dhārayet
sanātanaṁ brahma-guhyaṁ
paraṁ brahmādhigacchati
Synonyms
sa-viviktam — clearly elucidated; tava — your; praśnam — question; mayā — by Me; etat — this; api — even; dhārayet — fixes his attention upon; sanātanam — eternal; brahma-guhyam — secret of the Vedas; param — supreme; brahma — the Absolute Truth; adhigacchati — he attains.

Translation
Anyone who fixes his attention on these clear answers to your questions will attain to the eternal, confidential goal of the Vedas — the Supreme Absolute Truth.

Text 26
य एतन्मम भक्तेषु सम्प्रदद्यात् सुपुष्कलम् ।
तस्याहं ब्रह्मदायस्य ददाम्यात्मानमात्मना ॥ २६ ॥
ya etan mama bhakteṣu
sampradadyāt su-puṣkalam
tasyāhaṁ brahma-dāyasya
dadāmy ātmānam ātmanā
Synonyms
yaḥ — who; etat — this; mama — My; bhakteṣu — among the devotees; sampradadyāt — instructs; su-puṣkalam — liberally; tasya — to him; aham — I; brahma-dāyasya — to the person who is the bestower of knowledge of the Absolute; dadāmi — I give; ātmānam — Myself; ātmanā — by Myself.

Translation
One who liberally disseminates this knowledge among My devotees is the bestower of the Absolute Truth, and to him I give My very own self.

Text 27
य एतत् समधीयीत पवित्रं परमं शुचि ।
स पूयेताहरहर्मां ज्ञानदीपेन दर्शयन् ॥ २७ ॥
ya etat samadhīyīta
pavitraṁ paramaṁ śuci
sa pūyetāhar ahar māṁ
jñāna-dīpena darśayan
Synonyms
yaḥ — who; etat — this; samadhīyīta — recites loudly; pavitram — the purifying agent; paramam — supreme; śuci — clear and transparent; saḥ — he; pūyeta — becomes purified; ahaḥ ahaḥ — day after day; mām — Me; jñāna-dīpena — with the lamp of knowledge; darśayan — exhibiting.

Translation
He who loudly recites this supreme knowledge, which is the most lucid and purifying, becomes purified day by day, for he reveals Me to others with the lamp of transcendental knowledge.

Text 28
य एतच्छ्रद्धया नित्यमव्यग्र: श‍ृणुयान्नर: ।
मयि भक्तिं परां कुर्वन् कर्मभिर्न स बध्यते ॥ २८ ॥
ya etac chraddhayā nityam
avyagraḥ śṛṇuyān naraḥ
mayi bhaktiṁ parāṁ kurvan
karmabhir na sa badhyate
Synonyms
yaḥ — who; etat — this; śraddhayā — with faith; nityam — regularly; avyagraḥ — free from distraction; śṛṇuyāt — listens; naraḥ — a person; mayi — to Me; bhaktim — devotional service; parām — transcendental; kurvan — performing; karmabhiḥ — by fruitive actions; na — not; saḥ — he; badhyate — becomes bound up.

Translation
Anyone who regularly listens to this knowledge with faith and attention, all the while engaging in My pure devotional service, will never become bound by the reactions of material work.

Text 29
अप्युद्धव त्वया ब्रह्म सखे समवधारितम् ।
अपि ते विगतो मोह: शोकश्चासौ मनोभव: ॥ २९ ॥
apy uddhava tvayā brahma
sakhe samavadhāritam
api te vigato mohaḥ
śokaś cāsau mano-bhavaḥ
Synonyms
api — whether; uddhava — O Uddhava; tvayā — by you; brahma — spiritual knowledge; sakhe — O friend; samavadhāritam — sufficiently understood; api — whether; te — your; vigataḥ — is removed; mohaḥ — the illusion; śokaḥ — lamentation; ca — and; asau — this; manaḥ-bhavaḥ — born of your mind.

Translation
My dear friend Uddhava, have you now completely understood this transcendental knowledge? Are the confusion and lamentation that arose in your mind now dispelled?

Text 30
नैतत्त्वया दाम्भिकाय नास्तिकाय शठाय च ।
अशुश्रूषोरभक्ताय दुर्विनीताय दीयताम् ॥ ३० ॥
naitat tvayā dāmbhikāya
nāstikāya śaṭhāya ca
aśuśrūṣor abhaktāya
durvinītāya dīyatām
Synonyms
na — not; etat — this; tvayā — by you; dāmbhikāya — to a hypocrite; nāstikāya — to an atheist; śaṭhāya — to a cheat; ca — and; aśuśrūṣoḥ — to one who does not listen with faith; abhaktāya — to a nondevotee; durvinītāya — to one who is not humbly submissive; dīyatām — should be given.

Translation
You should not share this instruction with anyone who is hypocritical, atheistic or dishonest, or with anyone who will not listen faithfully, who is not a devotee, or who is simply not humble.

Text 31
एतैर्दोषैर्विहीनाय ब्रह्मण्याय प्रियाय च ।
साधवे शुचये ब्रूयाद् भक्ति: स्याच्छूद्रयोषिताम् ॥ ३१ ॥
etair doṣair vihīnāya
brahmaṇyāya priyāya ca
sādhave śucaye brūyād
bhaktiḥ syāc chūdra-yoṣitām
Synonyms
etaiḥ — of these; doṣaiḥ — faulty qualities; vihīnāya — to the person who is devoid; brahmaṇyāya — to one dedicated to the welfare of the brāhmaṇas; priyāya — kindly disposed; ca — and; sādhave — saintly; śucaye — pure; brūyāt — one should speak; bhaktiḥ — devotion; syāt — if it is present; śūdra — of the common workers; yoṣitām — and women.

Translation
This knowledge should be taught to one who is free from these bad qualities, who is dedicated to the welfare of the brāhmaṇas, and who is kindly disposed, saintly and pure. And if common workers and women are found to have devotion for the Supreme Lord, they are also to be accepted as qualified hearers.

Text 32
नैतद् विज्ञाय जिज्ञासोर्ज्ञातव्यमवशिष्यते ।
पीत्वा पीयूषममृतं पातव्यं नावशिष्यते ॥ ३२ ॥
naitad vijñāya jijñāsor
jñātavyam avaśiṣyate
pītvā pīyūṣam amṛtaṁ
pātavyaṁ nāvaśiṣyate
Synonyms
na — not; etat — this; vijñāya — fully understanding; jijñāsoḥ — of the inquisitive person; jñātavyam — matter to be understood; avaśiṣyate — remains; pītvā — having drunk; pīyūṣam — palatable; amṛtam — nectarean beverage; pātavyam — to be drunk; na — nothing; avaśiṣyate — remains.

Translation
When an inquisitive person comes to understand this knowledge, he has nothing further to know. After all, one who has drunk the most palatable nectar cannot remain thirsty.

Text 33
ज्ञाने कर्मणि योगे च वार्तायां दण्डधारणे ।
यावानर्थो नृणां तात तावांस्तेऽहं चतुर्विध: ॥ ३३ ॥
jñāne karmaṇi yoge ca
vārtāyāṁ daṇḍa-dhāraṇe
yāvān artho nṛṇāṁ tāta
tāvāṁs te ’haṁ catur-vidhaḥ
Synonyms
jñāne — in the process of knowledge; karmaṇi — in fruitive work; yoge — in mystic yoga; ca — and; vārtāyām — in ordinary business; daṇḍa-dhāraṇe — in political rule; yāvān — whatever; arthaḥ — accomplishment; nṛṇām — of men; tāta — My dear Uddhava; tāvān — that much; te — to you; aham — I; catuḥ-vidhaḥ — fourfold (i.e., the fourfold goals of human life: religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and liberation).

Translation
Through analytic knowledge, ritualistic work, mystic yoga, mundane business and political rule, people seek to advance in religiosity, economic development, sense gratification and liberation. But because you are My devotee, whatever men can accomplish in these multifarious ways you will very easily find within Me.

Text 34
मर्त्यो यदा त्यक्तसमस्तकर्मा
निवेदितात्मा विचिकीर्षितो मे ।
तदामृतत्त्वं प्रतिपद्यमानो
मयात्मभूयाय च कल्पते वै ॥ ३४ ॥
martyo yadā tyakta-samasta-karmā
niveditātmā vicikīrṣito me
tadāmṛtatvaṁ pratipadyamāno
mayātma-bhūyāya ca kalpate vai
Synonyms
martyaḥ — a mortal; yadā — when; tyakta — having given up; samasta — all; karmā — his fruitive activities; nivedita-ātmā — having offered his very self; vicikīrṣitaḥ — desirous of doing something special; me — for Me; tadā — at that time; amṛtatvam — immortality; pratipadyamānaḥ — in the process of attaining; mayā — with Me; ātma-bhūyāya — for equal opulence; ca — also; kalpate — he becomes qualified; vai — indeed.

Translation
A person who gives up all fruitive activities and offers himself entirely unto Me, eagerly desiring to render service unto Me, achieves liberation from birth and death and is promoted to the status of sharing My own opulences.

Text 35
श्रीशुक उवाच
स एवमादर्शितयोगमार्ग-
स्तदोत्तम:श्लोकवचो निशम्य ।
बद्धाञ्जलि: प्रीत्युपरुद्धकण्ठो
न किञ्चिदूचेऽश्रुपरिप्लुताक्ष: ॥ ३५ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
sa evam ādarśita-yoga-mārgas
tadottamaḥśloka-vaco niśamya
baddhāñjaliḥ prīty-uparuddha-kaṇṭho
na kiñcid ūce ’śru-pariplutākṣaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; saḥ — he (Uddhava); evam — thus; ādarśita — shown; yoga-mārgaḥ — the path of yoga; tadā — then; uttamaḥ-śloka — of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; vacaḥ — the words; niśamya — having heard; baddha-añjaliḥ — with hands folded in prayer; prīti — out of love; uparuddha — choked; kaṇṭhaḥ — his throat; na kiñcit — nothing; ūce — he said; aśru — with tears; paripluta — overflowing; akṣaḥ — his eyes.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Hearing these words spoken by Lord Kṛṣṇa, and having thus been shown the entire path of yoga, Uddhava folded his hands to offer obeisances. But his throat choked up with love and his eyes overflowed with tears; so he could say nothing.

Text 36
विष्टभ्य चित्तं प्रणयावघूर्णं
धैर्येण राजन् बहु मन्यमान: ।
कृताञ्जलि: प्राह यदुप्रवीरं
शीर्ष्णा स्पृशंस्तच्चरणारविन्दम् ॥ ३६ ॥
viṣṭabhya cittaṁ praṇayāvaghūrṇaṁ
dhairyeṇa rājan bahu-manyamānaḥ
kṛtāñjaliḥ prāha yadu-pravīraṁ
śīrṣṇā spṛśaṁs tac-caraṇāravindam
Synonyms
viṣṭabhya — restraining; cittam — his mind; praṇaya — with love; avaghūrṇam — completely agitated; dhairyeṇa — with steadfastness; rājan — O King; bahu-manyamānaḥ — feeling grateful; kṛta-añjaliḥ — his hands folded; prāha — he spoke; yadu-pravīram — to the greatest hero of the Yadus; śīrṣṇā — with his head; spṛśan — touching; tat — His; caraṇa-aravindam — lotus feet.

Translation
Steadying his mind, which had become overwhelmed with love, Uddhava felt extremely grateful to Lord Kṛṣṇa, the greatest hero of the Yadu dynasty. My dear King Parīkṣit, Uddhava bowed down to touch the Lord’s lotus feet with his head and then spoke with folded hands.

Text 37
श्रीउद्धव उवाच
विद्रावितो मोहमहान्धकारो
य आश्रितो मे तव सन्निधानात् ।
विभावसो: किं नु समीपगस्य
शीतं तमो भी: प्रभवन्त्यजाद्य ॥ ३७ ॥
śrī-uddhava uvāca
vidrāvito moha-mahāndhakāro
ya āśrito me tava sannidhānāt
vibhāvasoḥ kiṁ nu samīpa-gasya
śītaṁ tamo bhīḥ prabhavanty ajādya
Synonyms
śrī-uddhavaḥ uvāca — Śrī Uddhava said; vidrāvitaḥ — is driven away; moha — of delusion; mahā-andhakāraḥ — the great darkness; yaḥ — which; āśritaḥ — was taken shelter of; me — by me; tava — Your; sannidhānāt — by the presence; vibhāvasoḥ — of the sun; kim — what; nu — indeed; samīpa-gasya — for one who has come into the proximity; śītam — cold; tamaḥ — darkness; bhīḥ — fear; prabhavanti — have power; aja — O unborn; ādya — O primeval Lord.

Translation
Śrī Uddhava said: O unborn, primeval Lord, although I had fallen into the great darkness of illusion, my ignorance has now been dispelled by Your merciful association. Indeed, how can cold, darkness and fear exert their power over one who has approached the brilliant sun?

Text 38
प्रत्यर्पितो मे भवतानुकम्पिना
भृत्याय विज्ञानमय: प्रदीप: ।
हित्वा कृतज्ञस्तव पादमूलं
कोऽन्यं समीयाच्छरणं त्वदीयम् ॥ ३८ ॥
pratyarpito me bhavatānukampinā
bhṛtyāya vijñāna-mayaḥ pradīpaḥ
hitvā kṛta-jñas tava pāda-mūlaṁ
ko ’nyaṁ samīyāc charaṇaṁ tvadīyam
Synonyms
pratyarpitaḥ — offered in return; me — to me; bhavatā — by Your good self; anukampinā — who is merciful; bhṛtyāya — to Your servant; vijñāna-mayaḥ — of transcendental knowledge; pradīpaḥ — the torchlight; hitvā — giving up; kṛta-jñaḥ — who is grateful; tava — Your; pāda-mūlam — the sole of the lotus feet; kaḥ — who; anyam — to another; samīyāt — can go; śaraṇam — for shelter; tvadīyam — Your.

Translation
In return for my insignificant surrender, You have mercifully bestowed upon me, Your servant, the torchlight of transcendental knowledge. Therefore, what devotee of Yours who has any gratitude could ever give up Your lotus feet and take shelter of another master?

Text 39
वृक्णश्च मे सुद‍ृढ: स्‍नेहपाशो
दाशार्हवृष्ण्यन्धकसात्वतेषु ।
प्रसारित: सृष्टिविवृद्धये त्वया
स्वमायया ह्यात्मसुबोधहेतिना ॥ ३९ ॥
vṛkṇaś ca me su-dṛḍhaḥ sneha-pāśo
dāśārha-vṛṣṇy-andhaka-sātvateṣu
prasāritaḥ sṛṣṭi-vivṛddhaye tvayā
sva-māyayā hy ātma-subodha-hetinā
Synonyms
vṛkṇaḥ — cut off; ca — and; me — my; su-dṛḍhaḥ — very firm; sneha-pāśaḥ — binding rope of affection; dāśārha-vṛṣṇi-andhaka-sātvateṣu — for the Dāśārhas, Vṛṣṇis, Andhakas and Sātvatas; prasāritaḥ — cast; sṛṣṭi — of Your creation; vivṛddhaye — for the increase; tvayā — by You; sva-māyayā — through Your illusory energy; hi — indeed; ātma — of the soul; su-bodha — of proper knowledge; hetinā — by the sword.

Translation
The firmly binding rope of my affection for the families of the Dāśārhas, Vṛṣṇis, Andhakas and Sātvatas — a rope You originally cast over me by Your illusory energy for the purpose of developing Your creation — is now cut off by the weapon of transcendental knowledge of the self.

Text 40
नमोऽस्तु ते महायोगिन् प्रपन्नमनुशाधि माम् ।
यथा त्वच्चरणाम्भोजे रति: स्यादनपायिनी ॥ ४० ॥
namo ’stu te mahā-yogin
prapannam anuśādhi mām
yathā tvac-caraṇāmbhoje
ratiḥ syād anapāyinī
Synonyms
namaḥ astu — let me offer my obeisances; te — unto You; mahā-yogin — O greatest of mystics; prapannam — who am surrendered; anuśādhi — please instruct; mām — me; yathā — how; tvat — Your; caraṇa-ambhoje — at the lotus feet; ratiḥ — transcendental attraction; syāt — may be; anapāyinī — undeviating.

Translation
Obeisances unto You, O greatest of yogīs. Please instruct me, who am surrendered unto You, how I may have undeviating attachment to Your lotus feet.

Texts 41-44
श्रीभगवानुवाच
गच्छोद्धव मयादिष्टो बदर्याख्यं ममाश्रमम् ।
तत्र मत्पादतीर्थोदे स्‍नानोपस्पर्शनै: शुचि: ॥ ४१ ॥
ईक्षयालकनन्दाया विधूताशेषकल्मष: ।
वसानो वल्कलान्यङ्ग वन्यभुक् सुखनि:स्पृह: ॥ ४२ ॥
तितिक्षुर्द्वन्द्वमात्राणां सुशील: संयतेन्द्रिय: ।
शान्त: समाहितधिया ज्ञानविज्ञानसंयुत: ॥ ४३ ॥
मत्तोऽनुशिक्षितं यत्ते विविक्तमनुभावयन् ।
मय्यावेशितवाक्‌चित्तो मद्धर्मनिरतो भव ।
अतिव्रज्य गतीस्तिस्रो मामेष्यसि तत: परम् ॥ ४४ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
gacchoddhava mayādiṣṭo
badary-ākhyaṁ mamāśramam
tatra mat-pāda-tīrthode
snānopasparśanaiḥ śuciḥ
īkṣayālakanandāyā
vidhūtāśeṣa-kalmaṣaḥ
vasāno valkalāny aṅga
vanya-bhuk sukha-niḥspṛhaḥ
titikṣur dvandva-mātrāṇāṁ
suśīlaḥ saṁyatendriyaḥ
śāntaḥ samāhita-dhiyā
jñāna-vijñāna-saṁyutaḥ
matto ’nuśikṣitaṁ yat te
viviktam anubhāvayan
mayy āveśita-vāk-citto
mad-dharma-nirato bhava
ativrajya gatīs tisro
mām eṣyasi tataḥ param
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; gaccha — please go; uddhava — O Uddhava; mayā — by Me; ādiṣṭaḥ — ordered; badarī-ākhyam — named Badarikā; mama — My; āśramam — to the hermitage; tatra — there; mat-pāda — emanating from My feet; tīrtha — of the holy places; ude — in the water; snāna — by bathing; upasparśanaiḥ — and by touching for purification; śuciḥ — cleansed; īkṣayā — by glancing; alakanandāyāḥ — upon the river Gaṅgā; vidhūta — cleansed; aśeṣa — of all; kalmaṣaḥ — sinful reactions; vasānaḥ — wearing; valkalāni — bark; aṅga — My dear Uddhava; vanya — fruits, nuts, roots, etc., of the forest; bhuk — eating; sukha — happy; niḥspṛhaḥ — and free from desire; titikṣuḥ — tolerant; dvandva-mātrāṇām — of all dualities; su-śīlaḥ — exhibiting saintly character; saṁyata-indriyaḥ — with controlled senses; śāntaḥ — peaceful; samāhita — perfectly concentrated; dhiyā — with intelligence; jñāna — with knowledge; vijñāna — and realization; saṁyutaḥ — endowed; mattaḥ — from Me; anuśikṣitam — learned; yat — that which; te — by you; viviktam — ascertained with discrimination; anubhāvayan — thoroughly meditating upon; mayi — in Me; āveśita — absorbed; vāk — your words; cittaḥ — and mind; mat-dharma — My transcendental qualities; nirataḥ — constantly endeavoring to realize; bhava — be thus situated; ativrajya — crossing beyond; gatīḥ — the destinations of material nature; tisraḥ — three; mām — unto Me; eṣyasi — you will come; tataḥ param — thereafter.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Uddhava, take My order and go to My āśrama called Badarikā. Purify yourself by both touching and also bathing in the holy waters there, which have emanated from My lotus feet. Rid yourself of all sinful reactions with the sight of the sacred Alakanandā River. Dress yourself in bark and eat whatever is naturally available in the forest. Thus you should remain content and free from desire, tolerant of all dualities, good-natured, self-controlled, peaceful and endowed with transcendental knowledge and realization. With fixed attention, meditate constantly upon these instructions I have imparted to you and assimilate their essence. Fix your words and thoughts upon Me, and always endeavor to increase your realization of My transcendental qualities. In this way you will cross beyond the destinations of the three modes of nature and finally come back to Me.

Text 45
श्रीशुक उवाच
स एवमुक्तो हरिमेधसोद्धव:
प्रदक्षिणं तं परिसृत्य पादयो: ।
शिरो निधायाश्रुकलाभिरार्द्रधी-
र्न्यषिञ्चदद्वन्द्वपरोऽप्यपक्रमे ॥ ४५ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
sa evam ukto hari-medhasoddhavaḥ
pradakṣiṇaṁ taṁ parisṛtya pādayoḥ
śiro nidhāyāśru-kalābhir ārdra-dhīr
nyaṣiñcad advandva-paro ’py apakrame
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; saḥ — he; evam — thus; uktaḥ — addressed; hari-medhasā — by the Supreme Lord, whose intelligence takes away the misery of material life; uddhavaḥ — Uddhava; pradakṣiṇam — facing with his right side; tam — Him; parisṛtya — circumambulating; pādayoḥ — at the two feet; śiraḥ — his head; nidhāya — placing; aśru-kalābhiḥ — with the teardrops; ārdra — melted; dhīḥ — whose heart; nyaṣiñcat — he drenched; advandva-paraḥ — uninvolved in material dualities; api — although; apakrame — at the time of leaving.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus addressed by Lord Kṛṣṇa, whose intelligence destroys all the suffering of material life, Śrī Uddhava circumambulated the Lord and then fell down, placing his head upon the Lord’s feet. Although Uddhava was free from the influence of all material dualities, his heart was breaking, and at this time of departure he drenched the Lord’s lotus feet with his tears.

Text 46
सुदुस्त्यजस्‍नेहवियोगकातरो
न शक्नुवंस्तं परिहातुमातुर: ।
कृच्छ्रं ययौ मूर्धनि भर्तृपादुके
बिभ्रन्नमस्कृत्य ययौ पुन: पुन: ॥ ४६ ॥
su-dustyaja-sneha-viyoga-kātaro
na śaknuvaṁs taṁ parihātum āturaḥ
kṛcchraṁ yayau mūrdhani bhartṛ-pāduke
bibhran namaskṛtya yayau punaḥ punaḥ
Synonyms
su-dustyaja — impossible to give up; sneha — (from Him) in whom he had reposed such affection; viyoga — because of separation; kātaraḥ — beside himself; na śaknuvan — being incapable; tam — Him; parihātum — to abandon; āturaḥ — overwhelmed; kṛcchram yayau — he experienced great pain; mūrdhani — upon his head; bhartṛ — of his master; pāduke — the slippers; bibhran — carrying; namaskṛtya — bowing down to offer obeisances; yayau — he went away; punaḥ punaḥ — again and again.

Translation
Greatly fearing separation from Him for whom he felt such indestructible affection, Uddhava was distraught, and he could not give up the Lord’s company. Finally, feeling great pain, he bowed down to the Lord again and again, placed the slippers of his master upon his head, and departed.

Text 47
ततस्तमन्तर्हृदि सन्निवेश्य
गतो महाभागवतो विशालाम् ।
यथोपदिष्टां जगदेकबन्धुना
तप: समास्थाय हरेरगाद् गतिम् ॥ ४७ ॥
tatas tam antar hṛdi sanniveśya
gato mahā-bhāgavato viśālām
yathopadiṣṭāṁ jagad-eka-bandhunā
tapaḥ samāsthāya harer agād gatim
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; tam — Him; antaḥ — within; hṛdi — his mind; sanniveśya — placing; gataḥ — going; mahā-bhāgavataḥ — the great devotee; viśālām — to Badarikāśrama; yathā — as; upadiṣṭām — described; jagat — of the universe; eka — by the only; bandhunā — friend; tapaḥ — austerities; samāsthāya — properly executing; hareḥ — of the Supreme Lord; agāt — he attained; gatim — the destination.

Translation
Thereupon, placing the Lord deeply within his heart, the great devotee Uddhava went to Badarikāśrama. By engaging there in austerities, he attained to the Lord’s personal abode, which had been described to him by the only friend of the universe, Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself.

Text 48
य एतदानन्दसमुद्रसम्भृतं
ज्ञानामृतं भागवताय भाषितम् ।
कृष्णेन योगेश्वरसेविताङ्‍‍घ्रिणा
सच्छ्रद्धयासेव्य जगद् विमुच्यते ॥ ४८ ॥
ya etad ānanda-samudra-sambhṛtaṁ
jñānāmṛtaṁ bhāgavatāya bhāṣitam
kṛṣṇena yogeśvara-sevitāṅghriṇā
sac-chraddhayāsevya jagad vimucyate
Synonyms
yaḥ — anyone who; etat — this; ānanda — of ecstasy; samudra — ocean; sambhṛtam — collected; jñāna — of knowledge; amṛtam — the nectar; bhāgavatāya — to His devotee; bhāṣitam — spoken; kṛṣṇena — by Kṛṣṇa; yoga-īśvara — by the masters of yoga; sevita — served; aṅghriṇā — whose lotus feet; sat — true; śraddhayā — with faith; āsevya — rendering service; jagat — the whole world; vimucyate — becomes liberated.

Translation
Thus Lord Kṛṣṇa, whose lotus feet are served by all great yoga masters, spoke to His devotee this nectarean knowledge, which comprises the entire ocean of spiritual bliss. Anyone within this universe who receives this narration with great faith is assured of liberation.

Text 49
भवभयमपहन्तुं ज्ञानविज्ञानसारं
निगमकृदुपजह्रे भृङ्गवद् वेदसारम् ।
अमृतमुदधितश्चापाययद् भृत्यवर्गान्
पुरुषमृषभमाद्यं कृष्णसंज्ञं नतोऽस्मि ॥ ४९ ॥
bhava-bhayam apahantuṁ jñāna-vijñāna-sāraṁ
nigama-kṛd upajahre bhṛṅga-vad veda-sāram
amṛtam udadhitaś cāpāyayad bhṛtya-vargān
puruṣam ṛṣabham ādyaṁ kṛṣṇa-saṁjñaṁ nato ’smi
Synonyms
bhava — of material life; bhayam — the fear; apahantum — in order to take away; jñāna-vijñāna — of knowledge and self-realization; sāram — the essence; nigama — of the Vedas; kṛt — the author; upajahre — delivered; bhṛṅga-vat — like a bee; veda-sāram — the essential meaning of the Vedas; amṛtam — the nectar; udadhitaḥ — from the ocean; ca — and; apāyayat — made to drink; bhṛtya-vargān — His many devotees; puruṣam — to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ṛṣabham — the greatest; ādyam — the first of all beings; kṛṣṇa-saṁjñam — named Lord Kṛṣṇa; nataḥ — bowed down; asmi — I am.

Translation
I offer my obeisances to that Supreme Personality of Godhead, the original and greatest of all beings, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He is the author of the Vedas, and just to destroy His devotees’ fear of material existence, like a bee He has collected this nectarean essence of all knowledge and self-realization. Thus He has awarded to His many devotees this nectar from the ocean of bliss, and by His mercy they have drunk it.