Text 1
श्रीराजोवाच
परस्य विष्णोरीशस्य मायिनामपि मोहिनीम् ।
मायां वेदितुमिच्छामो भगवन्तो ब्रुवन्तु न: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-rājovāca
parasya viṣṇor īśasya
māyinām api mohinīm
māyāṁ veditum icchāmo
bhagavanto bruvantu naḥ
Synonyms
śrī-rājā uvāca — the King said; parasya — of the Supreme; viṣṇoḥ — Viṣṇu; īśasya — the Lord; māyinām — for the possessors of great mystic power; api — even; mohinīm — which is bewildering; māyām — the illusory potency; veditum — to understand; icchāmaḥ — we desire; bhagavantaḥ — my lords; bruvantu — please tell this; naḥ — to us.

Translation
King Nimi said: Now we wish to learn about the illusory potency of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Viṣṇu, which bewilders even great mystics. My lords, please speak to us about this subject.

Text 2
नानुतृप्ये जुषन्युष्मद्वचोहरिकथामृतम् ।
संसारतापनिस्तप्तो मर्त्यस्तत्तापभेषजम् ॥ २ ॥
nānutṛpye juṣan yuṣmad-
vaco hari-kathāmṛtam
saṁsāra-tāpa-nistapto
martyas tat-tāpa-bheṣajam
Synonyms
na anutṛpye — I am not yet satiated; juṣan — engaging; yuṣmat — your; vacaḥ — in the words; hari-kathā — of the topics of the Supreme Lord, Hari; amṛtam — the nectar; saṁsāra — of material existence; tāpa — by the misery; nistaptaḥ — tormented; martyaḥ — a mortal human; tat-tāpa — of that pain; bheṣajam — the medical treatment.

Translation
Although I am drinking the nectar of your statements about the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, my thirst is not yet satiated. Such nectarean descriptions of the Lord and His devotees are the actual medicine for conditioned souls like me, who are tormented by the threefold miseries of material existence.

Text 3
श्रीअन्तरीक्ष उवाच
एभिर्भूतानि भूतात्मा महाभूतैर्महाभुज ।
ससर्जोच्चावचान्याद्य: स्वमात्रात्मप्रसिद्धये ॥ ३ ॥
śrī-antarīkṣa uvāca
ebhir bhūtāni bhūtātmā
mahā-bhūtair mahā-bhuja
sasarjoccāvacāny ādyaḥ
sva-mātrātma-prasiddhaye
Synonyms
śrī-antarīkṣaḥ uvāca — Śrī Antarīkṣa said; ebhiḥ — by these (material elements); bhūtāni — creatures; bhūta-ātmā — the Soul of all creation; mahā-bhūtaiḥ — by the elements of the mahat-tattva; mahā-bhuja — O mighty-armed King; sasarja — He created; ucca-avacāni — both high and low; ādyaḥ — the original person; sva — of His own parts and parcels; mātrā — the sense gratification; ātma — and the self-realization; prasiddhaye — for facilitating.

Translation
Śrī Antarīkṣa said: O mighty-armed King, by activating the material elements, the primeval Soul of all creation has sent forth all living beings in higher and lower species so that these conditioned souls can cultivate either sense gratification or ultimate liberation, according to their desire.

Text 4
एवं सृष्टानि भूतानि प्रविष्ट: पञ्चधातुभि: ।
एकधा दशधात्मानं विभजन्जुषते गुणान् ॥ ४ ॥
evaṁ sṛṣṭāni bhūtāni
praviṣṭaḥ pañca-dhātubhiḥ
ekadhā daśadhātmānaṁ
vibhajan juṣate guṇān
Synonyms
evam — in the manner just described; sṛṣṭāni — created; bhūtāni — the living beings; praviṣṭaḥ — having entered; pañca-dhātubhiḥ — (created) by the five gross elements (earth, water, fire, air and ether); ekadhā — onefold (as the overseer of the mind); daśadhā — tenfold (as the overseer of the five senses of perception and five organs of action); ātmānam — Himself; vibhajan — dividing; juṣate — He engages (He causes the individual soul to engage); guṇān — with the material modes.

Translation
The Supersoul enters the material bodies of the created beings, activates the mind and senses, and thus causes the conditioned souls to approach the three modes of material nature for sense gratification.

Text 5
गुणैर्गुणान्स भुञ्जान आत्मप्रद्योतितै: प्रभु: ।
मन्यमान इदं सृष्टमात्मानमिह सज्जते ॥ ५ ॥
guṇair guṇān sa bhuñjāna
ātma-pradyotitaiḥ prabhuḥ
manyamāna idaṁ sṛṣṭam
ātmānam iha sajjate
Synonyms
guṇaiḥ — with the modes (the senses); guṇān — the modes (the objects of the senses); saḥ — he (the individual living being); bhuñjānaḥ — enjoying; ātma — by the Supreme Soul; pradyotitaiḥ — enlivened; prabhuḥ — the master; manyamānaḥ — thinking; idam — this; sṛṣṭam — created (body); ātmānam — as his own self; iha — in this; sajjate — he becomes entangled.

Translation
The individual living being, the master of the material body, uses his material senses, which have been activated by the Supersoul, to try to enjoy sense objects composed of the three modes of nature. Thus he misidentifies the created material body with the unborn eternal self and becomes entangled in the illusory energy of the Lord.

Text 6
कर्माणि कर्मभि: कुर्वन्सनिमित्तानि देहभृत् ।
तत्तत्कर्मफलं गृह्णन्भ्रमतीह सुखेतरम् ॥ ६ ॥
karmāṇi karmabhiḥ kurvan
sa-nimittāni deha-bhṛt
tat tat karma-phalaṁ gṛhṇan
bhramatīha sukhetaram
Synonyms
karmāṇi — various kinds of fruitive work; karmabhiḥ — by the karmendriyas, the organs of action; kurvan — performing; sa-nimittāni — which are imbued with motivating desires; deha-bhṛt — the proprietor of the material body; tat tat — various; karma-phalam — results of work; gṛhṇan — accepting; bhramati — he wanders; iha — throughout this world; sukha — happiness; itaram — and otherwise.

Translation
Impelled by deep-rooted material desires, the embodied living entity engages his active sense organs in fruitive activities. He then experiences the results of his material actions by wandering throughout this world in so-called happiness and distress.

Text 7
इत्थं कर्मगतीर्गच्छन्बह्वभद्रवहा: पुमान् ।
आभूतसम्प्लवात्सर्गप्रलयावश्न‍ुतेऽवश: ॥ ७ ॥
itthaṁ karma-gatīr gacchan
bahv-abhadra-vahāḥ pumān
ābhūta-samplavāt sarga-
pralayāv aśnute ’vaśaḥ
Synonyms
ittham — in this way; karma-gatīḥ — the destinations determined by his past activities; gacchan — obtaining; bahu-abhadra — much that is inauspicious; vahāḥ — which involve; pumān — the living being; ābhūta-samplavāt — until the dissolution of the created universe; sarga-pralayau — birth and death; aśnute — he experiences; avaśaḥ — helplessly.

Translation
Thus the conditioned living entity is forced to experience repeated birth and death. Impelled by the reactions of his own activities, he helplessly wanders from one inauspicious situation to another, suffering from the moment of creation until the time of cosmic annihilation.

Text 8
धातूपप्लव आसन्ने व्यक्तं द्रव्यगुणात्मकम् ।
अनादिनिधन: कालो ह्यव्यक्तायापकर्षति ॥ ८ ॥
dhātūpaplava āsanne
vyaktaṁ dravya-guṇātmakam
anādi-nidhanaḥ kālo
hy avyaktāyāpakarṣati
Synonyms
dhātu — of the material elements; upaplave — the dissolution; āsanne — when it has become imminent; vyaktam — the manifest cosmos; dravya — gross objects; guṇa — and the subtle modes; ātmakam — consisting of; anādi — without beginning; nidhanaḥ — or end; kālaḥ — time; hi — indeed; avyaktāya — into the unmanifest; apakarṣati — draws.

Translation
When the annihilation of the material elements is imminent, the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His form of eternal time withdraws the manifest cosmos, consisting of gross and subtle features, and the entire universe vanishes into nonmanifestation.

Text 9
शतवर्षा ह्यनावृष्टिर्भविष्यत्युल्बणा भुवि ।
तत्कालोपचितोष्णार्को लोकांस्त्रीन्प्रतपिष्यति ॥ ९ ॥
śata-varṣā hy anāvṛṣṭir
bhaviṣyaty ulbaṇā bhuvi
tat-kālopacitoṣṇārko
lokāṁs trīn pratapiṣyati
Synonyms
śata-varṣā — lasting one hundred years; hi — indeed; anāvṛṣṭiḥ — drought; bhaviṣyati — there will be; ulbaṇā — terrible; bhuvi — on the earth; tat-kāla — in that duration of time; upacita — accumulated; uṣṇa — whose heat; arkaḥ — the sun; lokān — the worlds; trīn — three; pratapiṣyati — will greatly burn.

Translation
As cosmic annihilation approaches, a terrible drought takes place on earth for one hundred years. For one hundred years the heat of the sun gradually increases, and its blazing heat begins to torment the three worlds.

Text 10
पातालतलमारभ्य सङ्कर्षणमुखानल: ।
दहन्नूर्ध्वशिखो विष्वग्वर्धते वायुनेरित: ॥ १० ॥
pātāla-talam ārabhya
saṅkarṣaṇa-mukhānalaḥ
dahann ūrdhva-śikho viṣvag
vardhate vāyuneritaḥ
Synonyms
pātāla-talam — the planet Pātāla; ārabhya — beginning from; saṅkarṣaṇa-mukha — from the mouth of the Supreme Lord in His form as Saṅkarṣaṇa; analaḥ — the fire; dahan — burning; ūrdhva-śikhaḥ — its flame going upward; viṣvak — all the directions; vardhate — grows; vāyunā — by winds; īritaḥ — impelled.

Translation
Beginning from Pātālaloka, a fire grows, emanating from the mouth of Lord Saṅkarṣaṇa. Its flames shooting upward, driven by great winds, it scorches everything in all directions.

Text 11
संवर्तको मेघगणो वर्षति स्म शतं समा: ।
धाराभिर्हस्तिहस्ताभिर्लीयते सलिले विराट् ॥ ११ ॥
saṁvartako megha-gaṇo
varṣati sma śataṁ samāḥ
dhārābhir hasti-hastābhir
līyate salile virāṭ
Synonyms
saṁvartakaḥ — of annihilation; megha-gaṇaḥ — hordes of clouds; varṣati — will rain; sma — indeed; śatam samāḥ — for one hundred years; dhārābhiḥ — with torrents; hasti-hastābhiḥ — (raindrops measuring the length of) elephant trunks; līyate — will merge; salile — in the water; virāṭ — the entire universe.

Translation
Hordes of clouds called Saṁvartaka pour torrents of rain for one hundred years. Flooding down in raindrops as long as the trunk of an elephant, the deadly rainfall submerges the entire universe in water.

Text 12
ततो विराजमुत्सृज्य वैराज: पुरुषो नृप ।
अव्यक्तं विशते सूक्ष्मं निरिन्धन इवानल: ॥ १२ ॥
tato virājam utsṛjya
vairājaḥ puruṣo nṛpa
avyaktaṁ viśate sūkṣmaṁ
nirindhana ivānalaḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — then; virājam — the universe; utsṛjya — giving up (as his body); vairājaḥ puruṣaḥ — the personality of the universal form (Hiraṇyagarbha Brahmā); nṛpa — O King Nimi; avyaktam — unmanifest nature (the pradhāna); viśate — he enters; sūkṣmam — subtle; nirindhanaḥ — devoid of fuel; iva — like; analaḥ — a fire.

Translation
Then Vairāja Brahmā, the soul of the universal form, gives up his universal body, O King, and enters into the subtle unmanifest nature, like a fire that has run out of fuel.

Text 13
वायुना हृतगन्धा भू: सलिलत्वाय कल्पते ।
सलिलं तद्‍धृतरसं ज्योतिष्ट्वायोपकल्पते ॥ १३ ॥
vāyunā hṛta-gandhā bhūḥ
salilatvāya kalpate
salilaṁ tad-dhṛta-rasaṁ
jyotiṣṭvāyopakalpate
Synonyms
vāyunā — by the wind; hṛta — deprived; gandhā — of its quality of aroma; bhūḥ — the element earth; salilatvāya kalpate — becomes water; salilam — water; tat — by that (the same element, wind); hṛta-rasam — deprived of its quality of taste; jyotiṣṭvāya upakalpate — becomes fire.

Translation
Deprived of its quality of aroma by the wind, the element earth is transformed into water; and water, deprived of its taste by that same wind, is merged into fire.

Text 14
हृतरूपं तु तमसा वायौ ज्योति: प्रलीयते ।
हृतस्पर्शोऽवकाशेन वायुर्नभसि लीयते ।
कालात्मना हृतगुणं नभ आत्मनि लीयते ॥ १४ ॥
hṛta-rūpaṁ tu tamasā
vāyau jyotiḥ pralīyate
hṛta-sparśo ’vakāśena
vāyur nabhasi līyate
kālātmanā hṛta-guṇaṁ
nabha ātmani līyate
Synonyms
hṛta-rūpam — deprived of its quality of form; tu — certainly; tamasā — by darkness; vāyau — into air; jyotiḥ — fire; pralīyate — merges; hṛta-sparśaḥ — deprived of touch; avakāśena — by the element space; vāyuḥ — air; nabhasi — into space; līyate — merges; kāla-ātmanā — by the Supreme Soul in the form of time; hṛta-guṇam — deprived of its tangible quality; nabhaḥ — space; ātmani — into false ego in the mode of ignorance; līyate — merges.

Translation
Fire, deprived of its form by darkness, dissolves into the element air. When the air loses its quality of touch by the influence of space, the air merges into that space. When space is deprived of its tangible quality by the Supreme Soul in the form of time, space merges into false ego in the mode of ignorance.

Text 15
इन्द्रियाणि मनो बुद्धि: सह वैकारिकैर्नृप ।
प्रविशन्ति ह्यहङ्कारं स्वगुणैरहमात्मनि ॥ १५ ॥
indriyāṇi mano buddhiḥ
saha vaikārikair nṛpa
praviśanti hy ahaṅkāraṁ
sva-guṇair aham ātmani
Synonyms
indriyāṇi — the senses; manaḥ — the mind; buddhiḥ — intelligence; saha vaikārikaiḥ — along with the demigods, who are products of false ego in the mode of goodness; nṛpa — O King; praviśanti — they enter; hi — indeed; ahaṅkāram — the element ego; sva-guṇaiḥ — along with its qualities (goodness, passion and ignorance); aham — ego; ātmani — into the mahat-tattva.

Translation
My dear King, the material senses and intelligence merge into false ego in the mode of passion, from which they arose; and the mind, along with the demigods, merges into false ego in the mode of goodness. Then the total false ego, along with all of its qualities, merges into the mahat-tattva.

Text 16
एषा माया भगवत: सर्गस्थित्यन्तकारिणी ।
त्रिवर्णा वर्णितास्माभि: किं भूय: श्रोतुमिच्छसि ॥ १६ ॥
eṣā māyā bhagavataḥ
sarga-sthity-anta-kāriṇī
tri-varṇā varṇitāsmābhiḥ
kiṁ bhūyaḥ śrotum icchasi
Synonyms
eṣā — this; māyā — material energy; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Lord; sarga — of creation; sthiti — maintenance; anta — and dissolution (of this universe); kāriṇī — the agent; tri-varṇā — consisting of three modes (goodness, passion and ignorance); varṇitā — has been described; asmābhiḥ — by us; kim — what; bhūyaḥ — further; śrotum — to hear; icchasi — do you wish.

Translation
I have now described māyā, the illusory energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. This illusory potency, consisting of the three modes of material nature, is empowered by the Lord for the creation, maintenance and annihilation of the material universe. Now, what more do you wish to hear?

Text 17
श्रीराजोवाच
यथैतामैश्वरीं मायां दुस्तरामकृतात्मभि: ।
तरन्त्यञ्ज: स्थूलधियो महर्ष इदमुच्यताम् ॥ १७ ॥
śrī-rājovāca
yathaitām aiśvarīṁ māyāṁ
dustarām akṛtātmabhiḥ
taranty añjaḥ sthūla-dhiyo
maharṣa idam ucyatām
Synonyms
śrī-rājā uvāca — King Nimi said; yathā — how; etām — this; aiśvarīm — of the Supreme Lord; māyām — material energy; dustarām — unsurpassable; akṛta-ātmabhiḥ — by those who are not self-controlled; taranti — they may cross over; añjaḥ — easily; sthūla-dhiyaḥ — persons whose intelligence is dulled by materialistic attachments; maha-ṛṣe — O great sage; idam — this; ucyatām — please tell.

Translation
King Nimi said: O great sage, please explain how even a foolish materialist can easily cross over the illusory energy of the Supreme Lord, which is always insurmountable for those who are not self-controlled.

Text 18
श्रीप्रबुद्ध उवाच
कर्माण्यारभमाणानां दु:खहत्यै सुखाय च ।
पश्येत् पाकविपर्यासं मिथुनीचारिणां नृणाम् ॥ १८ ॥
śrī-prabuddha uvāca
karmāṇy ārabhamāṇānāṁ
duḥkha-hatyai sukhāya ca
paśyet pāka-viparyāsaṁ
mithunī-cāriṇāṁ nṛṇām
Synonyms
śrī-prabuddhaḥ uvāca — Śrī Prabuddha said; karmāṇi — fruitive activities; ārabhamāṇānām — making endeavors in; duḥkha-hatyai — for the elimination of distress; sukhāya ca — and for gaining happiness; paśyet — one should see; pāka — of the result; viparyāsam — contrary outcome; mithunī-cāriṇām — who are coupled as men and women; nṛṇām — of such persons.

Translation
Śrī Prabuddha said: Accepting the roles of male and female in human society, the conditioned souls unite in sexual relationships. Thus they constantly make material endeavors to eliminate their unhappiness and unlimitedly increase their pleasure. But one should see that they inevitably achieve exactly the opposite result. In other words, their happiness inevitably vanishes, and as they grow older their material discomfort increases.

Text 19
नित्यार्तिदेन वित्तेन दुर्लभेनात्ममृत्युना ।
गृहापत्याप्तपशुभि: का प्रीति: साधितैश्चलै: ॥ १९ ॥
nityārtidena vittena
durlabhenātma-mṛtyunā
gṛhāpatyāpta-paśubhiḥ
kā prītiḥ sādhitaiś calaiḥ
Synonyms
nitya — constantly; ārti-dena — giving pain; vittena — with wealth; durlabhena — hard to acquire; ātma-mṛtyunā — death for the self; gṛha — with one’s home; apatya — children; āpta — relatives; paśubhiḥ — and domestic animals; kā — what; prītiḥ — happiness; sādhitaiḥ — which are gained (by that wealth); calaiḥ — unsteady.

Translation
Wealth is a perpetual source of distress, it is most difficult to acquire, and it is virtual death for the soul. What satisfaction does one actually gain from his wealth? Similarly, how can one gain ultimate or permanent happiness from one’s so-called home, children, relatives and domestic animals, which are all maintained by one’s hard-earned money?

Text 20
एवं लोकं परं विद्यान्नश्वरं कर्मनिर्मितम् ।
सतुल्यातिशयध्वंसं यथा मण्डलवर्तिनाम् ॥ २० ॥
evaṁ lokaṁ paraṁ vidyān
naśvaraṁ karma-nirmitam
sa-tulyātiśaya-dhvaṁsaṁ
yathā maṇḍala-vartinām
Synonyms
evam — in this way; lokam — the world; param — next (after this life); vidyāt — one should understand as; naśvaram — impermanent; karma-nirmitam — created from fruitive work; sa-tulya — characterized by (the rivalry of) equals; atiśaya — and superiors; dhvaṁsam — and by ruination; yathā — as; maṇḍala-vartinām — (the rivalries) of minor rulers.

Translation
One cannot find permanent happiness even on the heavenly planets, which one can attain in the next life by ritualistic ceremonies and sacrifices. Even in material heaven the living entity is disturbed by rivalry with his equals and envy of those superior to him. And since one’s residence in heaven is finished with the exhaustion of pious fruitive activities, the denizens of heaven are afflicted by fear, anticipating the destruction of their heavenly life. Thus they resemble kings who, though enviously admired by ordinary citizens, are constantly harassed by enemy kings and who therefore never attain actual happiness.

Text 21
तस्माद् गुरुं प्रपद्येत जिज्ञासु: श्रेय उत्तमम् ।
शाब्दे परे च निष्णातं ब्रह्मण्युपशमाश्रयम् ॥ २१ ॥
tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta
jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam
śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ
brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; gurum — a spiritual master; prapadyeta — one should take shelter of; jijñāsuḥ — being inquisitive; śreyaḥ uttamam — about the highest good; śābde — in the Vedas; pare — in the Supreme; ca — and; niṣṇātam — perfectly knowledgeable; brahmaṇi — (in these two aspects) of the Absolute Truth; upaśama-āśrayam — fixed in detachment from material affairs.

Translation
Therefore any person who seriously desires real happiness must seek a bona fide spiritual master and take shelter of him by initiation. The qualification of the bona fide guru is that he has realized the conclusions of the scriptures by deliberation and is able to convince others of these conclusions. Such great personalities, who have taken shelter of the Supreme Godhead, leaving aside all material considerations, should be understood to be bona fide spiritual masters.

Text 22
तत्र भागवतान् धर्मान् शिक्षेद् गुर्वात्मदैवत: ।
अमाययानुवृत्त्या यैस्तुष्येदात्मात्मदोहरि: ॥ २२ ॥
tatra bhāgavatān dharmān
śikṣed gurv-ātma-daivataḥ
amāyayānuvṛttyā yais
tuṣyed ātmātma-do hariḥ
Synonyms
tatra — there (in the association of the spiritual master); bhāgavatān dharmān — the science of devotional service; śikṣet — should learn; guru-ātma-daivataḥ — he for whom the spiritual master is his very life and worshipable deity; amāyayā — without deceit; anuvṛttyā — by faithful service; yaiḥ — by which (devotional science); tuṣyet — can be satisfied; ātmā — the Supreme Soul; ātma-daḥ — who bestows His own self; hariḥ — Lord Hari.

Translation
Accepting the bona fide spiritual master as one’s life and soul and worshipable deity, the disciple should learn from him the process of pure devotional service. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, the soul of all souls, is inclined to give Himself to His pure devotees. Therefore, the disciple should learn from the spiritual master to serve the Lord without duplicity and in such a faithful and favorable way that the Supreme Lord, being satisfied, will offer Himself to the faithful disciple.

Text 23
सर्वतो मनसोऽसङ्गमादौ सङ्गं च साधुषु ।
दयां मैत्रीं प्रश्रयं च भूतेष्वद्धा यथोचितम् ॥ २३ ॥
sarvato manaso ’saṅgam
ādau saṅgaṁ ca sādhuṣu
dayāṁ maitrīṁ praśrayaṁ ca
bhūteṣv addhā yathocitam
Synonyms
sarvataḥ — everywhere; manasaḥ — of the mind; asaṅgam — detachment; ādau — in the beginning; saṅgam — association; ca — and; sādhuṣu — with saintly persons; dayām — mercy; maitrīm — friendship; praśrayam — reverence; ca — and; bhūteṣu — for all living beings; addhā — thus; yathā ucitam — as is suitable.

Translation
A sincere disciple should learn to dissociate the mind from everything material and positively cultivate association with his spiritual master and other saintly devotees. He should be merciful to those in an inferior position to him, cultivate friendship with those on an equal level and meekly serve those in a higher spiritual position. Thus he should learn to deal properly with all living beings.

Text 24
शौचं तपस्तितिक्षां च मौनं स्वाध्यायमार्जवम् ।
ब्रह्मचर्यमहिंसां च समत्वं द्वन्द्वसंज्ञयो: ॥ २४ ॥
śaucaṁ tapas titikṣāṁ ca
maunaṁ svādhyāyam ārjavam
brahmacaryam ahiṁsāṁ ca
samatvaṁ dvandva-saṁjñayoḥ
Synonyms
śaucam — cleanliness; tapaḥ — austerity; titikṣām — tolerance; ca — and; maunam — silence; svādhyāyam — study of the Vedas; ārjavam — simplicity; brahmacaryam — celibacy; ahiṁsām — nonviolence; ca — and; samatvam — equanimity; dvandva-saṁjñayoḥ — in situations perceived in terms of duality.

Translation
To serve the spiritual master the disciple should learn cleanliness, austerity, tolerance, silence, study of Vedic knowledge, simplicity, celibacy, nonviolence, and equanimity in the face of material dualities such as heat and cold, happiness and distress.

Text 25
सर्वत्रात्मेश्वरान्वीक्षां कैवल्यमनिकेतताम् ।
विविक्तचीरवसनं सन्तोषं येन केनचित् ॥ २५ ॥
sarvatrātmeśvarānvīkṣāṁ
kaivalyam aniketatām
vivikta-cīra-vasanaṁ
santoṣaṁ yena kenacit
Synonyms
sarvatra — everywhere; ātma — for one’s true self; īśvara — and for the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anvīkṣām — meditation by keeping continuously in view; kaivalyam — solitude; aniketatām — having no fixed residence; vivikta-cīra — scraps of cloth found in unfrequented places; vasanam — wearing; santoṣam — satisfaction; yena kenacit — with anything.

Translation
One should practice meditation by constantly seeing oneself to be an eternal cognizant spirit soul and seeing the Lord to be the absolute controller of everything. To increase one’s meditation, one should live in a secluded place and give up false attachment to one’s home and household paraphernalia. Giving up the decorations of the temporary material body, one should dress himself with scraps of cloth found in rejected places, or with the bark of trees. In this way one should learn to be satisfied in any material situation.

Text 26
श्रद्धां भागवते शास्त्रेऽनिन्दामन्यत्र चापि हि ।
मनोवाक्कर्मदण्डं च सत्यं शमदमावपि ॥ २६ ॥
śraddhāṁ bhāgavate śāstre
’nindām anyatra cāpi hi
mano-vāk-karma-daṇḍaṁ ca
satyaṁ śama-damāv api
Synonyms
śraddhām — faith; bhāgavate — related to the Supreme Lord; śāstre — in scripture; anindām — not blaspheming; anyatra — others; ca — also; api hi — indeed; manaḥ — of the mind; vāk — speech; karma — and one’s activities; daṇḍam — strict control; ca — and; satyam — truthfulness; śama — self-control of the mind; damau — and of the external senses; api — also.

Translation
One should have firm faith that he will achieve all success in life by following those scriptures that describe the glories of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavān. At the same time, one should avoid blaspheming other scriptures. One should rigidly control his mind, speech and bodily activities, always speak the truth, and bring the mind and senses under full control.

Texts 27-28
श्रवणं कीर्तनं ध्यानं हरेरद्भ‍ुतकर्मण: ।
जन्मकर्मगुणानां च तदर्थेऽखिलचेष्टितम् ॥ २७ ॥
इष्टं दत्तं तपो जप्तं वृत्तं यच्चात्मन: प्रियम् ।
दारान् सुतान् गृहान् प्राणान् यत्परस्मै निवेदनम् ॥ २८ ॥
śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ dhyānaṁ
harer adbhuta-karmaṇaḥ
janma-karma-guṇānāṁ ca
tad-arthe ’khila-ceṣṭitam
iṣṭaṁ dattaṁ tapo japtaṁ
vṛttaṁ yac cātmanaḥ priyam
dārān sutān gṛhān prāṇān
yat parasmai nivedanam
Synonyms
śravaṇam — hearing; kīrtanam — chanting; dhyānam — and meditation; hareḥ — of the Supreme Lord, Hari; adbhuta-karmaṇaḥ — whose activities are wonderful; janma — of His incarnations; karma — pastimes; guṇānām — transcendental qualities; ca — and; tat-arthe — for His sake; akhila — all; ceṣṭitam — endeavors; iṣṭam — whatever worship one performs; dattam — whatever charity; tapaḥ — penance; japtam — whatever mantras one chants; vṛttam — pious activities performed; yat — what; ca — also; ātmanaḥ — to oneself; priyam — dear; dārān — wife; sutān — sons; gṛhān — home; prāṇān — vital air; yat — which; parasmai — unto the Supreme; nivedanam — offering.

Translation
One should hear, glorify and meditate upon the wonderful transcendental activities of the Lord. One should specifically become absorbed in the appearance, activities, qualities and holy names of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Thus inspired, one should perform all of one’s daily activities as an offering to the Lord. One should perform sacrifice, charity and penance exclusively for the Lord’s satisfaction. Similarly, one should chant only those mantras which glorify the Supreme Personality of Godhead. And all one’s religious activities should be performed as an offering to the Lord. Whatever one finds pleasing or enjoyable he should immediately offer to the Supreme Lord, and even his wife, children, home and very life air he should offer at the lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 29
एवं कृष्णात्मनाथेषु मनुष्येषु च सौहृदम् ।
परिचर्यां चोभयत्र महत्सु नृषु साधुषु ॥ २९ ॥
evaṁ kṛṣṇātma-nātheṣu
manuṣyeṣu ca sauhṛdam
paricaryāṁ cobhayatra
mahatsu nṛṣu sādhuṣu
Synonyms
evam — thus; kṛṣṇa-ātma-nātheṣu — for those who take Lord Kṛṣṇa as the Lord of their soul; manuṣyeṣu — humans; ca — and; sauhṛdam — friendship; paricaryām — service; ca — and; ubhayatra — rendered to both (moving and nonmoving creatures, or the Lord and His devotees); mahatsu — (especially) to the pure devotees of the Lord; nṛṣu — to human beings; sādhuṣu — those who are fixed in saintly behavior.

Translation
One who desires his ultimate self-interest should cultivate friendship with those persons who have accepted Kṛṣṇa as the Lord of their life. One should further develop an attitude of service toward all living beings. One should especially try to help those in the human form of life and, among them, especially those who accept the principles of religious behavior. Among religious persons, one should especially render service to the pure devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 30
परस्परानुकथनं पावनं भगवद्यश: ।
मिथो रतिर्मिथस्तुष्टिर्निवृत्तिर्मिथ आत्मन: ॥ ३० ॥
parasparānukathanaṁ
pāvanaṁ bhagavad-yaśaḥ
mitho ratir mithas tuṣṭir
nivṛttir mitha ātmanaḥ
Synonyms
paraspara — mutual; anukathanam — discussion; pāvanam — purifying; bhagavat — of the Supreme Lord; yaśaḥ — glories; mithaḥ — mutual; ratiḥ — loving attraction; mithaḥ — mutual; tuṣṭiḥ — satisfaction; nivṛttiḥ — cessation of material miseries; mithaḥ — mutual; ātmanaḥ — of the soul.

Translation
One should learn how to associate with the devotees of the Lord by gathering with them to chant the glories of the Lord. This process is most purifying. As devotees thus develop their loving friendship, they feel mutual happiness and satisfaction. And by thus encouraging one another they are able to give up material sense gratification, which is the cause of all suffering.

Text 31
स्मरन्त: स्मारयन्तश्च मिथोऽघौघहरं हरिम् ।
भक्त्या सञ्जातया भक्त्या बिभ्रत्युत्पुलकां तनुम् ॥ ३१ ॥
smarantaḥ smārayantaś ca
mitho ’ghaugha-haraṁ harim
bhaktyā sañjātayā bhaktyā
bibhraty utpulakāṁ tanum
Synonyms
smarantaḥ — remembering; smārayantaḥ ca — and reminding; mithaḥ — one another; agha-ogha-haram — who takes away everything inauspicious from the devotee; harim — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhaktyā — by devotion; sañjātayā — awakened; bhaktyā — by devotion; bibhrati — possess; utpulakām — agitated by ecstasy; tanum — body.

Translation
The devotees of the Lord constantly discuss the glories of the Personality of Godhead among themselves. Thus they constantly remember the Lord and remind one another of His qualities and pastimes. In this way, by their devotion to the principles of bhakti-yoga, the devotees please the Personality of Godhead, who takes away from them everything inauspicious. Being purified of all impediments, the devotees awaken to pure love of Godhead, and thus, even within this world, their spiritualized bodies exhibit symptoms of transcendental ecstasy, such as standing of the bodily hairs on end.

Text 32
क्व‍‍चिद् रुदन्त्यच्युतचिन्तया क्व‍‍चि-
द्धसन्ति नन्दन्ति वदन्त्यलौकिका: ।
नृत्यन्ति गायन्त्यनुशीलयन्त्यजं
भवन्ति तूष्णीं परमेत्य निवृता: ॥ ३२ ॥
kvacid rudanty acyuta-cintayā kvacid
dhasanti nandanti vadanty alaukikāḥ
nṛtyanti gāyanty anuśīlayanty ajaṁ
bhavanti tūṣṇīṁ param etya nirvṛtāḥ
Synonyms
kvacit — sometimes; rudanti — they cry; acyuta — of the infallible Supreme Lord; cintayā — by the thought; kvacit — sometimes; hasanti — they laugh; nandanti — take great pleasure; vadanti — speak; alaukikāḥ — acting amazingly; nṛtyanti — they dance; gāyanti — sing; anuśīlayanti — and imitate; ajam — the unborn; bhavanti — they become; tūṣṇīm — silent; param — the Supreme; etya — obtaining; nirvṛtāḥ — freed from distress.

Translation
Having achieved love of Godhead, the devotees sometimes weep loudly, absorbed in thought of the infallible Lord. Sometimes they laugh, feel great pleasure, speak out loud to the Lord, dance or sing. Such devotees, having transcended material, conditioned life, sometimes imitate the unborn Supreme by acting out His pastimes. And sometimes, achieving His personal audience, they remain peaceful and silent.

Text 33
इति भागवतान् धर्मान् शिक्षन् भक्त्या तदुत्थया ।
नारायणपरो मायामञ्जस्तरति दुस्तराम् ॥ ३३ ॥
iti bhāgavatān dharmān
śikṣan bhaktyā tad-utthayā
nārāyaṇa-paro māyām
añjas tarati dustarām
Synonyms
iti — thus; bhāgavatān dharmān — the science of devotional service; śikṣan — studying; bhaktyā — by devotion; tat-utthayā — generated by it; nārāyaṇa-paraḥ — completely devoted to the Supreme Lord, Nārāyaṇa; māyām — the illusory energy; añjaḥ — easily; tarati — crosses beyond; dustarām — impossible to cross.

Translation
Thus learning the science of devotional service and practically engaging in the devotional service of the Lord, the devotee comes to the stage of love of Godhead. And by complete devotion to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, the devotee easily crosses over the illusory energy, māyā, which is extremely difficult to cross.

Text 34
श्रीराजोवाच
नारायणाभिधानस्य ब्रह्मण: परमात्मन: ।
निष्ठामर्हथ नो वक्तुं यूयं हि ब्रह्मवित्तमा: ॥ ३४ ॥
śrī-rājovāca
nārāyaṇābhidhānasya
brahmaṇaḥ paramātmanaḥ
niṣṭhām arhatha no vaktuṁ
yūyaṁ hi brahma-vittamāḥ
Synonyms
śrī-rājā uvāca — the King said; nārāyaṇa-abhidhānasya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, named Nārāyaṇa; brahmaṇaḥ — of the Absolute Truth; parama-ātmanaḥ — of the Supersoul; niṣṭhām — the transcendental situation; arhatha — you may kindly; naḥ — to us; vaktum — speak; yūyam — all of you; hi — indeed; brahma-vit-tamāḥ — the most expert knowers of the Supreme.

Translation
King Nimi inquired: Please explain to me the transcendental situation of the Supreme Lord, Nārāyaṇa, who is Himself the Absolute Truth and the Supersoul of everyone. You can explain this to me, because you are all most expert in transcendental knowledge.

Text 35
श्रीपिप्पलायन उवाच
स्थित्युद्भ‍वप्रलयहेतुरहेतुरस्य
यत् स्वप्नजागरसुषुप्तिषु सद् बहिश्च ।
देहेन्द्रियासुहृदयानि चरन्ति येन
सञ्जीवितानि तदवेहि परं नरेन्द्र ॥ ३५ ॥
śrī-pippalāyana uvāca
sthity-udbhava-pralaya-hetur ahetur asya
yat svapna-jāgara-suṣuptiṣu sad bahiś ca
dehendriyāsu-hṛdayāni caranti yena
sañjīvitāni tad avehi paraṁ narendra
Synonyms
śrī-pippalāyanaḥ uvāca — Śrī Pippalāyana said; sthiti — of maintenance; udbhava — of the creation; pralaya — and destruction; hetuḥ — the cause; ahetuḥ — itself without cause; asya — of this material universe; yat — which; svapna — in dream; jāgara — wakefulness; suṣuptiṣu — in deep sleep or unconsciousness; sat — which exists; bahiḥ ca — and external to them as well; deha — of the material bodies of the living entities; indriya — the senses; āsu — life airs; hṛdayāni — and minds; caranti — act; yena — by which; sañjīvitāni — given life; tat — that; avehi — please know; param — to be the Supreme; nara-indra — O King.

Translation
Śrī Pippalāyana said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the cause of the creation, maintenance and destruction of this universe, yet He has no prior cause. He pervades the various states of wakefulness, dreaming and unconscious deep sleep and also exists beyond them. By entering the body of every living being as the Supersoul, He enlivens the body, senses, life airs and mental activities, and thus all the subtle and gross organs of the body begin their functions. My dear King, know that Personality of Godhead to be the Supreme.

Text 36
नैतन्मनो विशति वागुत चक्षुरात्मा
प्राणेन्द्रियाणि च यथानलमर्चिष: स्वा: ।
शब्दोऽपि बोधकनिषेधतयात्ममूल-
मर्थोक्तमाह यद‍ृते न निषेधसिद्धि: ॥ ३६ ॥
naitan mano viśati vāg uta cakṣur ātmā
prāṇendriyāṇi ca yathānalam arciṣaḥ svāḥ
śabdo ’pi bodhaka-niṣedhatayātma-mūlam
arthoktam āha yad-ṛte na niṣedha-siddhiḥ
Synonyms
na — cannot; etat — this (Supreme Truth); manaḥ — the mind; viśati — enter; vāk — the function of speech; uta — nor; cakṣuḥ — sight; ātmā — intelligence; prāṇa — the subtle airs supporting life; indriyāṇi — the senses; ca — or; yathā — just as; analam — a fire; arciṣaḥ — its sparks; svāḥ — own; śabdaḥ — the authoritative sound of the Vedas; api — even; bodhaka — being able to indicate by verbal reference; niṣedhatayā — because of denying such; ātma — of the Supreme Soul; mūlam — basic evidence; artha-uktam — expressed indirectly; āha — does express; yat-ṛte — without which (Supreme); na — there is not; niṣedha — of the negative statements of scripture; siddhiḥ — ultimate purpose.

Translation
Neither the mind nor the faculties of speech, sight, intelligence, the life air or any of the senses are capable of penetrating that Supreme Truth, any more than small sparks can affect the original fire from which they are generated. Not even the authoritative language of the Vedas can perfectly describe the Supreme Truth, since the Vedas themselves disclaim the possibility that the Truth can be expressed by words. But through indirect reference the Vedic sound does serve as evidence of the Supreme Truth, since without the existence of that Supreme Truth the various restrictions found in the Vedas would have no ultimate purpose.

Text 37
सत्त्वं रजस्तम इति त्रिवृदेकमादौ
सूत्रं महानहमिति प्रवदन्ति जीवम् ।
ज्ञानक्रियार्थफलरूपतयोरुशक्ति
ब्रह्मैव भाति सदसच्च तयो: परं यत् ॥ ३७ ॥
sattvaṁ rajas tama iti tri-vṛd ekam ādau
sūtraṁ mahān aham iti pravadanti jīvam
jñāna-kriyārtha-phala-rūpatayoru-śakti
brahmaiva bhāti sad asac ca tayoḥ paraṁ yat
Synonyms
sattvam — goodness; rajaḥ — passion; tamaḥ — and ignorance; iti — thus known; tri-vṛt — threefold; ekam — one; ādau — in the beginning, before creation; sūtram — the power to act; mahān — the power of consciousness; aham — and the false ego; iti — thus; pravadanti — is called; jīvam — (false ego, which covers) the living entity; jñāna — the demigods as the embodiment of knowledge; kriyā — the senses; artha — sense objects; phala — and fruitive results such as happiness and distress; rūpatayā — assuming the forms; uru-śakti — possessing great varieties of energy; brahma eva — the Supreme alone; bhāti — is manifest; sat asat ca — as both gross objects and their subtle causes; tayoḥ — both; param — beyond; yat — which is.

Translation
Originally one, the Absolute, Brahman, comes to be known as threefold, manifesting itself as the three modes of material nature — goodness, passion and ignorance. Brahman further expands its potency, and thus the power to act and the power of consciousness become manifest, along with the false ego, which covers the identity of the conditioned living being. Thus, by the expansion of the multipotencies of the Absolute, the demigods, as the embodiment of knowledge, become manifest, along with the material senses, their objects, and the results of material activity, namely happiness and distress. In this way the manifestation of the material world takes place as the subtle cause and as the material effect visible in the appearance of gross material objects. Brahman, which is the source of all subtle and gross manifestations, is simultaneously transcendental to them, being absolute.

Text 38
नात्मा जजान न मरिष्यति नैधतेऽसौ
न क्षीयते सवनविद् व्यभिचारिणां हि ।
सर्वत्र शश्वदनपाय्युपलब्धिमात्रं
प्राणो यथेन्द्रियबलेन विकल्पितं सत् ॥ ३८ ॥
nātmā jajāna na mariṣyati naidhate ’sau
na kṣīyate savana-vid vyabhicāriṇāṁ hi
sarvatra śaśvad anapāyy upalabdhi-mātraṁ
prāṇo yathendriya-balena vikalpitaṁ sat
Synonyms
na — never; ātmā — the soul; jajāna — was born; na — never; mariṣyati — will die; na — does not; edhate — grow; asau — this; na — does not; kṣīyate — become diminished; savana-vit — the knower of these phases of time; vyabhicāriṇām — as they occur in other, changing beings; hi — indeed; sarvatra — everywhere; śaśvat — constantly; anapāyi — never disappearing; upalabdhi-mātram — pure consciousness; prāṇaḥ yathā — just like the life air within the body; indriya-balena — by the force of the senses; vikalpitam — imagined as divided; sat — becoming.

Translation
Brahman, the eternal soul, was never born and will never die, nor does it grow or decay. That spiritual soul is actually the knower of the youth, middle age and death of the material body. Thus the soul can be understood to be pure consciousness, existing everywhere at all times and never being destroyed. Just as the life air within the body, although one, becomes manifest as many in contact with the various material senses, the one soul appears to assume various material designations in contact with the material body.

Text 39
अण्डेषु पेशिषु तरुष्वविनिश्चितेषु
प्राणो हि जीवमुपधावति तत्र तत्र ।
सन्ने यदिन्द्रियगणेऽहमि च प्रसुप्ते
कूटस्थ आशयमृते तदनुस्मृतिर्न: ॥ ३९ ॥
aṇḍeṣu peśiṣu taruṣv aviniściteṣu
prāṇo hi jīvam upadhāvati tatra tatra
sanne yad indriya-gaṇe ’hami ca prasupte
kūṭa-stha āśayam ṛte tad-anusmṛtir naḥ
Synonyms
aṇḍeṣu — in (species of life born from) eggs; peśiṣu — in embryos; taruṣu — in plants; aviniściteṣu — in species of indeterminate origin (born from perspiration); prāṇaḥ — the vital air; hi — indeed; jīvam — the soul; upadhāvati — follows; tatra tatra — from one species to another; sanne — they are merged; yat — when; indriya-gaṇe — all the senses; ahami — the false ego; ca — also; prasupte — in deep sleep; kūṭa-sthaḥ — unchanging; āśayam — the subtle covering of contaminated consciousness, the liṅga-śarīra; ṛte — without; tat — of that; anusmṛtiḥ — (there is) subsequent remembrance; naḥ — our.

Translation
The spirit soul is born in many different species of life within the material world. Some species are born from eggs, others from embryos, others from the seeds of plants and trees, and others from perspiration. But in all species of life the prāṇa, or vital air, remains unchanging and follows the spirit soul from one body to another. Similarly, the spirit soul is eternally the same despite its material condition of life. We have practical experience of this. When we are absorbed in deep sleep without dreaming, the material senses become inactive, and even the mind and false ego are merged into a dormant condition. But although the senses, mind and false ego are inactive, one remembers upon waking that he, the soul, was peacefully sleeping.

Text 40
यर्ह्यब्जनाभचरणैषणयोरुभक्त्या
चेतोमलानि विधमेद् गुणकर्मजानि ।
तस्मिन् विशुद्ध उपलभ्यत आत्मतत्त्वं
साक्षाद् यथामलद‍ृशो: सवितृप्रकाश: ॥ ४० ॥
yarhy abja-nābha-caraṇaiṣaṇayoru-bhaktyā
ceto-malāni vidhamed guṇa-karma-jāni
tasmin viśuddha upalabhyata ātma-tattvaṁ
śākṣād yathāmala-dṛśoḥ savitṛ-prakāśaḥ
Synonyms
yarhi — when; abja-nābha — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose navel is shaped like a lotus; caraṇa — the feet; eṣaṇayā — desiring (only); uru-bhaktyā — by powerful devotional service; cetaḥ — of the heart; malāni — the dirt; vidhamet — cleanses away; guṇa-karma-jāni — generated from the modes of nature and material activities in those modes; tasmin — in that; viśuddhe — completely purified (heart); upalabhyate — is perceived; ātma-tattvam — the true nature of the self; sākṣāt — directly; yathā — just as; amala-dṛśoḥ — of pure eyes; savitṛ — of the sun; prakāśaḥ — the manifestation.

Translation
When one seriously engages in the devotional service of the Personality of Godhead, fixing the Lord’s lotus feet within one’s heart as the only goal of life, one can destroy the innumerable impure desires lodged within the heart as a result of one’s previous fruitive work within the three modes of material nature. When the heart is thus purified one can directly perceive both the Supreme Lord and one’s self as transcendental entities. Thus one becomes perfect in spiritual understanding through direct experience, just as one can directly experience the sunshine through normal, healthy vision.

Text 41
श्रीराजोवाच
कर्मयोगं वदत न: पुरुषो येन संस्कृत: ।
विधूयेहाशु कर्माणि नैष्कर्म्यं विन्दते परम् ॥ ४१ ॥
śrī-rājovāca
karma-yogaṁ vadata naḥ
puruṣo yena saṁskṛtaḥ
vidhūyehāśu karmāṇi
naiṣkarmyaṁ vindate param
Synonyms
śrī-rājā uvāca — the King said; karma-yogam — the practice of dovetailing one’s work with the Supreme; vadata — please tell; naḥ — us; puruṣaḥ — a person; yena — by which; saṁskṛtaḥ — being refined; vidhūya — getting rid of; iha — in this life; āśu — quickly; karmāṇi — materialistic activities; naiṣkarmyam — freedom from fruitive reactions; vindate — enjoys; param — transcendental.

Translation
King Nimi said: O great sages, please speak to us about the process of karma-yoga. Purified by this process of dedicating one’s practical work to the Supreme, a person can very quickly free himself from all material activities, even in this life, and thus enjoy pure life on the transcendental platform.

Text 42
एवं प्रश्न‍मृषीन् पूर्वमपृच्छं पितुरन्तिके ।
नाब्रुवन् ब्रह्मण: पुत्रास्तत्र कारणमुच्यताम् ॥ ४२ ॥
evaṁ praśnam ṛṣīn pūrvam
apṛcchaṁ pitur antike
nābruvan brahmaṇaḥ putrās
tatra kāraṇam ucyatām
Synonyms
evam — similar; praśnam — a question; ṛṣīn — to the sages; pūrvam — previously; apṛccham — I asked; pituḥ — of my father (Ikṣvāku Mahārāja); antike — in front; na abruvan — they did not speak; brahmaṇaḥ — of Lord Brahmā; putrāḥ — the sons; tatra — of that; kāraṇam — the reason; ucyatām — please say.

Translation
Once in the past, in the presence of my father, Mahārāja Ikṣvāku, I placed a similar question before four great sages who were sons of Lord Brahmā. But they did not answer my question. Please explain the reason for this.

Text 43
श्रीआविर्होत्र उवाच
कर्माकर्मविकर्मेति वेदवादो न लौकिक: ।
वेदस्य चेश्वरात्मत्वात् तत्र मुह्यन्ति सूरय: ॥ ४३ ॥
śrī-āvirhotra uvāca
karmākarma vikarmeti
veda-vādo na laukikaḥ
vedasya ceśvarātmatvāt
tatra muhyanti sūrayaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-āvirhotraḥ uvāca — the sage Āvirhotra said; karma — the execution of duties prescribed by scripture; akarma — failure to perform such duties; vikarma — engagement in forbidden activities; iti — thus; veda-vādaḥ — subject matter understood through the Vedas; na — not; laukikaḥ — mundane; vedasya — of the vedas; ca — and; īśvara-ātmatvāt — because of coming from the Personality of Godhead Himself; tatra — in this matter; muhyanti — become confused; sūrayaḥ — (even) great scholarly authorities.

Translation
Śrī Āvirhotra replied: Prescribed duties, nonperformance of such duties, and forbidden activities are topics one can properly understand through authorized study of the Vedic literature. This difficult subject matter can never be understood by mundane speculation. The authorized Vedic literature is the sound incarnation of the Personality of Godhead Himself, and thus Vedic knowledge is perfect. Even the greatest learned scholars are bewildered in their attempts to understand the science of action if they neglect the authority of Vedic knowledge.

Text 44
परोक्षवादो वेदोऽयं बालानामनुशासनम् ।
कर्ममोक्षाय कर्माणि विधत्ते ह्यगदं यथा ॥ ४४ ॥
parokṣa-vādo vedo ’yaṁ
bālānām anuśāsanam
karma-mokṣāya karmāṇi
vidhatte hy agadaṁ yathā
Synonyms
parokṣa-vādaḥ — describing a situation as something else in order to disguise its real nature; vedaḥ — Vedas; ayam — these; bālānām — of childlike persons; anuśāsanam — guidance; karma-mokṣāya — for liberation from material activities; karmāṇi — material activities; vidhatte — prescribe; hi — indeed; agadam — a medicine; yathā — just as.

Translation
Childish and foolish people are attached to materialistic, fruitive activities, although the actual goal of life is to become free from such activities. Therefore, the Vedic injunctions indirectly lead one to the path of ultimate liberation by first prescribing fruitive religious activities, just as a father promises his child candy so that the child will take his medicine.

Text 45
नाचरेद् यस्तु वेदोक्तं स्वयमज्ञोऽजितेन्द्रिय: ।
विकर्मणा ह्यधर्मेण मृत्योर्मृत्युमुपैति स: ॥ ४५ ॥
nācared yas tu vedoktaṁ
svayam ajño ’jitendriyaḥ
vikarmaṇā hy adharmeṇa
mṛtyor mṛtyum upaiti saḥ
Synonyms
na ācaret — does not perform; yaḥ — who; tu — but; veda-uktam — what is prescribed in the Vedas; svayam — himself; ajñaḥ — ignorant; ajita-indriyaḥ — not having learned to control his senses; vikarmaṇā — by not executing scriptural duty; hi — indeed; adharmeṇa — by his irreligion; mṛtyoḥ mṛtyum — death after death; upaiti — achieves; saḥ — he.

Translation
If an ignorant person who has not conquered the material senses does not adhere to the Vedic injunctions, certainly he will engage in sinful and irreligious activities. Thus his reward will be repeated birth and death.

Text 46
वेदोक्तमेव कुर्वाणो नि:सङ्गोऽर्पितमीश्वरे ।
नैष्कर्म्यां लभते सिद्धिं रोचनार्था फलश्रुति: ॥ ४६ ॥
vedoktam eva kurvāṇo
niḥsaṅgo ’rpitam īśvare
naiṣkarmyaṁ labhate siddhiṁ
rocanārthā phala-śrutiḥ
Synonyms
veda-uktam — the regulated activities described by the Vedas; eva — certainly; kurvāṇaḥ — performing; nihsaṅgaḥ — without attachment; arpitam — offered; īśvare — to the Supreme Lord; naiṣkarmyam — of liberation from material work and its reactions; labhate — one achieves; siddhim — the perfection; rocana-arthā — for the purpose of giving encouragement; phala-śrutiḥ — the promises of material results given in the Vedic scriptures.

Translation
By executing without attachment the regulated activities prescribed in the Vedas, offering the results of such work to the Supreme Lord, one attains the perfection of freedom from the bondage of material work. The material fruitive results offered in the revealed scriptures are not the actual goal of Vedic knowledge, but are meant for stimulating the interest of the performer.

Text 47
य आशु हृदयग्रन्थिं निर्जिहीर्षु: परात्मन: ।
विधिनोपचरेद् देवं तन्त्रोक्तेन च केशवम् ॥ ४७ ॥
ya āśu hṛdaya-granthiṁ
nirjihīrṣuḥ parātmanaḥ
vidhinopacared devaṁ
tantroktena ca keśavam
Synonyms
yaḥ — one who; āśu — quickly; hṛdaya-granthim — the knot of the heart (false identification with the material body); nirjihīrṣuḥ — desirous of cutting; parātmanaḥ — of the transcendental soul; vidhinā — with the regulations; upacaret — he should worship; devam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tantra-uktena — which are described by the tantras (the supplementary Vedic literatures that give detailed instructions for spiritual practice); ca — as well (in addition to those regulations which are directly vedoktam); keśavam — Lord Keśava.

Translation
One who desires to quickly cut the knot of false ego, which binds the spirit soul, should worship the Supreme Lord, Keśava, by the regulations found in Vedic literatures such as the tantras.

Text 48
लब्ध्वानुग्रह आचार्यात् तेन सन्दर्शितागम: ।
महापुरुषमभ्यर्चेन्मूर्त्याभिमतयात्मन: ॥ ४८ ॥
labdhvānugraha ācāryāt
tena sandarśitāgamaḥ
mahā-puruṣam abhyarcen
mūrtyābhimatayātmanaḥ
Synonyms
labdhvā — having obtained; anugrahaḥ — mercy; ācāryāt — from the spiritual master; tena — by him; sandarśita — being shown; āgamaḥ — (the process of worship given by) the vaiṣṇava-tantras; mahā-puruṣam — the Supreme Person; abhyarcet — the disciple should worship; mūrtyā — in the particular personal form; abhimatayā — which is preferred; ātmanaḥ — by himself.

Translation
Having obtained the mercy of his spiritual master, who reveals to the disciple the injunctions of Vedic scriptures, the devotee should worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the particular personal form of the Lord the devotee finds most attractive.

Text 49
शुचि: सम्मुखमासीन: प्राणसंयमनादिभि: ।
पिण्डं विशोध्य सन्न्यासकृतरक्षोऽर्चयेद्धरिम् ॥ ४९ ॥
śuciḥ sammukham āsīnaḥ
prāṇa-saṁyamanādibhiḥ
piṇḍaṁ viśodhya sannyāsa-
kṛta-rakṣo ’rcayed dharim
Synonyms
śuciḥ — clean; sammukham — facing (the Deity); āsīnaḥ — thus seated; prāṇa-saṁyamana-ādibhiḥ — by prāṇāyāma (breathing exercises) and other means; piṇḍam — the gross body; viśodhya — purifying; sannyāsa — by placing transcendental marks of tilaka on various places of the body; kṛta-rakṣaḥ — in this way invoking the Lord’s protection; arcayet — one should worship; harim — Lord Hari.

Translation
After cleansing oneself, purifying the body by prāṇāyāma, bhūta-śuddhi and other processes, and marking the body with sacred tilaka for protection, one should sit in front of the Deity and worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Texts 50-51
अर्चादौ हृदये चापि यथालब्धोपचारकै: ।
द्रव्यक्षित्यात्मलिङ्गानि निष्पाद्य प्रोक्ष्य चासनम् ॥ ५० ॥
पाद्यादीनुपकल्प्याथ सन्निधाप्य समाहित: ।
हृदादिभि: कृतन्यासो मूलमन्त्रेण चार्चयेत् ॥ ५१ ॥
arcādau hṛdaye cāpi
yathā-labdhopacārakaiḥ
dravya-kṣity-ātma-liṅgāni
niṣpādya prokṣya cāsanam
pādyādīn upakalpyātha
sannidhāpya samāhitaḥ
hṛd-ādibhiḥ kṛta-nyāso
mūla-mantreṇa cārcayet
Synonyms
arcā-ādau — in the form of the Deity and His paraphernalia; hṛdaye — in the heart; ca api — also; yathā-labdha — whatever is available; upacārakaiḥ — with ingredients of worship; dravya — the physical items to be offered; kṣiti — the ground; ātma — one’s own mind; liṅgāni — and the Deity; niṣpādya — preparing; prokṣya — sprinkling with water for purification; ca — and; āsanam — one’s seat; pādya-ādīn — the water for bathing the Deity’s feet and other offerings; upakalpya — getting ready; atha — then; sannidhāpya — placing the Deity in His proper place; samāhitaḥ — concentrating one’s attention; hṛt-ādibhiḥ — on the Deity’s heart and other places of the body; kṛta-nyāsaḥ — having drawn sacred marks; mūla-mantreṇa — with the appropriate basic mantra for worshiping the particular Deity; ca — and; arcayet — one should offer worship.

Translation
The devotee should gather whatever ingredients for worshiping the Deity are available, make ready the offerings, the ground, his mind and the Deity, sprinkle his sitting place with water for purification and prepare the bathing water and other paraphernalia. The devotee should then place the Deity in His proper place, both physically and within his own mind, concentrate his attention, and mark the Deity’s heart and other parts of the body with tilaka. Then he should offer worship with the appropriate mantra.

Texts 52-53
साङ्गोपाङ्गां सपार्षदां तां तां मूर्तिं स्वमन्त्रत: ।
पाद्यार्घ्याचमनीयाद्यै: स्न‍ानवासोविभूषणै: ॥ ५२ ॥
गन्धमाल्याक्षतस्रग्भिर्धूपदीपोपहारकै: ।
साङ्गंसम्पूज्य विधिवत् स्तवै: स्तुत्वा नमेद्धरिम् ॥ ५३ ॥
sāṅgopāṅgāṁ sa-pārṣadāṁ
tāṁ tāṁ mūrtiṁ sva-mantrataḥ
pādyārghyācamanīyādyaiḥ
snāna-vāso-vibhūṣaṇaiḥ
gandha-mālyākṣata-sragbhir
dhūpa-dīpopahārakaiḥ
sāṅgam sampūjya vidhivat
stavaiḥ stutvā named dharim
Synonyms
sa-aṅga — including the limbs of His transcendental body; upāṅgām — and His special bodily features such as His Sudarśana disc and other weapons; sa-pārṣadām — along with His personal associates; tām tām — each particular; mūrtim — Deity; sva-mantrataḥ — by the Deity’s own mantra; pādya — with water for bathing the feet; arghya — scented water for greeting; ācamanīya — water for washing the mouth; ādyaiḥ — and so on; snāna — water for bathing; vāsaḥ — fine clothing; vibhūṣaṇaiḥ — ornaments; gandha — with fragrances; mālya — necklaces; akṣata — unbroken barleycorns; sragbhiḥ — and flower garlands; dhūpa — with incense; dīpa — and lamps; upahārakaiḥ — such offerings; sa-aṅgam — in all aspects; sampūjya — completing the worship; vidhivat — in accordance with the prescribed regulations; stavaiḥ stutvā — honoring the Deity by offering prayers; namet — one should bow down; harim — to the Lord.

Translation
One should worship the Deity along with each of the limbs of His transcendental body, His weapons such as the Sudarśana cakra, His other bodily features and His personal associates. One should worship each of these transcendental aspects of the Lord by its own mantra and with offerings of water to wash the feet, scented water, water to wash the mouth, water for bathing, fine clothing and ornaments, fragrant oils, valuable necklaces, unbroken barleycorns, flower garlands, incense and lamps. Having thus completed the worship in all its aspects in accordance with the prescribed regulations, one should then honor the Deity of Lord Hari with prayers and offer obeisances to Him by bowing down.

Text 54
आत्मानम् तन्मयं ध्यायन् मूर्तिं सम्पूजयेद्धरे: ।
शेषामाधाय शिरसा स्वधाम्न्युद्वास्य सत्कृतम् ॥ ५४ ॥
ātmānam tan-mayam dhyāyan
mūrtiṁ sampūjayed dhareḥ
śeṣām ādhāya śirasā
sva-dhāmny udvāsya sat-kṛtam
Synonyms
ātmānam — oneself; tat — in the Lord; mayam — absorbed; dhyāyan — so meditating; mūrtim — the personal form; sampūjayet — should fully worship; hareḥ — of Lord Hari; śeṣām — the remnants of worship; ādhāya — taking; śirasā — upon one’s head; sva-dhāmni — in His place; udvāsya — putting; sat-kṛtam — respectfully.

Translation
The worshiper should become fully absorbed in meditating upon himself as an eternal servant of the Lord and should thus perfectly worship the Deity, remembering that the Deity is also situated within his heart. Then he should take the remnants of the Deity’s paraphernalia, such as flower garlands, upon his head and respectfully put the Deity back in His own place, thus concluding the worship.

Text 55
एवमग्‍न्यर्कतोयादावतिथौ हृदये च य: ।
यजतीश्वरमात्मानमचिरान्मुच्यते हि स: ॥ ५५ ॥
evam agny-arka-toyādāv
atithau hṛdaye ca yaḥ
yajatīśvaram ātmānam
acirān mucyate hi saḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; agni — in fire; arka — the sun; toya — water; ādau — and so on; atithau — in the guest at ones’s home; hṛdaye — in one’s heart; ca — also; yaḥ — who; yajati — worships; īśvaram — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ātmānam — the Supreme Soul; acirāt — without delay; mucyate — becomes liberated; hi — indeed; saḥ — he.

Translation
Thus the worshiper of the Supreme Lord should recognize that the Personality of Godhead is all-pervading and should worship Him through His presence in fire, the sun, water and other elements, in the heart of the guest one receives in one’s home, and also in one’s own heart. In this way the worshiper will very soon achieve liberation.