Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
अथ ब्रह्मात्मजै: देवै: प्रजेशैरावृतोऽभ्यगात् ।
भवश्च भूतभव्येशो ययौ भूतगणैर्वृत: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
atha brahmātma-jaiḥ devaiḥ
prajeśair āvṛto ’bhyagāt
bhavaś ca bhūta-bhavyeśo
yayau bhūta-gaṇair vṛtaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; atha — then; brahmā — Lord Brahmā; ātma-jaiḥ — by his sons (headed by Sanaka); devaiḥ — by the demigods; prajā-īśaiḥ — and by the progenitors of universal population (headed by Marīci); āvṛtaḥ — surrounded; abhyagāt — went (to Dvārakā); bhavaḥ — Lord Śiva; ca — also; bhūta — to all living beings; bhavya-īśaḥ — the bestower of auspiciousness; yayau — went; bhūta gaṇaiḥ — by the hordes of ghostly creatures; vṛtaḥ — surrounded.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Lord Brahmā then set off for Dvārakā, accompanied by his own sons as well as by the demigods and the great Prajāpatis. Lord Śiva, the bestower of auspiciousness to all living beings, also went, surrounded by many ghostly creatures.

Texts 2-4
इन्द्रो मरुद्भ‍िर्भगवानादित्या वसवोऽश्विनौ ।
ऋभवोऽङ्गिरसो रुद्रा विश्वे साध्याश्च देवता: ॥ २ ॥
गन्धर्वाप्सरसो नागा: सिद्धचारणगुह्यका: ।
ऋषय: पितरश्चैव सविद्याधरकिन्नरा: ॥ ३ ॥
द्वारकामुपसञ्जग्मु: सर्वे कृष्णदिद‍ृक्षव: ।
वपुषा येन भगवान् नरलोकमनोरम: ।
यशो वितेने लोकेषु सर्वलोकमलापहम् ॥ ४ ॥
indro marudbhir bhagavān
ādityā vasavo ’śvinau
ṛbhavo ’ṅgiraso rudrā
viśve sādhyāś ca devatāḥ
gandharvāpsaraso nāgāḥ
siddha-cāraṇa-guhyakāḥ
ṛṣayaḥ pitaraś caiva
sa-vidyādhara-kinnarāḥ
dvārakām upasañjagmuḥ
sarve kṛṣṇa-didṛkṣavaḥ
vapuṣā yena bhagavān
nara-loka-manoramaḥ
yaśo vitene lokeṣu
sarva-loka-malāpaham
Synonyms
indraḥ — Lord Indra; marudbhiḥ — along with the wind-gods; bhagavān — the powerful controller; ādityāḥ — the twelve principal demigods, all sons of Aditi; vasavaḥ — the eight Vasu demigods; aśvinau — the two Aśvinī-kumāras; ṛbhavaḥ — the Ṛbhus; aṅgirasaḥ — the descendants of Aṅgirā Muni; rudrāḥ — the expansions of Lord Śiva; viśve sādhyāḥ — known as Viśvedevas and Sādhyas; ca — also; devatāḥ — other demigods; gandharva-apsarasaḥ — the heavenly musicians and dancing girls; nāgāḥ — the celestial snakes; siddha-cāraṇa — the Siddhas and Cāraṇas; guhyakāḥ — and the hobgoblins; ṛṣayaḥ — the great sages; pitaraḥ — the departed forefathers; ca — also; eva — indeed; sa — along with; vidyādhara-kinnarāḥ — the Vidyādharas and Kinnaras; dvārakām — to Dvārakā; upasañjagmuḥ — they arrived together; sarve — all of them; kṛṣṇa-didṛkṣavaḥ — eager to see Lord Kṛṣṇa; vapuṣā — by the transcendental body; yena — which; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nara-loka — to all human society; manaḥ-ramaḥ — enchanting; yaśaḥ — His fame; vitene — He expanded; lokeṣu — throughout all the universe; sarva-loka — of all planets; mala — the impurities; apaham — which eradicates.

Translation
The powerful Lord Indra, along with the Maruts, Ādityas, Vasus, Aśvinīs, Ṛbhus, Aṅgirās, Rudras, Viśvedevas, Sādhyas, Gandharvas, Apsarās, Nāgas, Siddhas, Cāraṇas, Guhyakas, the great sages and forefathers and the Vidyādharas and Kinnaras, arrived at the city of Dvārakā, hoping to see Lord Kṛṣṇa. By His transcendental form, Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord, enchanted all human beings and spread His own fame throughout the worlds. The Lord’s glories destroy all contamination within the universe.

Text 5
तस्यां विभ्राजमानायां समृद्धायां महर्द्धिभि: ।
व्यचक्षतावितृप्ताक्षा: कृष्णमद्भ‍ुतदर्शनम् ॥ ५ ॥
tasyāṁ vibhrājamānāyāṁ
samṛddhāyāṁ maharddhibhiḥ
vyacakṣatāvitṛptākṣāḥ
kṛṣṇam adbhuta-darśanam
Synonyms
tasyām — in that (Dvārakā); vibhrājamānāyām — resplendent; samṛddhāyām — very rich; mahā-ṛddhibhiḥ — with great opulences; vyacakṣata — they saw; avitṛpta — unsatisfied; akṣāḥ — whose eyes; kṛṣṇam — Lord Kṛṣṇa; adbhuta-darśanam — wonderful to behold.

Translation
In that resplendent city of Dvārakā, rich with all superior opulences, the demigods beheld with unsatiated eyes the wonderful form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Text 6
स्वर्गोद्यानोपगैर्माल्यैश्छादयन्तो यदूत्तमम् ।
गीर्भिश्चित्रपदार्थाभिस्तुष्टुवुर्जगदीश्वरम् ॥ ६ ॥
svargodyānopagair mālyaiś
chādayanto yudūttamam
gīrbhiś citra-padārthābhis
tuṣṭuvur jagad-īśvaram
Synonyms
svarga-udyāna — from the gardens of the heavenly planets of the demigods; upagaiḥ — obtained; mālyaiḥ — with flower garlands; chādayantaḥ — covering; yadu-uttamam — the best of the Yadus; gīrbhiḥ — with verbal expressions; citra — charming; pada-arthābhiḥ — the words and ideas comprising which; tuṣṭuvuḥ — they praised; jagat-īśvaram — the Lord of the universe.

Translation
The demigods covered the Supreme Lord of the universe with flower garlands brought from the gardens of heaven. Then they praised Him, the best of the Yadu dynasty, with statements containing charming words and ideas.

Text 7
श्रीदेवा ऊचु:
नता: स्म ते नाथ पदारविन्दं
बुद्धीन्द्रियप्राणमनोवचोभि: ।
यच्चिन्त्यतेऽन्तर्हृदि भावयुक्तै-
र्मुमुक्षुभि: कर्ममयोरुपाशात् ॥ ७ ॥
śrī-devā ūcuḥ
natāḥ sma te nātha padāravindaṁ
buddhīndriya-prāṇa-mano-vacobhiḥ
yac cintyate ’ntar hṛdi bhāva-yuktair
mumukṣubhiḥ karma-mayoru-pāśāt
Synonyms
śrī-devāḥ ūcuḥ — the demigods said; natāḥ sma — we are bowed down; te — Your; nātha — O Lord; pada-aravindam — to the lotus feet; buddhi — with our intelligence; indriya — senses; prāṇa — vital air; manaḥ — mind; vacobhiḥ — and words; yat — which; cintyate — are meditated upon; antaḥ hṛdi — within the heart; bhāva-yuktaiḥ — who are fixed in yoga practice; mumukṣubhiḥ — by those striving for liberation; karma-maya — of the reactions of fruitive work; uru-pāśāt — from the great bondage.

Translation
The demigods began to speak: Our dear Lord, advanced mystic yogīs, striving for liberation from the severe bondage of material work, meditate with great devotion upon Your lotus feet within their hearts. Dedicating our intelligence, senses, vital air, mind and power of speech to Your Lordship, we demigods bow down at Your lotus feet.

Text 8
त्वं मायया त्रिगुणयात्मनि दुर्विभाव्यं
व्यक्तं सृजस्यवसि लुम्पसि तद्गुणस्थ: ।
नैतैर्भवानजित कर्मभिरज्यते वै
यत् स्वे सुखेऽव्यवहितेऽभिरतोऽनवद्य: ॥ ८ ॥
tvaṁ māyayā tri-guṇayātmani durvibhāvyaṁ
vyaktaṁ sṛjasy avasi lumpasi tad-guṇa-sthaḥ
naitair bhavān ajita karmabhir ajyate vai
yat sve sukhe ’vyavahite ’bhirato ’navadyaḥ
Synonyms
tvam — You; māyayā — by the material energy; tri-guṇayā — made up of the three modes of nature; ātmani — within Yourself; durvibhāvyam — inconceivable; vyaktam — the manifest cosmos; sṛjasi — You create; avasi — protect; lumpasi — and destroy; tat — of that material nature; guṇa — within the modes (goodness, passion and ignorance); sthaḥ — situated; na — not; etaiḥ — by these; bhavān — You; ajita — O unconquerable Lord; karmabhiḥ — activities; ajyate — are entangled; vai — at all; yat — because; sve — in Your own; sukhe — happiness; avyavahite — unimpeded; abhirataḥ — You are always absorbed; anavadyaḥ — the unimpeachable Lord.

Translation
O unconquerable Lord, You engage Your illusory energy, composed of three modes, to unleash, maintain and devastate the inconceivable manifest cosmos, all within Your own self. As the supreme superintendent of māyā, You appear to be situated in the interaction of the modes of nature; however, You are never affected by material activities. In fact, You are directly engaged in Your own eternal, spiritual bliss, and thus You cannot be accused of any material infection.

Text 9
शुद्धिर्नृणां न तु तथेड्य दुराशयानां
विद्याश्रुताध्ययनदानतप:क्रियाभि: ।
सत्त्वात्मनामृषभ ते यशसि प्रवृद्ध-
सच्छ्रद्धया श्रवणसम्भृतया यथा स्यात् ॥ ९ ॥
śuddhir nṛṇāṁ na tu tatheḍya durāśayānāṁ
vidyā-śrutādhyayana-dāna-tapaḥ-kriyābhiḥ
sattvātmanām ṛṣabha te yaśasi pravṛddha-
sac-chraddhayā śravaṇa-sambhṛtayā yathā syāt
Synonyms
śuddhiḥ — purification; nṛṇām — of persons; na — is not; tu — but; tathā — in such a way; īḍya — O worshipable one; durāśayānām — of those whose consciousness is contaminated; vidyā — by ordinary worship; śruta — hearing and obeying the injunctions of the Vedas; adhyayana — study of various śāstras; dāna — charity; tapaḥ — austere penances; kriyābhiḥ — and ritual activities; sattva-ātmanām — of those who are situated in pure goodness; ṛṣabha — O greatest of all; te — Your; yaśasi — in the glories; pravṛddha — fully matured; sat — transcendental; śraddhayā — by faith; śravaṇa-sambhṛtayā — which is reinforced by the process of hearing; yathā — as; syāt — there is.

Translation
O greatest of all, those whose consciousness is polluted by illusion cannot purify themselves merely by ordinary worship, study of the Vedas, charity, austerity and ritual activities. Our Lord, those pure souls who have developed a powerful transcendental faith in Your glories achieve a purified state of existence that can never be attained by those lacking such faith.

Text 10
स्यान्नस्तवाङ्‍‍घ्रिरशुभाशयधूमकेतु:
क्षेमाय यो मुनिभिरार्द्रहृदोह्यमान: ।
य: सात्वतै: समविभूतय आत्मवद्भ‍ि-
र्व्यूहेऽर्चित: सवनश: स्वरतिक्रमाय ॥ १० ॥
syān nas tavāṅghrir aśubhāśaya-dhūmaketuḥ
kṣemāya yo munibhir ārdra-hṛdohyamānaḥ
yaḥ sātvataiḥ sama-vibhūtaya ātmavadbhir
vyūhe ’rcitaḥ savanaśaḥ svar-atikramāya
Synonyms
syāt — may they be; naḥ — for us; tava — Your; aṅghriḥ — the lotus feet; aśubha-āśaya — of our inauspicious mentality; dhūma-ketuḥ — the annihilating fire; kṣemāya — for achieving real benefit; yaḥ — which; munibhiḥ — by sages; ārdra-hṛdā — with melted hearts; uhyamānaḥ — are being carried; yaḥ — which; sātvataiḥ — by the devotees of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sama-vibhūtaye — for gaining opulence like His; ātma-vadbhiḥ — by those who are self-controlled; vyūhe — in the four-handed personal expansions of Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha; arcitaḥ — worshiped; savanaśaḥ — at the three junctions of each day; svaḥ-atikramāya — for crossing beyond the heavenly planets of this world.

Translation
Great sages, desiring the highest benefit in life, always cherish Your lotus feet within their hearts, which are melted by love for You. Similarly, Your self-controlled devotees, desiring to cross beyond the material kingdom of heaven to achieve opulence equal to Yours, worship Your lotus feet in the morning, at noon and in the evening. Thus, they meditate upon Your Lordship in Your quadruple expansion. Your lotus feet are just like a blazing fire that burns to ashes all the inauspicious desires for material sense gratification.

Text 11
यश्चिन्त्यते प्रयतपाणिभिरध्वराग्नौ
त्रय्या निरुक्तविधिनेश हविर्गृहीत्वा ।
अध्यात्मयोग उत योगिभिरात्ममायां
जिज्ञासुभि: परमभागवतै: परीष्ट: ॥ ११ ॥
yaś cintyate prayata-pāṇibhir adhvarāgnau
trayyā nirukta-vidhineśa havir gṛhītvā
adhyātma-yoga uta yogibhir ātma-māyāṁ
jijñāsubhiḥ parama-bhāgavataiḥ parīṣṭaḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — which; cintyate — are meditated upon; prayata-pāṇibhiḥ — by those with folded hands; adhvara-agnau — in the fire of sacrifice; trayyā — of the three Vedas (Ṛg, Yajur and Sāma); nirukta — comprising the essential understanding presented in the Nirukta; vidhinā — by the process; īśa — O Lord; haviḥ — the ghee meant for offering; gṛhītvā — taking; adhyātma-yoge — in that yoga system meant for realization of one’s true self; uta — also; yogibhiḥ — by the practitioners of this yoga; ātma-māyām — about Your bewildering material energy; jijñāsubhiḥ — who are inquisitive; parama-bhāgavataiḥ — by the most elevated devotees; parīṣṭaḥ — perfectly worshiped.

Translation
Those about to offer oblations into the fire of sacrifice in accordance with the Ṛg, Yajur and Sāma Vedas meditate on Your lotus feet. Similarly, the practitioners of transcendental yoga meditate upon Your lotus feet, hoping for knowledge about Your divine mystic potency, and the most elevated pure devotees perfectly worship Your lotus feet, desiring to cross beyond Your illusory potency.

Text 12
पर्युष्टया तव विभो वनमालयेयं
संस्पार्धिनी भगवती प्रतिपत्नीवच्छ्री: ।
य: सुप्रणीतममुयार्हणमाददन्नो
भूयात् सदाङ्‍‍घ्रिरशुभाशयधूमकेतु: ॥ १२ ॥
paryuṣṭayā tava vibho vana-mālayeyaṁ
saṁspārdhinī bhagavatī pratipatnī-vac chrīḥ
yaḥ su-praṇītam amuyārhaṇam ādadan no
bhūyāt sadāṅghrir aśubhāśaya-dhūmaketuḥ
Synonyms
paryuṣṭayā — worn out; tava — Your; vibho — almighty Lord; vanamālayā — by the flower garland; iyam — she; saṁspārdhinī — feeling competitive; bhagavatī — the female counterpart of the Personality of Godhead; prati-patnī-vat — just like an envious co-wife; śrīḥ — Lakṣmīdevī, the goddess of fortune; yaḥ — which Supreme Lord (Yourself); su-praṇītam — (so that it may be) properly executed; amuyā — by this; arhaṇam — the offering; ādadan — accepting; naḥ — our; bhūyāt — may they be; sadā — always; aṅghriḥ — the lotus feet; aśubha-āśaya — of our impure desires; dhūma-ketuḥ — the fire of destruction.

Translation
O almighty Lord, You are so kind to Your servants that You have accepted the withered flower garland that we have placed on Your chest. Since the goddess of fortune makes her abode on Your transcendental chest, she will undoubtedly become agitated, like a jealous co-wife, upon seeing our offering also dwelling there. Yet You are so merciful that You neglect Your eternal consort Lakṣmī and accept our offering as most excellent worship. O merciful Lord, may Your lotus feet always act as a blazing fire to consume the inauspicious desires within our hearts.

Text 13
केतुस्त्रिविक्रमयुतस्त्रिपतत्पताको
यस्ते भयाभयकरोऽसुरदेवचम्वो: ।
स्वर्गाय साधुषु खलेष्वितराय भूमन्
पाद: पुनातु भगवन् भजतामघं न: ॥ १३ ॥
ketus tri-vikrama-yutas tri-patat-patāko
yas te bhayābhaya-karo ’sura-deva-camvoḥ
svargāya sādhuṣu khaleṣv itarāya bhūman
padaḥ punātu bhagavan bhajatām aghaṁ naḥ
Synonyms
ketuḥ — a flagpole; tri-vikrama — three mighty steps in conquering Bali Mahārāja; yataḥ — adorned by; tri-patat — falling into each of the three planetary systems; patākaḥ — the flag upon which; yaḥ — which; te — Your (lotus feet); bhaya-abhaya — fear and fearlessness; karaḥ — creating; asura-deva — of the demons and the demigods; camvoḥ — for the respective armies; svargāya — for the attainment of heaven; sādhuṣu — among the saintly demigods and devotees; khaleṣu — among the envious; itarāya — for just the opposite; bhūman — O most powerful Lord; pādaḥ — the lotus feet; punātu — may they purify; bhagavan — O Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhajatām — who are engaged in worshiping You; agham — the sins; naḥ — of us.

Translation
O omnipotent Lord, in Your incarnation as Trivikrama, You raised Your leg like a flagpole to break the shell of the universe, allowing the holy Ganges to flow down, like a banner of victory, in three branches throughout the three planetary systems. By three mighty steps of Your lotus feet, Your Lordship captured Bali Mahārāja, along with his universal kingdom. Your lotus feet inspire fear in the demons by driving them down to hell and fearlessness among Your devotees by elevating them to the perfection of heavenly life. We are sincerely trying to worship You, our Lord; therefore may Your lotus feet kindly free us from all of our sinful reactions.

Text 14
नस्योतगाव इव यस्य वशे भवन्ति
ब्रह्मादयस्तनुभृतो मिथुरर्द्यमाना: ।
कालस्य ते प्रकृतिपूरुषयो: परस्य
शं नस्तनोतु चरण: पुरुषोत्तमस्य ॥ १४ ॥
nasy ota-gāva iva yasya vaśe bhavanti
brahmādayas tanu-bhṛto mithur ardyamānāḥ
kālasya te prakṛti-pūruṣayoḥ parasya
śaṁ nas tanotu caraṇaḥ puruṣottamasya
Synonyms
nasi — through the nose; ota — strung; gāvaḥ — oxen; iva — as if; yasya — of whose; vaśe — under the control; bhavanti — they exist; brahma-ādayaḥ — Brahmā and all others; tanu-bhṛtaḥ — the embodied living beings; mithuḥ — among each other; ardyamānāḥ — struggling; kālasya — of the force of time; te — of Yourself; prakṛti-pūruṣayoḥ — both the material nature and the living entity; parasya — who is beyond them; śam — transcendental fortune; naḥ — for us; tanotu — may they spread; caraṇaḥ — the lotus feet; puruṣa-uttamasya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the transcendental entity who is superior to both material nature and the enjoyer of nature. May Your lotus feet bestow transcendental pleasure upon us. All of the great demigods, beginning with Brahmā, are embodied living entities. Struggling painfully with one another under the strict control of Your time factor, they are just like bulls dragged by ropes tied through their pierced noses.

Text 15
अस्यासि हेतुरुदयस्थितिसंयमाना-
मव्यक्तजीवमहतामपि कालमाहु: ।
सोऽयं त्रिणाभिरखिलापचये प्रवृत्त:
कालो गभीररय उत्तमपूरुषस्त्वम् ॥ १५ ॥
asyāsi hetur udaya-sthiti-saṁyamānām
avyakta-jīva-mahatām api kālam āhuḥ
so ’yaṁ tri-ṇābhir akhilāpacaye pravṛttaḥ
kālo gabhīra-raya uttama-pūruṣas tvam
Synonyms
asya — of this (universe); asi — You are; hetuḥ — the cause; udaya — of the creation; sthiti — maintenance; saṁyamānām — and annihilation; avyakta — of the unmanifest material nature; jīva — the individual living beings; mahatām — and of the mahat-tattva, with the manifest elements evolved from it; api — also; kālam — the controlling time factor; āhuḥ — You are said to be; saḥ ayam — this same personality; tri-ṇābhiḥ — appearing as a wheel with circumference divided into three parts (the year divided into four-month seasons); akhila — of everything; apacaye — in effecting the diminution; pravṛttaḥ — engaged; kālaḥ — the time factor; gabhīra — imperceptible; rayaḥ — the movement of which; uttama-pūruṣaḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tvam — You are.

Translation
You are the cause of the creation, maintenance and destruction of this universe. As time, You regulate the subtle and manifest states of material nature and control every living being. As the threefold wheel of time You diminish all things by Your imperceptible actions, and thus You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 16
त्वत्त: पुमान् समधिगम्य ययास्य वीर्यं
धत्ते महान्तमिव गर्भममोघवीर्य: ।
सोऽयं तयानुगत आत्मन आण्डकोशं
हैमं ससर्ज बहिरावरणैरुपेतम् ॥ १६ ॥
tvattaḥ pumān samadhigamya yayāsya vīryaṁ
dhatte mahāntam iva garbham amogha-vīryaḥ
so ’yaṁ tayānugata ātmana āṇḍa-kośaṁ
haimaṁ sasarja bahir āvaraṇair upetam
Synonyms
tvattaḥ — from You; pumān — the puruṣa-avatāra, Mahā-Viṣṇu; samadhigamya — obtaining; yayā — along with which (material nature); asya — of this creation; vīryam — the potential seed; dhatte — He impregnates; mahāntam — the mahat-tattva, the raw amalgamation of matter; iva garbham — like an ordinary fetus; amogha-vīryaḥ — He whose semen is never wasted; saḥ ayam — that same (mahat-tattva); tayā — with the material nature; anugataḥ — joined; ātmanaḥ — from itself; āṇḍa-kośam — the primeval egg of the universe; haimam — golden; sasarja — produced; bahiḥ — on its outside; āvaraṇaiḥ — with several coverings; upetam — endowed.

Translation
My dear Lord, the original puruṣa-avatāra, Mahā-Viṣṇu, acquires His creative potency from You. Thus with infallible energy He impregnates material nature, producing the mahat-tattva. Then the mahat-tattva, the amalgamated material energy, endowed with the potency of the Lord, produces from itself the primeval golden egg of the universe, which is covered by various layers of material elements.

Text 17
तत्तस्थूषश्च जगतश्च भवानधीशो
यन्माययोत्थगुणविक्रिययोपनीतान् ।
अर्थाञ्जुषन्नपि हृषीकपते न लिप्तो
येऽन्ये स्वत: परिहृतादपि बिभ्यति स्म ॥ १७ ॥
tat tasthūṣaś ca jagataś ca bhavān adhīśo
yan māyayottha-guṇa-vikriyayopanītān
arthāñ juṣann api hṛṣīka-pate na lipto
ye ’nye svataḥ parihṛtād api bibhyati sma
Synonyms
tat — therefore; tasthūṣaḥ — of everything stationary; ca — and; jagataḥ — mobile; ca — as well; bhavān — You (are); adhīśaḥ — the ultimate controller; yat — because; māyayā — by material nature; uttha — raised; guṇa — of (nature’s) modes; vikriyayā — by the transformation (i.e. by the activity of the sense organs of the living beings); upanītān — gathered together; arthān — the sense objects; juṣan — engaging with; api — even though; hṛṣīka-pate — O master of everyone’s senses; na liptaḥ — You are never touched; ye — those who; anye — others; svataḥ — on their own strength; parihṛtāt — on account of (objects of sense gratification); api — even; bibhyati — they fear; sma — indeed.

Translation
O Lord, You are the supreme creator of this universe and the ultimate controller of all moving and nonmoving living entities. You are Hṛṣīkeśa, the supreme controller of all sensory activity, and thus You never become contaminated or entangled in the course of Your supervision of the infinite sensory activities within the material creation. On the other hand, other living entities, even yogīs and philosophers, are disturbed and frightened simply by remembering the material objects that they have supposedly renounced in their pursuit of enlightenment.

Text 18
स्मायावलोकलवदर्शितभावहारि-
भ्रूमण्डलप्रहितसौरतमन्त्रशौण्डै: ।
पत्न्‍यस्तु षोडशसहस्रमनङ्गबाणै-
र्यस्येन्द्रियं विमथितुं करणैर्न विभ्व्य: ॥ १८ ॥
smāyāvaloka-lava-darśita-bhāva-hāri-
bhrū-maṇḍala-prahita-saurata-mantra-śauṇḍaiḥ
patnyas tu ṣoḍaśa-sahasram anaṅga-bāṇair
yasyendriyaṁ vimathituṁ karaṇair na vibhvyaḥ
Synonyms
smāya — smiling; avaloka — of a glance; lava — by fractions; darśita — having shown; bhāva — their feelings; hāri — enchanting; bhrū-maṇḍala — by which arch of the eyebrows; prahita — launched; saurata — of conjugal love; mantra — messages; śauṇḍaiḥ — by the impudent advances; patnyaḥ — wives; tu — but; ṣoḍaśa-sahasram — sixteen thousand; anaṅga — of Cupid; bāṇaiḥ — by the arrows; yasya — whose; indriyam — senses; vimathitum — to agitate; karaṇaiḥ — with all their devices; na vibhvyaḥ — they were not able.

Translation
My Lord, You are living with sixteen thousand exquisitely beautiful, aristocratic wives. By their irresistible coy and smiling glances and by their lovely arching eyebrows, they send You messages of eager conjugal love. But they are completely unable to disturb the mind and senses of Your Lordship.

Text 19
विभ्व्यस्तवामृतकथोदवहास्त्रिलोक्या:
पादावनेजसरित: शमलानि हन्तुम् ।
आनुश्रवं श्रुतिभिरङ्‍‍घ्रिजमङ्गसङ्गै-
स्तीर्थद्वयं शुचिषदस्त उपस्पृशन्ति ॥ १९ ॥
vibhvyas tavāmṛta-kathoda-vahās tri-lokyāḥ
pādāvane-ja-saritaḥ śamalāni hantum
ānuśravaṁ śrutibhir aṅghri-jam aṅga-saṅgais
tīrtha-dvayaṁ śuci-ṣadas ta upaspṛśanti
Synonyms
vibhvyaḥ — are able; tava — Your; amṛta — nectarean; kathā — of the topics; uda-vahāḥ — the water-bearing rivers; tri-lokyāḥ — of the three worlds; pāda-avane — from the bathing of Your lotus feet; ja — born; saritaḥ — rivers; śamalāni — all contamination; hantum — to destroy; ānuśravam — consisting of the process of hearing from bona fide authority; śrutibhiḥ — with the ears; aṅghri-jam — consisting of (the holy rivers) generated from Your lotus feet; aṅga-saṅgaiḥ — by direct physical contact; tīrtha-dvayam — these two kinds of holy places; śuci-ṣadaḥ — those who are striving for purification; te — Your; upaspṛśanti — they approach to associate with.

Translation
The nectar-bearing rivers of discussions about You, and also the holy rivers generated from the bathing of Your lotus feet, are able to destroy all contamination within the three worlds. Those who are striving for purification associate with the holy narrations of Your glories by hearing them with their ears, and they associate with the holy rivers flowing from Your lotus feet by physically bathing in them.

Text 20
श्रीबादरायणिरुवाच
इत्यभिष्टूय विबुधै: सेश: शतधृतिर्हरिम् ।
अभ्यभाषत गोविन्दं प्रणम्याम्बरमाश्रित: ॥ २० ॥
śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca
ity abhiṣṭūya vibudhaiḥ
seśaḥ śata-dhṛtir harim
abhyabhāṣata govindaṁ
praṇamyāmbaram āśritaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti — thus; abhiṣṭūya — praising; vibudhaiḥ — along with all the demigods; sa-īśaḥ — and also Lord Śiva; śata-dhṛtiḥ — Lord Brahmā; harim — the Supreme Lord; abhyabhāṣata — spoke; govindam — to Govinda; praṇamya — offering obeisances; ambaram — in the sky; āśritaḥ — situated.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: After Brahmā, along with Lord Śiva and the other demigods, thus offered prayers to the Supreme Lord, Govinda, Lord Brahmā situated himself in the sky and addressed the Lord as follows.

Text 21
श्रीब्रह्मोवाच
भूमेर्भारावताराय पुरा विज्ञापित: प्रभो ।
त्वमस्माभिरशेषात्मन्तत्तथैवोपपादितम् ॥ २१ ॥
śrī-brahmovāca
bhūmer bhārāvatārāya
purā vijñāpitaḥ prabho
tvam asmābhir aśeṣātman
tat tathaivopapāditam
Synonyms
śrī-brahmā uvāca — Śrī Brahmā said; bhūmeḥ — of the earth; bhāra — the burden; avatārāya — for the sake of diminishing; purā — previously; vijñāpitaḥ — were requested; prabho — O Lord; tvam — You; asmābhiḥ — by us; aśeṣa-ātman — O unlimited Soul of all; tat — that (request); tathā eva — just as expressed by us; upapāditam — was fulfilled.

Translation
Lord Brahmā said: My dear Lord, previously we requested You to remove the burden of the earth. O unlimited Personality of Godhead, that request has certainly been fulfilled.

Text 22
धर्मश्च स्थापित: सत्सु सत्यसन्धेषु वै त्वया ।
कीर्तिश्च दिक्षु विक्षिप्ता सर्वलोकमलापहा ॥ २२ ॥
dharmaś ca sthāpitaḥ satsu
satya-sandheṣu vai tvayā
kīrtiś ca dikṣu vikṣiptā
sarva-loka-malāpahā
Synonyms
dharmaḥ — the principles of religion; ca — and; sthāpitaḥ — established; satsu — among the pious; satya-sandheṣu — among those who seek after truth; vai — indeed; tvayā — by You; kīrtiḥ — Your glories; ca — and; dikṣu — in all the directions; vikṣiptā — disseminated; sarva-loka — of all planets; mala — the contamination; apahā — which remove.

Translation
My Lord, You have reestablished the principles of religion among pious men who are always firmly bound to the truth. You have also distributed Your glories all over the world, and thus the whole world can be purified by hearing about You.

Text 23
अवतीर्य यदोर्वंशे बिभ्रद् रूपमनुत्तमम् ।
कर्माण्युद्दामवृत्तानि हिताय जगतोऽकृथा: ॥ २३ ॥
avatīrya yador vaṁśe
bibhrad rūpam anuttamam
karmāṇy uddāma-vṛttāni
hitāya jagato ’kṛthāḥ
Synonyms
avatīrya — descending; yadoḥ — of King Yadu; vaṁśe — into the dynasty; bibhrat — bearing; rūpam — a transcendental form; anuttamam — unexcelled; karmāṇi — activities; uddāma-vṛttāni — comprised of magnanimous deeds; hitāya — for the benefit; jagataḥ — of the universe; akṛthāḥ — You performed.

Translation
Descending into the dynasty of King Yadu, You have manifested Your unique transcendental form, and for the benefit of the entire universe You have executed magnanimous transcendental activities.

Text 24
यानि ते चरितानीश मनुष्या: साधव: कलौ ।
श‍ृण्वन्त: कीर्तयन्तश्च तरिष्यन्त्यञ्जसा तम: ॥ २४ ॥
yāni te caritānīśa
manuṣyāḥ sādhavaḥ kalau
śṛṇvantaḥ kīrtayantaś ca
tariṣyanty añjasā tamaḥ
Synonyms
yāni — which; te — Your; caritāni — pastimes; īśa — O Supreme Lord; manuṣyāḥ — humans; sādhavaḥ — saintly persons; kalau — in the degraded Age of Kali; śṛṇvantaḥ — hearing; kīrtayantaḥ — chanting; ca — and; tariṣyanti — they will cross over; añjasā — easily; tamaḥ — darkness.

Translation
My dear Lord, those pious and saintly persons who in the Age of Kali hear about Your transcendental activities and also glorify them will easily cross over the darkness of the age.

Text 25
यदुवंशेऽवतीर्णस्य भवत: पुरुषोत्तम ।
शरच्छतं व्यतीयाय पञ्चविंशाधिकं प्रभो ॥ २५ ॥
yadu-vaṁśe ’vatīrṇasya
bhavataḥ puruṣottama
śarac-chataṁ vyatīyāya
pañca-viṁśādhikaṁ prabho
Synonyms
yadu-vaṁśe — in the family of the Yadus; avatīrṇasya — who has descended; bhavataḥ — of Yourself; puruṣa-uttama — O Supreme Person; śarat-śatam — one hundred autumns; vyatīyāya — having passed; pañca-viṁśa — by twenty-five; adhikam — more; prabho — O Lord.

Translation
O Supreme Personality of Godhead, O my Lord, You have descended into the Yadu dynasty, and thus You have spent one hundred twenty-five autumns with Your devotees.

Texts 26-27
नाधुना तेऽखिलाधार देवकार्यावशेषितम् ।
कुलं च विप्रशापेन नष्टप्रायमभूदिदम् ॥ २६ ॥
तत: स्वधाम परमं विशस्व यदि मन्यसे ।
सलोकाँल्ल‍ोकपालान् न: पाहि वैकुण्ठकिङ्करान् ॥ २७ ॥
nādhunā te ’khilādhāra
deva-kāryāvaśeṣitam
kulaṁ ca vipra-śāpena
naṣṭa-prāyam abhūd idam
tataḥ sva-dhāma paramaṁ
viśasva yadi manyase
sa-lokāl loka-pālān naḥ
pāhi vaikuṇṭha-kiṅkarān
Synonyms
na adhunā — no longer; te — for You; akhila-ādhāra — O basis of everything; deva-kārya — duty on behalf of the demigods; avaśeṣitam — remaining part; kulam — Your dynasty; ca — and; vipra-śāpena — by the curse of the brāhmaṇas; naṣṭa-prāyam — virtually annihilated; abhūt — has become; idam — this; tataḥ — therefore; sva-dhāma — Your own abode; paramam — supreme; viśasva — please enter; yadi — if; manyase — You are so disposed; sa-lokān — with the inhabitants of all the planets; loka-pālān — the protectors of the planets; naḥ — us; pāhi — please continue to protect; vaikuṇṭha — of Lord Viṣṇu, Vaikuṇṭha; kiṅkarān — the servants.

Translation
My dear Lord, there is nothing remaining at this time for Your Lordship to do on behalf of the demigods. You have already withdrawn Your dynasty by the curse of the brāhmaṇas. O Lord, You are the basis of everything, and if You so desire, kindly return now to Your own abode in the spiritual world. At the same time, we humbly beg that You always protect us. We are Your humble servants, and on Your behalf we are managing the universal situation. We, along with our planets and followers, require Your constant protection.

Text 28
श्रीभगवानुवाच
अवधारितमेतन्मे यदात्थ विबुधेश्वर ।
कृतं व: कार्यमखिलं भूमेर्भारोऽवतारित: ॥ २८ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
avadhāritam etan me
yad āttha vibudheśvara
kṛtaṁ vaḥ kāryam akhilaṁ
bhūmer bhāro ’vatāritaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; avadhāritam — is understood; etat — this; me — by Me; yat — that which; āttha — you have said; vibudha-īśvara — O controller of the demigods, Brahmā; kṛtam — is completed; vaḥ — your; kāryam — work; akhilam — all; bhūmeḥ — of the earth; bhāraḥ — the burden; avatāritaḥ — is removed.

Translation
The Supreme Lord said: O lord of the demigods, Brahmā, I understand your prayers and request. Having removed the burden of the earth, I have executed everything that was required on your behalf.

Text 29
तदिदं यादवकुलं वीर्यशौर्यश्रियोद्धतम् ।
लोकं जिघृक्षद् रुद्धं मे वेलयेव महार्णव: ॥ २९ ॥
tad idaṁ yādava-kulaṁ
vīrya-śaurya-śriyoddhatam
lokaṁ jighṛkṣad ruddhaṁ me
velayeva mahārṇavaḥ
Synonyms
tat idam — this very; yādava-kulam — Yādava dynasty; vīrya — by their power; śaurya — courage; śriyā — and opulence; uddhatam — magnified; lokam — the whole world; jighṛkṣat — threatening to devour; ruddham — has been checked; me — by Me; velayā — by the shore; iva — just as; mahā-arṇavaḥ — a great ocean.

Translation
That very Yādava dynasty in which I appeared became greatly magnified in opulence, especially in their physical strength and courage, to the extent that they threatened to devour the whole world. Therefore I have stopped them, just as the shore holds back the great ocean.

Text 30
यद्यसंहृत्य द‍ृप्तानां यदूनां विपुलं कुलम् ।
गन्तास्म्यनेन लोकोऽयमुद्वेलेन विनङ्‍क्ष्यति ॥ ३० ॥
yady asaṁhṛtya dṛptānāṁ
yadūnāṁ vipulaṁ kulam
gantāsmy anena loko ’yam
udvelena vinaṅkṣyati
Synonyms
yadi — if; asaṁhṛtya — without withdrawing; dṛptānām — of the overly proud; yadūnām — Yadus; vipulam — the vast; kulam — dynasty; gantā asmi — I go; anena — for that reason; lokaḥ — the world; ayam — this; udvelena — by the overflow (of the Yadus); vinaṅkṣyati — will be destroyed.

Translation
If I were to leave this world without withdrawing the overly proud members of the Yadu dynasty, the whole world would be destroyed by the deluge of their unlimited expansion.

Text 31
इदानीं नाश आरब्ध: कुलस्य द्विजशापज: ।
यास्यामि भवनं ब्रह्मन्नेतदन्ते तवानघ ॥ ३१ ॥
idānīṁ nāśa ārabdhaḥ
kulasya dvija-śāpa-jaḥ
yāsyāmi bhavanaṁ brahmann
etad-ante tavānagha
Synonyms
idānīm — just now; nāśaḥ — the annihilation; ārabdhaḥ — has begun; kulasya — of the dynasty; dvija-śāpa-jaḥ — due to the curse of the brāhmaṇas; yāsyāmi — I will go; bhavanam — to the place of residence; brahman — O Brahmā; etat-ante — after this; tava — your; anagha — O sinless one.

Translation
Now due to the brāhmaṇas’ curse, the annihilation of My family has already begun. O sinless Brahmā, when this annihilation is finished and I am enroute to Vaikuṇṭha, I will pay a small visit to your abode.

Text 32
श्रीशुक उवाच
इत्युक्तो लोकनाथेन स्वयम्भू: प्रणिपत्य तम् ।
सह देवगणैर्देव: स्वधाम समपद्यत ॥ ३२ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
ity ukto loka-nāthena
svayam-bhūḥ praṇipatya tam
saha deva-gaṇair devaḥ
sva-dhāma samapadyata
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti — thus; uktaḥ — being addressed; loka-nāthena — by the Lord of the universe, Śrī Kṛṣṇa; svayam-bhūḥ — self-born Brahmā; praṇipatya — falling down to offer obeisances; tam — unto Him; saha — along with; deva-gaṇaiḥ — all the different demigods; devaḥ — the great Lord Brahmā; sva-dhāma — to his personal abode; samapadyata — returned.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: Thus addressed by the Lord of the universe, the self-born Brahmā fell down in obeisances at the lotus feet of the Lord. Surrounded by all the demigods, the great Brahmā then returned to his personal abode.

Text 33
अथ तस्यां महोत्पातान् द्वारवत्यां समुत्थितान् ।
विलोक्य भगवानाह यदुवृद्धान् समागतान् ॥ ३३ ॥
atha tasyāṁ mahotpātān
dvāravatyāṁ samutthitān
vilokya bhagavān āha
yadu-vṛddhān samāgatān
Synonyms
atha — thereafter; tasyām — in that city; mahā-utpātān — serious disturbances; dvāravatyām — in Dvārakā; samutthitān — developed; vilokya — observing; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; āha — said; yadu-vṛddhān — to the elder Yadus; samāgatān — assembled.

Translation
Thereafter, the Personality of Godhead observed that tremendous disturbances were taking place in the holy city of Dvārakā. Thus the Lord spoke to the assembled senior members of the Yadu dynasty as follows.

Text 34
श्रीभगवानुवाच
एते वै सुमहोत्पाता व्युत्तिष्ठन्तीह सर्वत: ।
शापश्च न: कुलस्यासीद् ब्राह्मणेभ्यो दुरत्यय: ॥ ३४ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
ete vai su-mahotpātā
vyuttiṣṭhantīha sarvataḥ
śāpaś ca naḥ kulasyāsīd
brāhmaṇebhyo duratyayaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Personality of Godhead said; ete — these; vai — indeed; su-mahā-utpātāḥ — very great disturbances; vyuttiṣṭhanti — are rising up; iha — here; sarvataḥ — on all sides; śāpaḥ — the curse; ca — and; naḥ — our; kulasya — of the family; āsīt — there has been; brāhmaṇebhyaḥ — by the brāhmaṇas; duratyayaḥ — impossible to counteract.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Our dynasty has been cursed by the brāhmaṇas. Such a curse is impossible to counteract, and thus great disturbances are appearing everywhere around us.

Text 35
न वस्तव्यमिहास्माभिर्जिजीविषुभिरार्यका: ।
प्रभासं सुमहत्पुण्यं यास्यामोऽद्यैव मा चिरम् ॥ ३५ ॥
na vastavyam ihāsmābhir
jijīviṣubhir āryakāḥ
prabhāsaṁ su-mahat-puṇyaṁ
yāsyāmo ’dyaiva mā ciram
Synonyms
na vastavyam — should not reside; iha — here; asmābhiḥ — we; jijīviṣubhiḥ — desiring to live; āryakāḥ — O venerable ones; prabhāsam — to the holy place called Prabhāsa; su-mahat — very much; puṇyam — pious; yāsyāmaḥ — let us go; adya — today; eva — even; mā ciram — without delay.

Translation
My dear respected elders, we must not remain any longer in this place if we wish to keep our lives intact. Let us go this very day to the most pious place Prabhāsa. We have no time to delay.

Text 36
यत्र स्न‍ात्वा दक्षशापाद् गृहीतो यक्ष्मणोडुराट् ।
विमुक्त: किल्बिषात् सद्यो भेजे भूय: कलोदयम् ॥ ३६ ॥
yatra snātvā dakṣa-śāpād
gṛhīto yakṣmaṇodu-rāṭ
vimuktaḥ kilbiṣāt sadyo
bheje bhūyaḥ kalodayam
Synonyms
yatra — where; snātvā — taking bath; dakṣa-śāpāt — because of the curse of Prajāpati Dakṣa; gṛhītaḥ — seized; yakṣmaṇā — by consumptive lung disease; uḍu-rāṭ — the king of stars, the moon; vimuktaḥ — freed; kilbiṣāt — from his sinful reaction; sadyaḥ — immediately; bheje — he assumed; bhūyaḥ — once again; kalā — of his phases; udayam — the increasing.

Translation
Once, the moon was afflicted with consumption because of the curse of Dakṣa, but just by taking bath at Prabhāsa-kṣetra, the moon was immediately freed from his sinful reaction and again resumed the waxing of his phases.

Texts 37-38
वयं च तस्मिन्नाप्लुत्य तर्पयित्वा पितृन् सुरान् ।
भोजयित्वोषिजो विप्रान् नानागुणवतान्धसा ॥ ३७ ॥
तेषु दानानि पात्रेषु श्रद्धयोप्‍त्‍वा महान्ति वै ।
वृजिनानि तरिष्यामो दानैर्नौभिरिवार्णवम् ॥ ३८ ॥
vayaṁ ca tasminn āplutya
tarpayitvā pitṝn surān
bhojayitvoṣijo viprān
nānā-guṇavatāndhasā
teṣu dānāni pātreṣu
śraddhayoptvā mahānti vai
vṛjināni tariṣyāmo
dānair naubhir ivārṇavam
Synonyms
vayam — we; ca — also; tasmin — at that place; āplutya — bathing; tarpayitvā — satisfying by offerings; pitṝn — the departed forefathers; surān — and the demigods; bhojayitvā — feeding; uṣijaḥ — worshipable; viprān — the brāhmaṇas; nānā — various; guṇa-vatā — having tastes; andhasā — with foodstuffs; teṣu — in them (the brāhmaṇas); dānāni — gifts; pātreṣu — as fitting candidates for charity; śraddhayā — faithfully; uptvā — sowing (i.e. offering to them); mahānti — great; vai — indeed; vṛjināni — the dangers; tariṣyāmaḥ — we will cross over; dānaiḥ — by our charity; naubhiḥ — with boats; iva — as if; arṇavam — the ocean.

Translation
By bathing at Prabhāsa-kṣetra, by offering sacrifice there to placate the forefathers and demigods, by feeding the worshipable brāhmaṇas with various delicious foodstuffs and by bestowing opulent gifts upon them as the most suitable candidates for charity, we will certainly cross over these terrible dangers through such acts of charity, just as one can cross over a great ocean in a suitable boat.

Text 39
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं भगवतादिष्टा यादवा: कुरुनन्दन ।
गन्तुं कृतधियस्तीर्थं स्यन्दनान् समयूयुजन् ॥ ३९ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ bhagavatādiṣṭā
yādavāḥ kuru-nandana
gantuṁ kṛta-dhiyas tīrthaṁ
syandanān samayūyujan
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva said; evam — thus; bhagavatā — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ādiṣṭāḥ — instructed; yādavāḥ — the Yādavas; kuru-nandana — O favorite son of the Kurus; gantum — to go; kṛta-dhiyaḥ — having made up their minds; tīrtham — to the holy place; syandanān — to their chariots; samayūyujan — they yoked their horses.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O favorite son of the Kurus, thus advised by the Personality of Godhead, the Yādavas made up their minds to go to that holy place, Prabhāsa-kṣetra, and thus yoked their horses to their chariots.

Texts 40-41
तन्निरीक्ष्योद्धवो राजन् श्रुत्वा भगवतोदितम् ।
द‍ृष्ट्वारिष्टानि घोराणि नित्यं कृष्णमनुव्रत: ॥ ४० ॥
विविक्त उपसङ्गम्य जगतामीश्वरेश्वरम् ।
प्रणम्य शिरसा पादौ प्राञ्जलिस्तमभाषत ॥ ४१ ॥
tan nirīkṣyoddhavo rājan
śrutvā bhagavatoditam
dṛṣṭvāriṣṭāni ghorāṇi
nityaṁ kṛṣṇam anuvrataḥ
vivikta upasaṅgamya
jagatām īśvareśvaram
praṇamya śirasā pādau
prāñjalis tam abhāṣata
Synonyms
tat — that; nirīkṣya — seeing; uddhavaḥ — Uddhava; rājan — O King; śrutvā — hearing; bhagavatā — by the Lord; uditam — what had been said; dṛṣṭvā — observing; ariṣṭāni — evil omens; ghorāṇi — fearful; nityam — always; kṛṣṇam — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; anuvrataḥ — a faithful follower; vivikte — in privacy; upasaṅgamya — approaching; jagatām — of all the moving creatures within the universe; īśvara — of the controllers; īśvaram — the one supreme controller; praṇamya — bowing down; śirasā — with his head; pādau — at His feet; prāñjaliḥ — with hands folded in submission; tam — to Him; abhāṣata — spoke.

Translation
My dear King, Uddhava was a constantly faithful follower of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Upon seeing the imminent departure of the Yādavas, hearing from them of the Lord’s instructions and taking note of the fearful omens, he approached the Personality of Godhead in a private place. He bowed down with his head at the lotus feet of the supreme controller of the universe and with folded hands addressed Him as follows.

Text 42
श्रीउद्धव उवाच
देवदेवेश योगेश पुण्यश्रवणकीर्तन ।
संहृत्यैतत् कुलं नूनं लोकं सन्त्यक्ष्यते भवान् ।
विप्रशापं समर्थोऽपि प्रत्यहन्न यदीश्वर: ॥ ४२ ॥
śrī-uddhava uvāca
deva-deveśa yogeśa
puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtana
saṁhṛtyaitat kulaṁ nūnaṁ
lokaṁ santyakṣyate bhavān
vipra-śāpaṁ samartho ’pi
pratyahan na yad īśvaraḥ
Synonyms
śrī-uddhavaḥ uvāca — Śrī Uddhava said; deva-deva — of the greatest among the demigods; īśa — O ultimate God; yoga-īśa — O master of all mystic power; puṇya — which are pious; śravaṇa-kīrtana — O You, hearing and chanting the glories of whom; saṁhṛtya — withdrawing; etat — this; kulam — dynasty; nūnam — is it not so; lokam — this world; santyakṣyate — are about to give up once and for all; bhavān — You; vipra-śāpam — the curse of the brāhmaṇas; samarthaḥ — capable; api — although; pratyahan na — You did not counteract; yat — because; īśvaraḥ — the Supreme Lord.

Translation
Śrī Uddhava said: O my Lord, O supreme God among all the demigods, real piety is invoked simply by hearing and chanting Your transcendental glories. My Lord, it appears that You will now withdraw Your dynasty, and thus You Yourself will finally give up Your pastimes within this universe. You are the supreme controller and the master of all mystic power. But although You are fully capable of counteracting the brāhmaṇas’ curse against Your dynasty, You are not doing so, and Your disappearance is imminent.

Text 43
नाहं तवाङ्‍‍घ्रिकमलं क्षणार्धमपि केशव ।
त्यक्तुं समुत्सहे नाथ स्वधाम नय मामपि ॥ ४३ ॥
nāhaṁ tavāṅghri-kamalaṁ
kṣaṇārdham api keśava
tyaktuṁ samutsahe nātha
sva-dhāma naya mām api
Synonyms
na — am not; aham — I; tava — Your; aṅghri-kamalam — lotus feet; kṣaṇa — of a moment; ardham — for half; api — even; keśava — O killer of the demon Keśī; tyaktum — giving up; samutsahe — am I able to tolerate; nātha — O master; sva-dhāma — to Your own abode; naya — please take; mām — me; api — also.

Translation
O Lord Keśava, my dear master, I cannot tolerate giving up Your lotus feet even for a fraction of a moment. I urge You to take me along with You to Your own abode.

Text 44
तव विक्रीडितं कृष्ण नृणां परममङ्गलम् ।
कर्णपीयूषमासाद्य त्यजन्त्यन्यस्पृहां जना: ॥ ४४ ॥
tava vikrīḍitaṁ kṛṣṇa
nṛṇāṁ parama-maṅgalam
karṇa-pīyūṣam āsādya
tyajanty anya-spṛhāṁ janāḥ
Synonyms
tava — Your; vikrīḍitam — pastimes; kṛṣṇa — O Kṛṣṇa; nṛṇām — for men; parama-maṅgalam — supremely auspicious; karṇa — for the ears; pīyūṣam — nectar; āsādya — having tasted; tyajanti — they reject; anya — for other things; spṛhām — their desires; janāḥ — persons.

Translation
O my dear Kṛṣṇa, Your pastimes are supremely auspicious for mankind and are an intoxicating beverage for the ears. Tasting such pastimes, people forget their desires for other things.

Text 45
शय्यासनाटनस्थानस्न‍ानक्रीडाशनादिषु ।
कथं त्वां प्रियमात्मानं वयं भक्तास्त्यजेमहि ॥ ४५ ॥
śayyāsanāṭana-sthāna-
snāna-krīḍāśanādiṣu
kathaṁ tvāṁ priyam ātmānaṁ
vayaṁ bhaktās tyajema hi
Synonyms
sayyā — in lying down; āsana — sitting; aṭana — walking; sthāna — standing; snāna — bathing; krīḍā — taking recreation; āsana — eating; ādiṣu — and other activities; katham — how; tvām — You; priyam — dear; ātmānam — Self; vayam — we; bhaktāḥ — Your devotees; tyajema — can reject; hi — indeed.

Translation
My dear Lord, You are the Supreme Soul, and thus You are most dear to us. We are Your devotees, and how can we possibly reject You or live without You even for a moment? Whether we are lying down, sitting, walking, standing, bathing, enjoying recreation, eating or doing anything else, we are constantly engaged in Your service.

Text 46
त्वयोपभुक्तस्रग्गन्धवासोऽलङ्कारचर्चिता: ।
उच्छिष्टभोजिनो दासास्तव मायां जयेमहि ॥ ४६ ॥
tvayopabhukta-srag-gandha-
vāso-’laṅkāra-carcitāḥ
ucchiṣṭa-bhojino dāsās
tava māyāṁ jayema hi
Synonyms
tvayā — by You; upabhukta — already enjoyed; srak — with the garlands; gandha — fragrances; vāsaḥ — garments; alaṅkāra — and ornaments; carcitāḥ — adorned; ucchiṣṭa — the remnants of Your food; bhojinaḥ — eating; dāsāḥ — Your servants; tava — Your; māyām — illusory energy; jayema — we will conquer; hi — indeed.

Translation
Simply by decorating ourselves with the garlands, fragrant oils, clothes and ornaments that You have already enjoyed, and by eating the remnants of Your meals, we, Your servants, will indeed conquer Your illusory energy.

Text 47
वातवसना य ऋषय: श्रमणा ऊर्ध्वमन्थिन: ।
ब्रह्माख्यं धाम ते यान्ति शान्ता: सन्न्यासीनोऽमला: ॥ ४७ ॥
vāta-vasanā ya ṛṣayaḥ
śramaṇā ūrdhra-manthinaḥ
brahmākhyaṁ dhāma te yānti
śāntāḥ sannyāsino ’malāḥ
Synonyms
vāta-vasanāḥ — dressed by the air (naked); ye — those who are; ṛṣayaḥ — sages; śramaṇāḥ — strict observers of spiritual practices; ūrdhva-manthinaḥ — who have conserved their semen to the point that it has risen up to their heads; brahma-ākhyam — known as Brahman; dhāma — the (impersonal) spiritual abode; te — they; yānti — to go; śāntāḥ — peaceful; sannyāsinaḥ — members of the renounced order of life; amalāḥ — sinless.

Translation
Naked sages who seriously endeavor in spiritual practice, who have raised their semen upward, who are peaceful and sinless members of the renounced order, attain the spiritual abode called Brahman.

Texts 48-49
वयं त्विह महायोगिन् भ्रमन्त: कर्मवर्त्मसु ।
त्वद्वार्तया तरिष्यामस्तावकैर्दुस्तरं तम: ॥ ४८ ॥
स्मरन्त: कीर्तयन्तस्ते कृतानि गदितानि च ।
गत्युत्स्मितेक्षणक्ष्वेलि यन्नृलोकविडम्बनम् ॥ ४९ ॥
vayaṁ tv iha mahā-yogin
bhramantaḥ karma-vartmasu
tvad-vārtayā tariṣyāmas
tāvakair dustaraṁ tamaḥ
smarantaḥ kīrtayantas te
kṛtāni gaditāni ca
gaty-utsmitekṣaṇa-kṣveli
yan nṛ-loka-viḍambanam
Synonyms
vayam — we; tu — on the other hand; iha — in this world; mahā-yogin — O greatest of yogīs; bhramantaḥ — wandering; karma-vartmasu — on the paths of material work; tvat — of You; vārtayā — by discussion of the topics; tariṣyāmaḥ — will cross over; tāvakaiḥ — along with Your devotees; dustaram — insurmountable; tamaḥ — darkness; smarantaḥ — remembering; kīrtayantaḥ — glorifying; te — Your; kṛtāni — deeds; gaditāni — words; ca — also; gati — movements; utsmita — widely smiling; īkṣaṇa — glances; kṣveli — and loving pastimes; yat — which are; nṛ-loka — of human society; viḍambanam — a clever imitation.

Translation
O greatest of mystics, although we are conditioned souls wandering on the path of fruitive work, we will certainly cross beyond the darkness of this material world simply by hearing about Your Lordship in the association of Your devotees. Thus we are always remembering and glorifying the wonderful things You do and the wonderful things You say. We ecstatically recall Your amorous pastimes with Your confidential conjugal devotees and how You boldly smile and move about while engaged in such youthful pastimes. My dear Lord, Your loving pastimes are bewilderingly similar to the activities of ordinary people within this material world.

Text 50
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं विज्ञापितो राजन् भगवान् देवकीसुत: ।
एकान्तिनं प्रियं भृत्यमुद्धवं समभाषत ॥ ५० ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ vijñāpito rājan
bhagavān devakī-sutaḥ
ekāntinaṁ priyaṁ bhṛtyam
uddhavaṁ samabhāṣata
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — in this way; vijñāpitaḥ — requested; rājan — O King; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; devakī-sutaḥ — the son of Devakī; ekāntinam — in private; priyam — dear; bhṛtyam — to the servant; uddhavam — Uddhava; samabhāṣata — He spoke at length.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King Parīkṣit, thus addressed, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī, began to reply confidentially to His dear, unalloyed servant Uddhava.