TEXT 1
श्रीभगवानुवाच
भूय एव महाबाहो श‍ृणु मे परमं वच: ।
यत्तेऽहं प्रीयमाणाय वक्ष्यामि हितकाम्यया ॥ १ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
bhūya eva mahā-bāho
śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ
yat te ’haṁ prīyamāṇāya
vakṣyāmi hita-kāmyayā
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; bhūyaḥ — again; eva — certainly; mahā-bāho — O mighty-armed; śṛṇu — just hear; me — My; paramam — supreme; vacaḥ — instruction; yat — that which; te — to you; aham — I; prīyamāṇāya — thinking you dear to Me; vakṣyāmi — say; hita-kāmyayā — for your benefit.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Listen again, O mighty-armed Arjuna. Because you are My dear friend, for your benefit I shall speak to you further, giving knowledge that is better than what I have already explained.

TEXT 2
न मे विदु: सुरगणा: प्रभवं न महर्षय: ।
अहमादिर्हि देवानां महर्षीणां च सर्वश: ॥ २ ॥
na me viduḥ sura-gaṇāḥ
prabhavaṁ na maharṣayaḥ
aham ādir hi devānāṁ
maharṣīṇāṁ ca sarvaśaḥ
Synonyms
na — never; me — My; viduḥ — know; sura-gaṇāḥ — the demigods; prabhavam — origin, opulences; na — never; mahā-ṛṣayaḥ — great sages; aham — I am; ādiḥ — the origin; hi — certainly; devānām — of the demigods; mahā-ṛṣīṇām — of the great sages; ca — also; sarvaśaḥ — in all respects.

Translation
Neither the hosts of demigods nor the great sages know My origin or opulences, for, in every respect, I am the source of the demigods and sages.

TEXT 3
यो मामजमनादिं च वेत्ति लोकमहेश्वरम् ।
असम्मूढ: स मर्त्येषु सर्वपापै: प्रमुच्यते ॥ ३ ॥
yo mām ajam anādiṁ ca
vetti loka-maheśvaram
asammūḍhaḥ sa martyeṣu
sarva-pāpaiḥ pramucyate
Synonyms
yaḥ — anyone who; mām — Me; ajam — unborn; anādim — without beginning; ca — also; vetti — knows; loka — of the planets; mahā-īśvaram — the supreme master; asammūḍhaḥ — undeluded; saḥ — he; martyeṣu — among those subject to death; sarva-pāpaiḥ — from all sinful reactions; pramucyate — is delivered.

Translation
He who knows Me as the unborn, as the beginningless, as the Supreme Lord of all the worlds – he only, undeluded among men, is freed from all sins.

TEXTS 4-5
बुद्धिर्ज्ञानमसम्मोह: क्षमा सत्यं दम: शम: ।
सुखं दु:खं भवोऽभावो भयं चाभयमेव च ॥ ४ ॥
अहिंसा समता तुष्टिस्तपो दानं यशोऽयश: ।
भवन्ति भावा भूतानां मत्त एव पृथग्विधा: ॥ ५ ॥
buddhir jñānam asammohaḥ
kṣamā satyaṁ damaḥ śamaḥ
sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ bhavo ’bhāvo
bhayaṁ cābhayam eva ca
ahiṁsā samatā tuṣṭis
tapo dānaṁ yaśo ’yaśaḥ
bhavanti bhāvā bhūtānāṁ
matta eva pṛthag-vidhāḥ
Synonyms
buddhiḥ — intelligence; jñānam — knowledge; asammohaḥ — freedom from doubt; kṣamā — forgiveness; satyam — truthfulness; damaḥ — control of the senses; śamaḥ — control of the mind; sukham — happiness; duḥkham — distress; bhavaḥ — birth; abhāvaḥ — death; bhayam — fear; ca — also; abhayam — fearlessness; eva — also; ca — and; ahiṁsā — nonviolence; samatā — equilibrium; tuṣṭiḥ — satisfaction; tapaḥ — penance; dānam — charity; yaśaḥ — fame; ayaśaḥ — infamy; bhavanti — come about; bhāvāḥ — natures; bhūtānām — of living entities; mattaḥ — from Me; eva — certainly; pṛthak-vidhāḥ — variously arranged.

Translation
Intelligence, knowledge, freedom from doubt and delusion, forgiveness, truthfulness, control of the senses, control of the mind, happiness and distress, birth, death, fear, fearlessness, nonviolence, equanimity, satisfaction, austerity, charity, fame and infamy – all these various qualities of living beings are created by Me alone.

TEXT 6
महर्षय: सप्‍त पूर्वे चत्वारो मनवस्तथा ।
मद्भ‍ावा मानसा जाता येषां लोक इमा: प्रजा: ॥ ६ ॥
maharṣayaḥ sapta pūrve
catvāro manavas tathā
mad-bhāvā mānasā jātā
yeṣāṁ loka imāḥ prajāḥ
Synonyms
mahā-ṛṣayaḥ — the great sages; sapta — seven; pūrve — before; catvāraḥ — four; manavaḥ — Manus; tathā — also; mat-bhāvāḥ — born of Me; mānasāḥ — from the mind; jātāḥ — born; yeṣām — of them; loke — in the world; imāḥ — all this; prajāḥ — population.

Translation
The seven great sages and before them the four other great sages and the Manus [progenitors of mankind] come from Me, born from My mind, and all the living beings populating the various planets descend from them.

TEXT 7
एतां विभूतिं योगं च मम यो वेत्ति तत्त्वत: ।
सोऽविकल्पेन योगेन युज्यते नात्र संशय: ॥ ७ ॥
etāṁ vibhūtiṁ yogaṁ ca
mama yo vetti tattvataḥ
so ’vikalpena yogena
yujyate nātra saṁśayaḥ
Synonyms
etām — all this; vibhūtim — opulence; yogam — mystic power; ca — also; mama — of Mine; yaḥ — anyone who; vetti — knows; tattvataḥ — factually; saḥ — he; avikalpena — without division; yogena — in devotional service; yujyate — is engaged; na — never; atra — here; saṁśayaḥ — doubt.

Translation
One who is factually convinced of this opulence and mystic power of Mine engages in unalloyed devotional service; of this there is no doubt.

TEXT 8
अहं सर्वस्य प्रभवो मत्त: सर्वं प्रवर्तते ।
इति मत्वा भजन्ते मां बुधा भावसमन्विता: ॥ ८ ॥
ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo
mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate
iti matvā bhajante māṁ
budhā bhāva-samanvitāḥ
Synonyms
aham — I; sarvasya — of all; prabhavaḥ — the source of generation; mattaḥ — from Me; sarvam — everything; pravartate — emanates; iti — thus; matvā — knowing; bhajante — become devoted; mām — unto Me; budhāḥ — the learned; bhāva-samanvitāḥ — with great attention.

Translation
I am the source of all spiritual and material worlds. Everything emanates from Me. The wise who perfectly know this engage in My devotional service and worship Me with all their hearts.

TEXT 9
मच्च‍ित्ता मद्ग‍तप्राणा बोधयन्त: परस्परम् ।
कथयन्तश्च मां नित्यं तुष्यन्ति च रमन्ति च ॥ ९ ॥
mac-cittā mad-gata-prāṇā
bodhayantaḥ parasparam
kathayantaś ca māṁ nityaṁ
tuṣyanti ca ramanti ca
Synonyms
mat-cittāḥ — their minds fully engaged in Me; mat-gata-prāṇāḥ — their lives devoted to Me; bodhayantaḥ — preaching; parasparam — among themselves; kathayantaḥ — talking; ca — also; mām — about Me; nityam — perpetually; tuṣyanti — become pleased; ca — also; ramanti — enjoy transcendental bliss; ca — also.

Translation
The thoughts of My pure devotees dwell in Me, their lives are fully devoted to My service, and they derive great satisfaction and bliss from always enlightening one another and conversing about Me.

TEXT 10
तेषां सततयुक्तानां भजतां प्रीतिपूर्वकम् ।
ददामि बुद्धियोगं तं येन मामुपयान्ति ते ॥ १० ॥
teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ
bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam
dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ
yena mām upayānti te
Synonyms
teṣām — unto them; satata-yuktānām — always engaged; bhajatām — in rendering devotional service; prīti-pūrvakam — in loving ecstasy; dadāmi — I give; buddhi-yogam — real intelligence; tam — that; yena — by which; mām — unto Me; upayānti — come; te — they.

Translation
To those who are constantly devoted to serving Me with love, I give the understanding by which they can come to Me.

TEXT 11
तेषामेवानुकम्पार्थमहमज्ञानजं तम: ।
नाशयाम्यात्मभावस्थो ज्ञानदीपेन भास्वता ॥ ११ ॥
teṣām evānukampārtham
aham ajñāna-jaṁ tamaḥ
nāśayāmy ātma-bhāva-stho
jñāna-dīpena bhāsvatā
Synonyms
teṣām — for them; eva — certainly; anukampā-artham — to show special mercy; aham — I; ajñāna-jam — due to ignorance; tamaḥ — darkness; nāśayāmi — dispel; ātma-bhāva — within their hearts; sthaḥ — situated; jñāna — of knowledge; dīpena — with the lamp; bhāsvatā — glowing.

Translation
To show them special mercy, I, dwelling in their hearts, destroy with the shining lamp of knowledge the darkness born of ignorance.

TEXTS 12-13
अर्जुन उवाच
परं ब्रह्म परं धाम पवित्रं परमं भवान् ।
पुरुषं शाश्वतं दिव्यमादिदेवमजं विभुम् ॥ १२ ॥
आहुस्त्वामृषय: सर्वे देवर्षिर्नारदस्तथा ।
असितो देवलो व्यास: स्वयं चैव ब्रवीषि मे ॥ १३ ॥
arjuna uvāca
paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma
pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān
puruṣaṁ śāśvataṁ divyam
ādi-devam ajaṁ vibhum
āhus tvām ṛṣayaḥ sarve
devarṣir nāradas tathā
asito devalo vyāsaḥ
svayaṁ caiva bravīṣi me
Synonyms
arjunaḥ uvāca — Arjuna said; param — supreme; brahma — truth; param — supreme; dhāma — sustenance; pavitram — pure; paramam — supreme; bhavān — You; puruṣam — personality; śāśvatam — eternal; divyam — transcendental; ādi-devam — the original Lord; ajam — unborn; vibhum — greatest; āhuḥ — say; tvām — of You; ṛṣayaḥ — sages; sarve — all; deva-ṛṣiḥ — the sage among the demigods; nāradaḥ — Nārada; tathā — also; asitaḥ — Asita; devalaḥ — Devala; vyāsaḥ — Vyāsa; svayam — personally; ca — also; eva — certainly; bravīṣi — You are explaining; me — unto me.

Translation
Arjuna said: You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the ultimate abode, the purest, the Absolute Truth. You are the eternal, transcendental, original person, the unborn, the greatest. All the great sages such as Nārada, Asita, Devala and Vyāsa confirm this truth about You, and now You Yourself are declaring it to me.

TEXT 14
सर्वमेतदृतं मन्ये यन्मां वदसि केशव ।
न हि ते भगवन्व्यक्तिं विदुर्देवा न दानवा: ॥ १४ ॥
sarvam etad ṛtaṁ manye
yan māṁ vadasi keśava
na hi te bhagavan vyaktiṁ
vidur devā na dānavāḥ
Synonyms
sarvam — all; etat — this; ṛtam — truth; manye — I accept; yat — which; mām — unto me; vadasi — You tell; keśava — O Kṛṣṇa; na — never; hi — certainly; te — Your; bhagavan — O Personality of Godhead; vyaktim — revelation; viduḥ — can know; devāḥ — the demigods; na — nor; dānavāḥ — the demons.

Translation
O Kṛṣṇa, I totally accept as truth all that You have told me. Neither the demigods nor the demons, O Lord, can understand Your personality.

TEXT 15
स्वयमेवात्मनात्मानं वेत्थ त्वं पुरुषोत्तम ।
भूतभावन भूतेश देवदेव जगत्पते ॥ १५ ॥
svayam evātmanātmānaṁ
vettha tvaṁ puruṣottama
bhūta-bhāvana bhūteśa
deva-deva jagat-pate
Synonyms
svayam — personally; eva — certainly; ātmanā — by Yourself; ātmānam — Yourself; vettha — know; tvam — You; puruṣa-uttama — O greatest of all persons; bhūta-bhāvana — O origin of everything; bhūta-īśa — O Lord of everything; deva-deva — O Lord of all demigods; jagat-pate — O Lord of the entire universe.

Translation
Indeed, You alone know Yourself by Your own internal potency, O Supreme Person, origin of all, Lord of all beings, God of gods, Lord of the universe!

TEXT 16
वक्तुमर्हस्यशेषेण दिव्या ह्यात्मविभूतय: ।
याभिर्विभूतिभिर्लोकानिमांस्त्वं व्याप्य तिष्ठसि ॥ १६ ॥
vaktum arhasy aśeṣeṇa
divyā hy ātma-vibhūtayaḥ
yābhir vibhūtibhir lokān
imāṁs tvaṁ vyāpya tiṣṭhasi
Synonyms
vaktum — to say; arhasi — You deserve; aśeṣeṇa — in detail; divyāḥ — divine; hi — certainly; ātma — Your own; vibhūtayaḥ — opulences; yābhiḥ — by which; vibhūtibhiḥ — opulences; lokān — all the planets; imān — these; tvam — You; vyāpya — pervading; tiṣṭhasi — remain.

Translation
Please tell me in detail of Your divine opulences by which You pervade all these worlds.

TEXT 17
कथं विद्यामहं योगिंस्त्वां सदा परिचिन्तयन् ।
केषु केषु च भावेषु चिन्त्योऽसि भगवन्मया ॥ १७ ॥
kathaṁ vidyām ahaṁ yogiṁs
tvāṁ sadā paricintayan
keṣu keṣu ca bhāveṣu
cintyo ’si bhagavan mayā
Synonyms
katham — how; vidyām aham — shall I know; yogin — O supreme mystic; tvām — You; sadā — always; paricintayan — thinking of; keṣu — in which; keṣu — in which; ca — also; bhāveṣu — natures; cintyaḥ asi — You are to be remembered; bhagavan — O Supreme; mayā — by me.

Translation
O Kṛṣṇa, O supreme mystic, how shall I constantly think of You, and how shall I know You? In what various forms are You to be remembered, O Supreme Personality of Godhead?

TEXT 18
विस्तरेणात्मनो योगं विभूतिं च जनार्दन ।
भूय: कथय तृप्‍तिर्हि श‍ृण्वतो नास्ति मेऽमृतम् ॥ १८ ॥
vistareṇātmano yogaṁ
vibhūtiṁ ca janārdana
bhūyaḥ kathaya tṛptir hi
śṛṇvato nāsti me ’mṛtam
Synonyms
vistareṇa — in detail; ātmanaḥ — Your; yogam — mystic power; vibhūtim — opulences; ca — also; jana-ardana — O killer of the atheists; bhūyaḥ — again; kathaya — describe; tṛptiḥ — satisfaction; hi — certainly; śṛṇvataḥ — hearing; na asti — there is not; me — my; amṛtam — nectar.

Translation
O Janārdana, again please describe in detail the mystic power of Your opulences. I am never satiated in hearing about You, for the more I hear the more I want to taste the nectar of Your words.

TEXT 19
श्रीभगवानुवाच
हन्त ते कथयिष्यामि दिव्या ह्यात्मविभूतय: ।
प्राधान्यत: कुरुश्रेष्ठ नास्त्यन्तो विस्तरस्य मे ॥ १९ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
hanta te kathayiṣyāmi
divyā hy ātma-vibhūtayaḥ
prādhānyataḥ kuru-śreṣṭha
nāsty anto vistarasya me
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; hanta — yes; te — unto you; kathayiṣyāmi — I shall speak; divyāḥ — divine; hi — certainly; ātma-vibhūtayaḥ — personal opulences; prādhānyataḥ — which are principal; kuru-śreṣṭha — O best of the Kurus; na asti — there is not; antaḥ — limit; vistarasya — to the extent; me — My.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Yes, I will tell you of My splendorous manifestations, but only of those which are prominent, O Arjuna, for My opulence is limitless.

TEXT 20
अहमात्मा गुडाकेश सर्वभूताशयस्थित: ।
अहमादिश्च मध्यं च भूतानामन्त एव च ॥ २० ॥
aham ātmā guḍākeśa
sarva-bhūtāśaya-sthitaḥ
aham ādiś ca madhyaṁ ca
bhūtānām anta eva ca
Synonyms
aham — I; ātmā — the soul; guḍākeśa — O Arjuna; sarva-bhūta — of all living entities; āśaya-sthitaḥ — situated within the heart; aham — I am; ādiḥ — the origin; ca — also; madhyam — middle; ca — also; bhūtānām — of all living entities; antaḥ — end; eva — certainly; ca — and.

Translation
I am the Supersoul, O Arjuna, seated in the hearts of all living entities. I am the beginning, the middle and the end of all beings.

TEXT 21
आदित्यानामहं विष्णुर्ज्योतिषां रविरंश‍ुमान् ।
मरीचिर्मरुतामस्मि नक्षत्राणामहं शशी ॥ २१ ॥
ādityānām ahaṁ viṣṇur
jyotiṣāṁ ravir aṁśumān
marīcir marutām asmi
nakṣatrāṇām ahaṁ śaśī
Synonyms
ādityānām — of the Ādityas; aham — I am; viṣṇuḥ — the Supreme Lord; jyotiṣām — of all luminaries; raviḥ — the sun; aṁśu-mān — radiant; marīciḥ — Marīci; marutām — of the Maruts; asmi — I am; nakṣatrāṇām — of the stars; aham — I am; śaśī — the moon.

Translation
Of the Ādityas I am Viṣṇu, of lights I am the radiant sun, of the Maruts I am Marīci, and among the stars I am the moon.

TEXT 22
वेदानां सामवेदोऽस्मि देवानामस्मि वासव: ।
इन्द्रियाणां मनश्चास्मि भूतानामस्मि चेतना ॥ २२ ॥
vedānāṁ sāma-vedo ’smi
devānām asmi vāsavaḥ
indriyāṇāṁ manaś cāsmi
bhūtānām asmi cetanā
Synonyms
vedānām — of all the Vedas; sāma-vedaḥ — the Sāma Veda; asmi — I am; devānām — of all the demigods; asmi — I am; vāsavaḥ — the heavenly king; indriyāṇām — of all the senses; manaḥ — the mind; ca — also; asmi — I am; bhūtānām — of all living entities; asmi — I am; cetanā — the living force.

Translation
Of the Vedas I am the Sāma Veda; of the demigods I am Indra, the king of heaven; of the senses I am the mind; and in living beings I am the living force [consciousness].

TEXT 23
रुद्राणां शङ्करश्चास्मि वित्तेशो यक्षरक्षसाम् ।
वसूनां पावकश्चास्मि मेरु: शिखरिणामहम् ॥ २३ ॥
rudrāṇāṁ śaṅkaraś cāsmi
vitteśo yakṣa-rakṣasām
vasūnāṁ pāvakaś cāsmi
meruḥ śikhariṇām aham
Synonyms
rudrāṇām — of all the Rudras; śaṅkaraḥ — Lord Śiva; ca — also; asmi — I am; vitta-īśaḥ — the lord of the treasury of the demigods; yakṣa-rakṣasām — of the Yakṣas and Rākṣasas; vasūnām — of the Vasus; pāvakaḥ — fire; ca — also; asmi — I am; meruḥ — Meru; śikhariṇām — of all mountains; aham — I am.

Translation
Of all the Rudras I am Lord Śiva, of the Yakṣas and Rākṣasas I am the Lord of wealth [Kuvera], of the Vasus I am fire [Agni], and of mountains I am Meru.

TEXT 24
पुरोधसां च मुख्यं मां विद्धि पार्थ बृहस्पतिम् ।
सेनानीनामहं स्कन्द: सरसामस्मि सागर: ॥ २४ ॥
purodhasāṁ ca mukhyaṁ māṁ
viddhi pārtha bṛhaspatim
senānīnām ahaṁ skandaḥ
sarasām asmi sāgaraḥ
Synonyms
purodhasām — of all priests; ca — also; mukhyam — the chief; mām — Me; viddhi — understand; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; bṛhaspatim — Bṛhaspati; senānīnām — of all commanders; aham — I am; skandaḥ — Kārttikeya; sarasām — of all reservoirs of water; asmi — I am; sāgaraḥ — the ocean.

Translation
Of priests, O Arjuna, know Me to be the chief, Bṛhaspati. Of generals I am Kārttikeya, and of bodies of water I am the ocean.

TEXT 25
महर्षीणां भृगुरहं गिरामस्म्येकमक्षरम् ।
यज्ञानां जपयज्ञोऽस्मि स्थावराणां हिमालय: ॥ २५ ॥
maharṣīṇāṁ bhṛgur ahaṁ
girām asmy ekam akṣaram
yajñānāṁ japa-yajño ’smi
sthāvarāṇāṁ himālayaḥ
Synonyms
mahā-ṛṣīṇām — among the great sages; bhṛguḥ — Bhṛgu; aham — I am; girām — of vibrations; asmi — I am; ekam akṣaram — praṇava; yajñānām — of sacrifices; japa-yajñaḥ — chanting; asmi — I am; sthāvarāṇām — of immovable things; himālayaḥ — the Himālayan mountains.

Translation
Of the great sages I am Bhṛgu; of vibrations I am the transcendental oṁ. Of sacrifices I am the chanting of the holy names [japa], and of immovable things I am the Himālayas.

TEXT 26
अश्वत्थ: सर्ववृक्षाणां देवर्षीणां च नारद: ।
गन्धर्वाणां चित्ररथ: सिद्धानां कपिलो मुनि: ॥ २६ ॥
aśvatthaḥ sarva-vṛkṣāṇāṁ
devarṣīṇāṁ ca nāradaḥ
gandharvāṇāṁ citrarathaḥ
siddhānāṁ kapilo muniḥ
Synonyms
aśvatthaḥ — the banyan tree; sarva-vṛkṣāṇām — of all trees; deva-ṛṣīṇām — of all the sages amongst the demigods; ca — and; nāradaḥ — Nārada; gandharvāṇām — of the citizens of the Gandharva planet; citrarathaḥ — Citraratha; siddhānām — of all those who are perfected; kapilaḥ muniḥ — Kapila Muni.

Translation
Of all trees I am the banyan tree, and of the sages among the demigods I am Nārada. Of the Gandharvas I am Citraratha, and among perfected beings I am the sage Kapila.

TEXT 27
उच्‍चैःश्रवसमश्वानां विद्धि माममृतोद्भ‍वम् ।
ऐरावतं गजेन्द्राणां नराणां च नराधिपम् ॥ २७ ॥
uccaiḥśravasam aśvānāṁ
viddhi mām amṛtodbhavam
airāvataṁ gajendrāṇāṁ
narāṇāṁ ca narādhipam
Synonyms
uccaiḥśravasam — Uccaiḥśravā; aśvānām — among horses; viddhi — know; mām — Me; amṛta-udbhavam — produced from the churning of the ocean; airāvatam — Airāvata; gaja-indrāṇām — of lordly elephants; narāṇām — among human beings; ca — and; nara-adhipam — the king.

Translation
Of horses know Me to be Uccaiḥśravā, produced during the churning of the ocean for nectar. Of lordly elephants I am Airāvata, and among men I am the monarch.

TEXT 28
आयुधानामहं वज्रं धेनूनामस्मि कामधुक् ।
प्रजनश्चास्मि कन्दर्प: सर्पाणामस्मि वासुकि: ॥ २८ ॥
āyudhānām ahaṁ vajraṁ
dhenūnām asmi kāma-dhuk
prajanaś cāsmi kandarpaḥ
sarpāṇām asmi vāsukiḥ
Synonyms
āyudhānām — of all weapons; aham — I am; vajram — the thunderbolt; dhenūnām — of cows; asmi — I am; kāma-dhuk — the surabhi cow; prajanaḥ — the cause for begetting children; ca — and; asmi — I am; kandarpaḥ — Cupid; sarpāṇām — of serpents; asmi — I am; vāsukiḥ — Vāsuki.

Translation
Of weapons I am the thunderbolt; among cows I am the surabhi. Of causes for procreation I am Kandarpa, the god of love, and of serpents I am Vāsuki.

TEXT 29
अनन्तश्चास्मि नागानां वरुणो यादसामहम् ।
पितॄणामर्यमा चास्मि यम: संयमतामहम् ॥ २९ ॥
anantaś cāsmi nāgānāṁ
varuṇo yādasām aham
pitṝṇām aryamā cāsmi
yamaḥ saṁyamatām aham
Synonyms
anantaḥ — Ananta; ca — also; asmi — I am; nāgānām — of the many-hooded serpents; varuṇaḥ — the demigod controlling the water; yādasām — of all aquatics; aham — I am; pitṝṇām — of the ancestors; aryamā — Aryamā; ca — also; asmi — I am; yamaḥ — the controller of death; saṁyamatām — of all regulators; aham — I am.

Translation
Of the many-hooded Nāgas I am Ananta, and among the aquatics I am the demigod Varuṇa. Of departed ancestors I am Aryamā, and among the dispensers of law I am Yama, the lord of death.

TEXT 30
प्रह्लादश्चास्मि दैत्यानां काल: कलयतामहम् ।
मृगाणां च मृगेन्द्रोऽहं वैनतेयश्च पक्षिणाम् ॥ ३० ॥
prahlādaś cāsmi daityānāṁ
kālaḥ kalayatām aham
mṛgāṇāṁ ca mṛgendro ’haṁ
vainateyaś ca pakṣiṇām
Synonyms
prahlādaḥ — Prahlāda; ca — also; asmi — I am; daityānām — of the demons; kālaḥ — time; kalayatām — of subduers; aham — I am; mṛgāṇām — of animals; ca — and; mṛga-indraḥ — the lion; aham — I am; vainateyaḥ — Garuḍa; ca — also; pakṣiṇām — of birds.

Translation
Among the Daitya demons I am the devoted Prahlāda, among subduers I am time, among beasts I am the lion, and among birds I am Garuḍa.

TEXT 31
पवन: पवतामस्मि राम: शस्त्रभृतामहम् ।
झषाणां मकरश्चास्मि स्रोतसामस्मि जाह्नवी ॥ ३१ ॥
pavanaḥ pavatām asmi
rāmaḥ śastra-bhṛtām aham
jhaṣāṇāṁ makaraś cāsmi
srotasām asmi jāhnavī
Synonyms
pavanaḥ — the wind; pavatām — of all that purifies; asmi — I am; rāmaḥ — Rāma; śastra-bhṛtām — of the carriers of weapons; aham — I am; jhaṣāṇām — of all fish; makaraḥ — the shark; ca — also; asmi — I am; srotasām — of flowing rivers; asmi — I am; jāhnavī — the river Ganges.

Translation
Of purifiers I am the wind, of the wielders of weapons I am Rāma, of fishes I am the shark, and of flowing rivers I am the Ganges.

TEXT 32
सर्गाणामादिरन्तश्च मध्यं चैवाहमर्जुन ।
अध्यात्मविद्या विद्यानां वाद: प्रवदतामहम् ॥ ३२ ॥
sargāṇām ādir antaś ca
madhyaṁ caivāham arjuna
adhyātma-vidyā vidyānāṁ
vādaḥ pravadatām aham
Synonyms
sargāṇām — of all creations; ādiḥ — the beginning; antaḥ — end; ca — and; madhyam — middle; ca — also; eva — certainly; aham — I am; arjuna — O Arjuna; adhyātma-vidyā — spiritual knowledge; vidyānām — of all education; vādaḥ — the natural conclusion; pravadatām — of arguments; aham — I am.

Translation
Of all creations I am the beginning and the end and also the middle, O Arjuna. Of all sciences I am the spiritual science of the self, and among logicians I am the conclusive truth.

TEXT 33
अक्षराणामकारोऽस्मि द्वन्द्व: सामासिकस्य च ।
अहमेवाक्षय: कालो धाताहं विश्वतोमुख: ॥ ३३ ॥
akṣarāṇām a-kāro ’smi
dvandvaḥ sāmāsikasya ca
aham evākṣayaḥ kālo
dhātāhaṁ viśvato-mukhaḥ
Synonyms
akṣarāṇām — of letters; a-kāraḥ — the first letter; asmi — I am; dvandvaḥ — the dual; sāmāsikasya — of compounds; ca — and; aham — I am; eva — certainly; akṣayaḥ — eternal; kālaḥ — time; dhātā — the creator; aham — I am; viśvataḥ-mukhaḥ — Brahmā.

Translation
Of letters I am the letter A, and among compound words I am the dual compound. I am also inexhaustible time, and of creators I am Brahmā.

TEXT 34
मृत्यु: सर्वहरश्चाहमुद्भ‍वश्च भविष्यताम् ।
कीर्ति: श्रीर्वाक्‍च नारीणां स्मृतिर्मेधा धृति: क्षमा ॥ ३४ ॥
mṛtyuḥ sarva-haraś cāham
udbhavaś ca bhaviṣyatām
kīrtiḥ śrīr vāk ca nārīṇāṁ
smṛtir medhā dhṛtiḥ kṣamā
Synonyms
mṛtyuḥ — death; sarva-haraḥ — all-devouring; ca — also; aham — I am; udbhavaḥ — generation; ca — also; bhaviṣyatām — of future manifestations; kīrtiḥ — fame; śrīḥ — opulence or beauty; vāk — fine speech; ca — also; nārīṇām — of women; smṛtiḥ — memory; medhā — intelligence; dhṛtiḥ — firmness; kṣamā — patience.

Translation
I am all-devouring death, and I am the generating principle of all that is yet to be. Among women I am fame, fortune, fine speech, memory, intelligence, steadfastness and patience.

TEXT 35
बृहत्साम तथा साम्न‍ां गायत्री छन्दसामहम् ।
मासानां मार्गशीर्षोऽहमृतूनां कुसुमाकर: ॥ ३५ ॥
bṛhat-sāma tathā sāmnāṁ
gāyatrī chandasām aham
māsānāṁ mārga-śīrṣo ’ham
ṛtūnāṁ kusumākaraḥ
Synonyms
bṛhat-sāma — the Bṛhat-sāma; tathā — also; sāmnām — of the Sāma Veda songs; gāyatrī — the Gāyatrī hymns; chandasām — of all poetry; aham — I am; māsānām — of months; mārga-śīrṣaḥ — the month of November-December; aham — I am; ṛtūnām — of all seasons; kusuma-ākaraḥ — spring.

Translation
Of the hymns in the Sāma Veda I am the Bṛhat-sāma, and of poetry I am the Gāyatrī. Of months I am Mārgaśīrṣa [November-December], and of seasons I am flower-bearing spring.

TEXT 36
द्यूतं छलयतामस्मि तेजस्तेजस्विनामहम् ।
जयोऽस्मि व्यवसायोऽस्मि सत्त्वं सत्त्ववतामहम् ॥ ३६ ॥
dyūtaṁ chalayatām asmi
tejas tejasvinām aham
jayo ’smi vyavasāyo ’smi
sattvaṁ sattvavatām aham
Synonyms
dyūtam — gambling; chalayatām — of all cheats; asmi — I am; tejaḥ — the splendor; tejasvinām — of everything splendid; aham — I am; jayaḥ — victory; asmi — I am; vyavasāyaḥ — enterprise or adventure; asmi — I am; sattvam — the strength; sattva-vatām — of the strong; aham — I am.

Translation
I am also the gambling of cheats, and of the splendid I am the splendor. I am victory, I am adventure, and I am the strength of the strong.

TEXT 37
वृष्णीनां वासुदेवोऽस्मि पाण्डवानां धनञ्जय: ।
मुनीनामप्यहं व्यास: कवीनामुशना कवि: ॥ ३७ ॥
vṛṣṇīnāṁ vāsudevo ’smi
pāṇḍavānāṁ dhanañ-jayaḥ
munīnām apy ahaṁ vyāsaḥ
kavīnām uśanā kaviḥ
Synonyms
vṛṣṇīnām — of the descendants of Vṛṣṇi; vāsudevaḥ — Kṛṣṇa in Dvārakā; asmi — I am; pāṇḍavānām — of the Pāṇḍavas; dhanam-jayaḥ — Arjuna; munīnām — of the sages; api — also; aham — I am; vyāsaḥ — Vyāsa, the compiler of all Vedic literature; kavīnām — of all great thinkers; uśanā — Uśanā; kaviḥ — the thinker.

Translation
Of the descendants of Vṛṣṇi I am Vāsudeva, and of the Pāṇḍavas I am Arjuna. Of the sages I am Vyāsa, and among great thinkers I am Uśanā.

TEXT 38
दण्डो दमयतामस्मि नीतिरस्मि जिगीषताम् ।
मौनं चैवास्मि गुह्यानां ज्ञानं ज्ञानवतामहम् ॥ ३८ ॥
daṇḍo damayatām asmi
nītir asmi jigīṣatām
maunaṁ caivāsmi guhyānāṁ
jñānaṁ jñānavatām aham
Synonyms
daṇḍaḥ — punishment; damayatām — of all means of suppression; asmi — I am; nītiḥ — morality; asmi — I am; jigīṣatām — of those who seek victory; maunam — silence; ca — and; eva — also; asmi — I am; guhyānām — of secrets; jñānam — knowledge; jñāna-vatām — of the wise; aham — I am.

Translation
Among all means of suppressing lawlessness I am punishment, and of those who seek victory I am morality. Of secret things I am silence, and of the wise I am the wisdom.

TEXT 39
यच्च‍ापि सर्वभूतानां बीजं तदहमर्जुन ।
न तदस्ति विना यत्स्यान्मया भूतं चराचरम् ॥ ३९ ॥
yac cāpi sarva-bhūtānāṁ
bījaṁ tad aham arjuna
na tad asti vinā yat syān
mayā bhūtaṁ carācaram
Synonyms
yat — whatever; ca — also; api — may be; sarva-bhūtānām — of all creations; bījam — seed; tat — that; aham — I am; arjuna — O Arjuna; na — not; tat — that; asti — there is; vinā — without; yat — which; syāt — exists; mayā — Me; bhūtam — created being; cara-acaram — moving and nonmoving.

Translation
Furthermore, O Arjuna, I am the generating seed of all existences. There is no being – moving or nonmoving – that can exist without Me.

TEXT 40
नान्तोऽस्ति मम दिव्यानां विभूतीनां परन्तप ।
एष तूद्देशत: प्रोक्तो विभूतेर्विस्तरो मया ॥ ४० ॥
nānto ’sti mama divyānāṁ
vibhūtīnāṁ paran-tapa
eṣa tūddeśataḥ prokto
vibhūter vistaro mayā
Synonyms
na — nor; antaḥ — a limit; asti — there is; mama — My; divyānām — of the divine; vibhūtīnām — opulences; param-tapa — O conqueror of the enemies; eṣaḥ — all this; tu — but; uddeśataḥ — as examples; proktaḥ — spoken; vibhūteḥ — of opulences; vistaraḥ — the expanse; mayā — by Me.

Translation
O mighty conqueror of enemies, there is no end to My divine manifestations. What I have spoken to you is but a mere indication of My infinite opulences.

TEXT 41
यद्यद्विभूतिमत्सत्त्वं श्रीमदूर्जितमेव वा ।
तत्तदेवावगच्छ त्वं मम तेजोऽशसम्भवम् ॥ ४१ ॥
yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ
śrīmad ūrjitam eva vā
tat tad evāvagaccha tvaṁ
mama tejo-’ṁśa-sambhavam
Synonyms
yat yat — whatever; vibhūti — opulences; mat — having; sattvam — existence; śrī-mat — beautiful; ūrjitam — glorious; eva — certainly; vā — or; tat tat — all those; eva — certainly; avagaccha — must know; tvam — you; mama — My; tejaḥ — of the splendor; aṁśa — a part; sambhavam — born of.

Translation
Know that all opulent, beautiful and glorious creations spring from but a spark of My splendor.

TEXT 42
अथवा बहुनैतेन किं ज्ञातेन तवार्जुन ।
विष्टभ्याहमिदं कृत्स्नमेकांशेन स्थितो जगत् ॥ ४२ ॥
atha vā bahunaitena
kiṁ jñātena tavārjuna
viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam
ekāṁśena sthito jagat
Synonyms
atha vā — or; bahunā — many; etena — by this kind; kim — what; jñātena — by knowing; tava — your; arjuna — O Arjuna; viṣṭabhya — pervading; aham — I; idam — this; kṛtsnam — entire; eka — by one; aṁśena — part; sthitaḥ — am situated; jagat — universe.

Translation
But what need is there, Arjuna, for all this detailed knowledge? With a single fragment of Myself I pervade and support this entire universe.