TEXTS 1-2
अर्जुन उवाच
प्रकृतिं पुरुषं चैव क्षेत्रं क्षेत्रज्ञमेव च ।
एतद्वेदितुमिच्छामि ज्ञानं ज्ञेयं च केशव ॥ १ ॥
श्रीभगवानुवाच
इदं शरीरं कौन्तेय क्षेत्रमित्यभिधीयते ।
एतद्यो वेत्ति तं प्राहु: क्षेत्रज्ञ इति तद्विद: ॥ २ ॥
arjuna uvāca
prakṛtiṁ puruṣaṁ caiva
kṣetraṁ kṣetra-jñam eva ca
etad veditum icchāmi
jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ ca keśava
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
idaṁ śarīraṁ kaunteya
kṣetram ity abhidhīyate
etad yo vetti taṁ prāhuḥ
kṣetra-jña iti tad-vidaḥ
Synonyms
arjunaḥ uvāca — Arjuna said; prakṛtim — nature; puruṣam — the enjoyer; ca — also; eva — certainly; kṣetram — the field; kṣetra-jñam — the knower of the field; eva — certainly; ca — also; etat — all this; veditum — to understand; icchāmi — I wish; jñānam — knowledge; jñeyam — the object of knowledge; ca — also; keśava — O Kṛṣṇa; śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Personality of Godhead said; idam — this; śarīram — body; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; kṣetram — the field; iti — thus; abhidhīyate — is called; etat — this; yaḥ — one who; vetti — knows; tam — he; prāhuḥ — is called; kṣetra-jñaḥ — the knower of the field; iti — thus; tat-vidaḥ — by those who know this.

Translation
Arjuna said: O my dear Kṛṣṇa, I wish to know about prakṛti [nature], puruṣa [the enjoyer], and the field and the knower of the field, and of knowledge and the object of knowledge. The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: This body, O son of Kuntī, is called the field, and one who knows this body is called the knower of the field.

TEXT 3
क्षेत्रज्ञं चापि मां विद्धि सर्वक्षेत्रेषु भारत ।
क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञयोर्ज्ञानं यत्तज्ज्ञानं मतं मम ॥ ३ ॥
kṣetra-jñaṁ cāpi māṁ viddhi
sarva-kṣetreṣu bhārata
kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor jñānaṁ
yat taj jñānaṁ mataṁ mama
Synonyms
kṣetra-jñam — the knower of the field; ca — also; api — certainly; mām — Me; viddhi — know; sarva — all; kṣetreṣu — in bodily fields; bhārata — O son of Bharata; kṣetra — the field of activities (the body); kṣetra-jñayoḥ — and the knower of the field; jñānam — knowledge of; yat — that which; tat — that; jñānam — knowledge; matam — opinion; mama — My.

Translation
O scion of Bharata, you should understand that I am also the knower in all bodies, and to understand this body and its knower is called knowledge. That is My opinion.

TEXT 4
तत्क्षेत्रं यच्च‍ यादृक्‍च यद्विकारि यतश्च यत् ।
स च यो यत्प्रभावश्च तत्समासेन मे श‍ृणु ॥ ४ ॥
tat kṣetraṁ yac ca yādṛk ca
yad-vikāri yataś ca yat
sa ca yo yat-prabhāvaś ca
tat samāsena me śṛṇu
Synonyms
tat — that; kṣetram — field of activities; yat — what; ca — also; yādṛk — as it is; ca — also; yat — having what; vikāri — changes; yataḥ — from which; ca — also; yat — what; saḥ — he; ca — also; yaḥ — who; yat — having what; prabhāvaḥ — influence; ca — also; tat — that; samāsena — in summary; me — from Me; śṛṇu — understand.

Translation
Now please hear My brief description of this field of activity and how it is constituted, what its changes are, whence it is produced, who that knower of the field of activities is, and what his influences are.

TEXT 5
ऋषिभिर्बहुधा गीतं छन्दोभिर्विविधै: पृथक् ।
ब्रह्मसूत्रपदैश्चैव हेतुमद्भ‍िर्विनिश्चितै: ॥ ५ ॥
ṛṣibhir bahudhā gītaṁ
chandobhir vividhaiḥ pṛthak
brahma-sūtra-padaiś caiva
hetumadbhir viniścitaiḥ
Synonyms
ṛṣibhiḥ — by the wise sages; bahudhā — in many ways; gītam — described; chandobhiḥ — by Vedic hymns; vividhaiḥ — various; pṛthak — variously; brahma-sūtra — of the Vedānta; padaiḥ — by the aphorisms; ca — also; eva — certainly; hetu-madbhiḥ — with cause and effect; viniścitaiḥ — certain.

Translation
That knowledge of the field of activities and of the knower of activities is described by various sages in various Vedic writings. It is especially presented in Vedānta-sūtra with all reasoning as to cause and effect.

TEXTS 6-7
महाभूतान्यहङ्कारो बुद्धिरव्यक्तमेव च ।
इन्द्रियाणि दशैकं च पञ्च चेन्द्रियगोचरा: ॥ ६ ॥
इच्छा द्वेष: सुखं दु:खं सङ्घातश्चेतना धृति: ।
एतत्क्षेत्रं समासेन सविकारमुदाहृतम् ॥ ७ ॥
mahā-bhūtāny ahaṅkāro
buddhir avyaktam eva ca
indriyāṇi daśaikaṁ ca
pañca cendriya-gocarāḥ
icchā dveṣaḥ sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ
saṅghātaś cetanā dhṛtiḥ
etat kṣetraṁ samāsena
sa-vikāram udāhṛtam
Synonyms
mahā-bhūtāni — the great elements; ahaṅkāraḥ — false ego; buddhiḥ — intelligence; avyaktam — the unmanifested; eva — certainly; ca — also; indriyāṇi — the senses; daśa-ekam — eleven; ca — also; pañca — five; ca — also; indriya-go-carāḥ — the objects of the senses; icchā — desire; dveṣaḥ — hatred; sukham — happiness; duḥkham — distress; saṅghātaḥ — the aggregate; cetanā — living symptoms; dhṛtiḥ — conviction; etat — all this; kṣetram — the field of activities; samāsena — in summary; sa-vikāram — with interactions; udāhṛtam — exemplified.

Translation
The five great elements, false ego, intelligence, the unmanifested, the ten senses and the mind, the five sense objects, desire, hatred, happiness, distress, the aggregate, the life symptoms, and convictions – all these are considered, in summary, to be the field of activities and its interactions.

TEXTS 8-12
अमानित्वमदम्भित्वमहिंसा क्षान्तिरार्जवम् ।
आचार्योपासनं शौचं स्थैर्यमात्मविनिग्रह: ॥ ८ ॥
इन्द्रियार्थेषु वैराग्यमनहङ्कार एव च ।
जन्ममृत्युजराव्याधिदु:खदोषानुदर्शनम् ॥ ९ ॥
असक्तिरनभिष्वङ्ग: पुत्रदारगृहादिषु ।
नित्यं च समचित्तत्वमिष्टानिष्टोपपत्तिषु ॥ १० ॥
मयि चानन्ययोगेन भक्तिरव्यभिचारिणी ।
विविक्तदेशसेवित्वमरतिर्जनसंसदि ॥ ११ ॥
अध्यात्मज्ञाननित्यत्वं तत्त्वज्ञानार्थदर्शनम् ।
एतज्ज्ञानमिति प्रोक्तमज्ञानं यदतोऽन्यथा ॥ १२ ॥
amānitvam adambhitvam
ahiṁsā kṣāntir ārjavam
ācāryopāsanaṁ śaucaṁ
sthairyam ātma-vinigrahaḥ
indriyārtheṣu vairāgyam
anahaṅkāra eva ca
janma-mṛtyu-jarā-vyādhi-
duḥkha-doṣānudarśanam
asaktir anabhiṣvaṅgaḥ
putra-dāra-gṛhādiṣu
nityaṁ ca sama-cittatvam
iṣṭāniṣṭopapattiṣu
mayi cānanya-yogena
bhaktir avyabhicāriṇī
vivikta-deśa-sevitvam
aratir jana-saṁsadi
adhyātma-jñāna-nityatvaṁ
tattva-jñānārtha-darśanam
etaj jñānam iti proktam
ajñānaṁ yad ato ’nyathā
Synonyms
amānitvam — humility; adambhitvam — pridelessness; ahiṁsā — nonviolence; kṣāntiḥ — tolerance; ārjavam — simplicity; ācārya-upāsanam — approaching a bona fide spiritual master; śaucam — cleanliness; sthairyam — steadfastness; ātma-vinigrahaḥ — self-control; indriya-artheṣu — in the matter of the senses; vairāgyam — renunciation; anahaṅkāraḥ — being without false egoism; eva — certainly; ca — also; janma — of birth; mṛtyu — death; jarā — old age; vyādhi — and disease; duḥkha — of the distress; doṣa — the fault; anudarśanam — observing; asaktiḥ — being without attachment; anabhiṣvaṅgaḥ — being without association; putra — for son; dāra — wife; gṛha-ādiṣu — home, etc.; nityam — constant; ca — also; sama-cittatvam — equilibrium; iṣṭa — the desirable; aniṣṭa — and undesirable; upapattiṣu — having obtained; mayi — unto Me; ca — also; ananya-yogena — by unalloyed devotional service; bhaktiḥ — devotion; avyabhicāriṇī — without any break; vivikta — to solitary; deśa — places; sevitvam — aspiring; aratiḥ — being without attachment; jana-saṁsadi — to people in general; adhyātma — pertaining to the self; jñāna — in knowledge; nityatvam — constancy; tattva-jñāna — of knowledge of the truth; artha — for the object; darśanam — philosophy; etat — all this; jñānam — knowledge; iti — thus; proktam — declared; ajñānam — ignorance; yat — that which; ataḥ — from this; anyathā — other.

Translation
Humility; pridelessness; nonviolence; tolerance; simplicity; approaching a bona fide spiritual master; cleanliness; steadiness; self-control; renunciation of the objects of sense gratification; absence of false ego; the perception of the evil of birth, death, old age and disease; detachment; freedom from entanglement with children, wife, home and the rest; even-mindedness amid pleasant and unpleasant events; constant and unalloyed devotion to Me; aspiring to live in a solitary place; detachment from the general mass of people; accepting the importance of self-realization; and philosophical search for the Absolute Truth – all these I declare to be knowledge, and besides this whatever there may be is ignorance.

TEXT 13
ज्ञेयं यत्तत्प्रवक्ष्यामि यज्ज्ञात्वामृतमश्न‍ुते ।
अनादिमत्परं ब्रह्म न सत्तन्नासदुच्यते ॥ १३ ॥
jñeyaṁ yat tat pravakṣyāmi
yaj jñātvāmṛtam aśnute
anādi mat-paraṁ brahma
na sat tan nāsad ucyate
Synonyms
jñeyam — the knowable; yat — which; tat — that; pravakṣyāmi — I shall now explain; yat — which; jñātvā — knowing; amṛtam — nectar; aśnute — one tastes; anādi — beginningless; mat-param — subordinate to Me; brahma — spirit; na — neither; sat — cause; tat — that; na — nor; asat — effect; ucyate — is said to be.

Translation
I shall now explain the knowable, knowing which you will taste the eternal. Brahman, the spirit, beginningless and subordinate to Me, lies beyond the cause and effect of this material world.

TEXT 14
सर्वत: पाणिपादं तत्सर्वतोऽक्षिशिरोमुखम् ।
सर्वत:श्रुतिमल्ल‍ोके सर्वमावृत्य तिष्ठति ॥ १४ ॥
sarvataḥ pāṇi-pādaṁ tat
sarvato ’kṣi-śiro-mukham
sarvataḥ śrutimal loke
sarvam āvṛtya tiṣṭhati
Synonyms
sarvataḥ — everywhere; pāṇi — hands; pādam — legs; tat — that; sarvataḥ — everywhere; akṣi — eyes; śiraḥ — heads; mukham — faces; sarvataḥ — everywhere; śruti-mat — having ears; loke — in the world; sarvam — everything; āvṛtya — covering; tiṣṭhati — exists.

Translation
Everywhere are His hands and legs, His eyes, heads and faces, and He has ears everywhere. In this way the Supersoul exists, pervading everything.

TEXT 15
सर्वेन्द्रियगुणाभासं सर्वेन्द्रियविवर्जितम् ।
असक्तं सर्वभृच्च‍ैव निर्गुणं गुणभोक्तृ च ॥ १५ ॥
sarvendriya-guṇābhāsaṁ
sarvendriya-vivarjitam
asaktaṁ sarva-bhṛc caiva
nirguṇaṁ guṇa-bhoktṛ ca
Synonyms
sarva — of all; indriya — senses; guṇa — of the qualities; ābhāsam — the original source; sarva — all; indriya — senses; vivarjitam — being without; asaktam — without attachment; sarva-bhṛt — the maintainer of everyone; ca — also; eva — certainly; nirguṇam — without material qualities; guṇa-bhoktṛ — master of the guṇas; ca — also.

Translation
The Supersoul is the original source of all senses, yet He is without senses. He is unattached, although He is the maintainer of all living beings. He transcends the modes of nature, and at the same time He is the master of all the modes of material nature.

TEXT 16
बहिरन्तश्च भूतानामचरं चरमेव च ।
सूक्ष्मत्वात्तदविज्ञेयं दूरस्थं चान्तिके च तत् ॥ १६ ॥
bahir antaś ca bhūtānām
acaraṁ caram eva ca
sūkṣmatvāt tad avijñeyaṁ
dūra-sthaṁ cāntike ca tat
Synonyms
bahiḥ — outside; antaḥ — inside; ca — also; bhūtānām — of all living entities; acaram — not moving; caram — moving; eva — also; ca — and; sūkṣmatvāt — on account of being subtle; tat — that; avijñeyam — unknowable; dūra-stham — far away; ca — also; antike — near; ca — and; tat — that.

Translation
The Supreme Truth exists outside and inside of all living beings, the moving and the nonmoving. Because He is subtle, He is beyond the power of the material senses to see or to know. Although far, far away, He is also near to all.

TEXT 17
अविभक्तं च भूतेषु विभक्तमिव च स्थितम् ।
भूतभर्तृ च तज्ज्ञेयं ग्रसिष्णु प्रभविष्णु च ॥ १७ ॥
avibhaktaṁ ca bhūteṣu
vibhaktam iva ca sthitam
bhūta-bhartṛ ca taj jñeyaṁ
grasiṣṇu prabhaviṣṇu ca
Synonyms
avibhaktam — without division; ca — also; bhūteṣu — in all living beings; vibhaktam — divided; iva — as if; ca — also; sthitam — situated; bhūta-bhartṛ — the maintainer of all living entities; ca — also; tat — that; jñeyam — to be understood; grasiṣṇu — devouring; prabhaviṣṇu — developing; ca — also.

Translation
Although the Supersoul appears to be divided among all beings, He is never divided. He is situated as one. Although He is the maintainer of every living entity, it is to be understood that He devours and develops all.

TEXT 18
ज्योतिषामपि तज्ज्योतिस्तमस: परमुच्यते ।
ज्ञानं ज्ञेयं ज्ञानगम्यं हृदि सर्वस्य विष्ठितम् ॥ १८ ॥
jyotiṣām api taj jyotis
tamasaḥ param ucyate
jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ jñāna-gamyaṁ
hṛdi sarvasya viṣṭhitam
Synonyms
jyotiṣām — in all luminous objects; api — also; tat — that; jyotiḥ — the source of light; tamasaḥ — the darkness; param — beyond; ucyate — is said; jñānam — knowledge; jñeyam — to be known; jñāna-gamyam — to be approached by knowledge; hṛdi — in the heart; sarvasya — of everyone; viṣṭhitam — situated.

Translation
He is the source of light in all luminous objects. He is beyond the darkness of matter and is unmanifested. He is knowledge, He is the object of knowledge, and He is the goal of knowledge. He is situated in everyone’s heart.

TEXT 19
इति क्षेत्रं तथा ज्ञानं ज्ञेयं चोक्तं समासत: ।
मद्भ‍क्त एतद्विज्ञाय मद्भ‍ावायोपपद्यते ॥ १९ ॥
iti kṣetraṁ tathā jñānaṁ
jñeyaṁ coktaṁ samāsataḥ
mad-bhakta etad vijñāya
mad-bhāvāyopapadyate
Synonyms
iti — thus; kṣetram — the field of activities (the body); tathā — also; jñānam — knowledge; jñeyam — the knowable; ca — also; uktam — described; samāsataḥ — in summary; mat-bhaktaḥ — My devotee; etat — all this; vijñāya — after understanding; mat-bhāvāya — to My nature; upapadyate — attains.

Translation
Thus the field of activities [the body], knowledge and the knowable have been summarily described by Me. Only My devotees can understand this thoroughly and thus attain to My nature.

TEXT 20
प्रकृतिं पुरुषं चैव विद्ध्यनादी उभावपि ।
विकारांश्च गुणांश्चैव विद्धि प्रकृतिसम्भवान् ॥ २० ॥
prakṛtiṁ puruṣaṁ caiva
viddhy anādī ubhāv api
vikārāṁś ca guṇāṁś caiva
viddhi prakṛti-sambhavān
Synonyms
prakṛtim — material nature; puruṣam — the living entities; ca — also; eva — certainly; viddhi — you must know; anādī — without beginning; ubhau — both; api — also; vikārān — transformations; ca — also; guṇān — the three modes of nature; ca — also; eva — certainly; viddhi — know; prakṛti — material nature; sambhavān — produced of.

Translation
Material nature and the living entities should be understood to be beginningless. Their transformations and the modes of matter are products of material nature.

TEXT 21
कार्यकारणकर्तृत्वे हेतु: प्रकृतिरुच्यते ।
पुरुष: सुखदु:खानां भोक्तृत्वे हेतुरुच्यते ॥ २१ ॥
kārya-kāraṇa-kartṛtve
hetuḥ prakṛtir ucyate
puruṣaḥ sukha-duḥkhānāṁ
bhoktṛtve hetur ucyate
Synonyms
kārya — of effect; kāraṇa — and cause; kartṛtve — in the matter of creation; hetuḥ — the instrument; prakṛtiḥ — material nature; ucyate — is said to be; puruṣaḥ — the living entity; sukha — of happiness; duḥkhānām — and distress; bhoktṛtve — in enjoyment; hetuḥ — the instrument; ucyate — is said to be.

Translation
Nature is said to be the cause of all material causes and effects, whereas the living entity is the cause of the various sufferings and enjoyments in this world.

TEXT 22
पुरुष: प्रकृतिस्थो हि भुङ्क्ते प्रकृतिजान्गुणान् ।
कारणं गुणसङ्गोऽस्य सदसद्योनिजन्मसु ॥ २२ ॥
puruṣaḥ prakṛti-stho hi
bhuṅkte prakṛti-jān guṇān
kāraṇaṁ guṇa-saṅgo ’sya
sad-asad-yoni-janmasu
Synonyms
puruṣaḥ — the living entity; prakṛti-sthaḥ — being situated in the material energy; hi — certainly; bhuṅkte — enjoys; prakṛti-jān — produced by the material nature; guṇān — the modes of nature; kāraṇam — the cause; guṇa-saṅgaḥ — the association with the modes of nature; asya — of the living entity; sat-asat — in good and bad; yoni — species of life; janmasu — in births.

Translation
The living entity in material nature thus follows the ways of life, enjoying the three modes of nature. This is due to his association with that material nature. Thus he meets with good and evil among various species.

TEXT 23
उपद्रष्टानुमन्ता च भर्ता भोक्ता महेश्वर: ।
परमात्मेति चाप्युक्तो देहेऽस्मिन्पुरुष: पर: ॥ २३ ॥
upadraṣṭānumantā ca
bhartā bhoktā maheśvaraḥ
paramātmeti cāpy ukto
dehe ’smin puruṣaḥ paraḥ
Synonyms
upadraṣṭā — overseer; anumantā — permitter; ca — also; bhartā — master; bhoktā — supreme enjoyer; mahā-īśvaraḥ — the Supreme Lord; parama-ātmā — the Supersoul; iti — also; ca — and; api — indeed; uktaḥ — is said; dehe — in the body; asmin — this; puruṣaḥ — enjoyer; paraḥ — transcendental.

Translation
Yet in this body there is another, a transcendental enjoyer, who is the Lord, the supreme proprietor, who exists as the overseer and permitter, and who is known as the Supersoul.

TEXT 24
य एवं वेत्ति पुरुषं प्रकृतिं च गुणै: सह ।
सर्वथा वर्तमानोऽपि न स भूयोऽभिजायते ॥ २४ ॥
ya evaṁ vetti puruṣaṁ
prakṛtiṁ ca guṇaiḥ saha
sarvathā vartamāno ’pi
na sa bhūyo ’bhijāyate
Synonyms
yaḥ — anyone who; evam — thus; vetti — understands; puruṣam — the living entity; prakṛtim — material nature; ca — and; guṇaiḥ — the modes of material nature; saha — with; sarvathā — in all ways; vartamānaḥ — being situated; api — in spite of; na — never; saḥ — he; bhūyaḥ — again; abhijāyate — takes his birth.

Translation
One who understands this philosophy concerning material nature, the living entity and the interaction of the modes of nature is sure to attain liberation. He will not take birth here again, regardless of his present position.

TEXT 25
ध्यानेनात्मनि पश्यन्ति केचिदात्मानमात्मना ।
अन्ये सांख्येन योगेन कर्मयोगेन चापरे ॥ २५ ॥
dhyānenātmani paśyanti
kecid ātmānam ātmanā
anye sāṅkhyena yogena
karma-yogena cāpare
Synonyms
dhyānena — by meditation; ātmani — within the self; paśyanti — see; kecit — some; ātmānam — the Supersoul; ātmanā — by the mind; anye — others; sāṅkhyena — of philosophical discussion; yogena — by the yoga system; karma-yogena — by activities without fruitive desire; ca — also; apare — others.

Translation
Some perceive the Supersoul within themselves through meditation, others through the cultivation of knowledge, and still others through working without fruitive desires.

TEXT 26
अन्ये त्वेवमजानन्त: श्रुत्वान्येभ्य उपासते ।
तेऽपि चातितरन्त्येव मृत्युं श्रुतिपरायणा: ॥ २६ ॥
anye tv evam ajānantaḥ
śrutvānyebhya upāsate
te ’pi cātitaranty eva
mṛtyuṁ śruti-parāyaṇāḥ
Synonyms
anye — others; tu — but; evam — thus; ajānantaḥ — without spiritual knowledge; śrutvā — by hearing; anyebhyaḥ — from others; upāsate — begin to worship; te — they; api — also; ca — and; atitaranti — transcend; eva — certainly; mṛtyum — the path of death; śruti-parāyaṇāḥ — inclined to the process of hearing.

Translation
Again there are those who, although not conversant in spiritual knowledge, begin to worship the Supreme Person upon hearing about Him from others. Because of their tendency to hear from authorities, they also transcend the path of birth and death.

TEXT 27
यावत्सञ्जायते किञ्चित्सत्त्वं स्थावरजङ्गमम् ।
क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञसंयोगात्तद्विद्धि भरतर्षभ ॥ २७ ॥
yāvat sañjāyate kiñcit
sattvaṁ sthāvara-jaṅgamam
kṣetra-kṣetrajña-saṁyogāt
tad viddhi bharatarṣabha
Synonyms
yāvat — whatever; sañjāyate — comes into being; kiñcit — anything; sattvam — existence; sthāvara — not moving; jaṅgamam — moving; kṣetra — of the body; kṣetra-jña — and the knower of the body; saṁyogāt — by the union between; tat viddhi — you must know it; bharata-ṛṣabha — O chief of the Bhāratas.

Translation
O chief of the Bhāratas, know that whatever you see in existence, both the moving and the nonmoving, is only a combination of the field of activities and the knower of the field.

TEXT 28
समं सर्वेषु भूतेषु तिष्ठन्तं परमेश्वरम् ।
विनश्यत्स्वविनश्यन्तं य: पश्यति स पश्यति ॥ २८ ॥
samaṁ sarveṣu bhūteṣu
tiṣṭhantaṁ parameśvaram
vinaśyatsv avinaśyantaṁ
yaḥ paśyati sa paśyati
Synonyms
samam — equally; sarveṣu — in all; bhūteṣu — living entities; tiṣṭhan tam — residing; parama-īśvaram — the Supersoul; vinaśyatsu — in the destructible; avinaśyantam — not destroyed; yaḥ — anyone who; paśyati — sees; saḥ — he; paśyati — actually sees.

Translation
One who sees the Supersoul accompanying the individual soul in all bodies, and who understands that neither the soul nor the Supersoul within the destructible body is ever destroyed, actually sees.

TEXT 29
समं पश्यन्हि सर्वत्र समवस्थितमीश्वरम् ।
न हिनस्त्यात्मनात्मानं ततो याति परां गतिम् ॥ २९ ॥
samaṁ paśyan hi sarvatra
samavasthitam īśvaram
na hinasty ātmanātmānaṁ
tato yāti parāṁ gatim
Synonyms
samam — equally; paśyan — seeing; hi — certainly; sarvatra — everywhere; samavasthitam — equally situated; īśvaram — the Supersoul; na — does not; hinasti — degrade; ātmanā — by the mind; ātmānam — the soul; tataḥ — then; yāti — reaches; parām — the transcendental; gatim — destination.

Translation
One who sees the Supersoul equally present everywhere, in every living being, does not degrade himself by his mind. Thus he approaches the transcendental destination.

TEXT 30
प्रकृत्यैव च कर्माणि क्रियमाणानि सर्वश: ।
य: पश्यति तथात्मानमकर्तारं स पश्यति ॥ ३० ॥
prakṛtyaiva ca karmāṇi
kriyamāṇāni sarvaśaḥ
yaḥ paśyati tathātmānam
akartāraṁ sa paśyati
Synonyms
prakṛtyā — by material nature; eva — certainly; ca — also; karmāṇi — activities; kriyamāṇāni — being performed; sarvaśaḥ — in all respects; yaḥ — anyone who; paśyati — sees; tathā — also; ātmānam — himself; akartāram — the nondoer; saḥ — he; paśyati — sees perfectly.

Translation
One who can see that all activities are performed by the body, which is created of material nature, and sees that the self does nothing, actually sees.

TEXT 31
यदा भूतपृथग्भावमेकस्थमनुपश्यति ।
तत एव च विस्तारं ब्रह्म सम्पद्यते तदा ॥ ३१ ॥
yadā bhūta-pṛthag-bhāvam
eka-stham anupaśyati
tata eva ca vistāraṁ
brahma sampadyate tadā
Synonyms
yadā — when; bhūta — of living entities; pṛthak-bhāvam — separated identities; eka-stham — situated in one; anupaśyati — one tries to see through authority; tataḥ eva — thereafter; ca — also; vistāram — the expansion; brahma — the Absolute; sampadyate — he attains; tadā — at that time.

Translation
When a sensible man ceases to see different identities due to different material bodies and he sees how beings are expanded everywhere, he attains to the Brahman conception.

TEXT 32
अनादित्वान्निर्गुणत्वात्परमात्मायमव्यय: ।
शरीरस्थोऽपि कौन्तेय न करोति न लिप्यते ॥ ३२ ॥
anāditvān nirguṇatvāt
paramātmāyam avyayaḥ
śarīra-stho ’pi kaunteya
na karoti na lipyate
Synonyms
anāditvāt — due to eternity; nirguṇatvāt — due to being transcendental; parama — beyond material nature; ātmā — spirit; ayam — this; avyayaḥ — inexhaustible; śarīra-sthaḥ — dwelling in the body; api — though; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; na karoti — never does anything; na lipyate — nor is he entangled.

Translation
Those with the vision of eternity can see that the imperishable soul is transcendental, eternal, and beyond the modes of nature. Despite contact with the material body, O Arjuna, the soul neither does anything nor is entangled.

TEXT 33
यथा सर्वगतं सौक्ष्म्यादाकाशं नोपलिप्यते ।
सर्वत्रावस्थितो देहे तथात्मा नोपलिप्यते ॥ ३३ ॥
yathā sarva-gataṁ saukṣmyād
ākāśaṁ nopalipyate
sarvatrāvasthito dehe
tathātmā nopalipyate
Synonyms
yathā — as; sarva-gatam — all-pervading; saukṣmyāt — due to being subtle; ākāśam — the sky; na — never; upalipyate — mixes; sarvatra — everywhere; avasthitaḥ — situated; dehe — in the body; tathā — so; ātmā — the self; na — never; upalipyate — mixes.

Translation
The sky, due to its subtle nature, does not mix with anything, although it is all-pervading. Similarly, the soul situated in Brahman vision does not mix with the body, though situated in that body.

TEXT 34
यथा प्रकाशयत्येक: कृत्स्‍नं लोकमिमं रवि: ।
क्षेत्रं क्षेत्री तथा कृत्स्‍नं प्रकाशयति भारत ॥ ३४ ॥
yathā prakāśayaty ekaḥ
kṛtsnaṁ lokam imaṁ raviḥ
kṣetraṁ kṣetrī tathā kṛtsnaṁ
prakāśayati bhārata
Synonyms
yathā — as; prakāśayati — illuminates; ekaḥ — one; kṛtsnam — the whole; lokam — universe; imam — this; raviḥ — sun; kṣetram — this body; kṣetrī — the soul; tathā — similarly; kṛtsnam — all; prakāśayati — illuminates; bhārata — O son of Bharata.

Translation
O son of Bharata, as the sun alone illuminates all this universe, so does the living entity, one within the body, illuminate the entire body by consciousness.

TEXT 35
क्षेत्रक्षेत्रज्ञयोरेवमन्तरं ज्ञानचक्षुषा ।
भूतप्रकृतिमोक्षं च ये विदुर्यान्ति ते परम् ॥ ३५ ॥
kṣetra-kṣetrajñayor evam
antaraṁ jñāna-cakṣuṣā
bhūta-prakṛti-mokṣaṁ ca
ye vidur yānti te param
Synonyms
kṣetra — of the body; kṣetra-jñayoḥ — of the proprietor of the body; evam — thus; antaram — the difference; jñāna-cakṣuṣā — by the vision of knowledge; bhūta — of the living entity; prakṛti — from material nature; mokṣam — the liberation; ca — also; ye — those who; viduḥ — know; yānti — approach; te — they; param — the Supreme.

Translation
Those who see with eyes of knowledge the difference between the body and the knower of the body, and can also understand the process of liberation from bondage in material nature, attain to the supreme goal.