TEXTS 1-3
श्रीभगवानुवाच
अभयं सत्त्वसंश‍ुद्धिर्ज्ञानयोगव्यवस्थिति: ।
दानं दमश्च यज्ञश्च स्वाध्यायस्तप आर्जवम् ॥ १ ॥
अहिंसा सत्यमक्रोधस्त्याग: शान्तिरपैश‍ुनम् ।
दया भूतेष्वलोलुप्‍त्वं मार्दवं ह्रीरचापलम् ॥ २ ॥
तेज: क्षमा धृति: शौचमद्रोहो नातिमानिता ।
भवन्ति सम्पदं दैवीमभिजातस्य भारत ॥ ३ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
abhayaṁ sattva-saṁśuddhir
jñāna-yoga-vyavasthitiḥ
dānaṁ damaś ca yajñaś ca
svādhyāyas tapa ārjavam
ahiṁsā satyam akrodhas
tyāgaḥ śāntir apaiśunam
dayā bhūteṣv aloluptvaṁ
mārdavaṁ hrīr acāpalam
tejaḥ kṣamā dhṛtiḥ śaucam
adroho nāti-mānitā
bhavanti sampadaṁ daivīm
abhijātasya bhārata
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; abhayam — fearlessness; sattva-saṁśuddhiḥ — purification of one’s existence; jñāna — in knowledge; yoga — of linking up; vyavasthitiḥ — the situation; dānam — charity; damaḥ — controlling the mind; ca — and; yajñaḥ — performance of sacrifice; ca — and; svādhyāyaḥ — study of Vedic literature; tapaḥ — austerity; ārjavam — simplicity; ahiṁsā — nonviolence; satyam — truthfulness; akrodhaḥ — freedom from anger; tyāgaḥ — renunciation; śāntiḥ — tranquillity; apaiśunam — aversion to fault-finding; dayā — mercy; bhūteṣu — towards all living entities; aloluptvam — freedom from greed; mārdavam — gentleness; hrīḥ — modesty; acāpalam — determination; tejaḥ — vigor; kṣamā — forgiveness; dhṛtiḥ — fortitude; śaucam — cleanliness; adrohaḥ — freedom from envy; na — not; ati-mānitā — expectation of honor; bhavanti — are; sampadam — the qualities; daivīm — the transcendental nature; abhijātasya — of one who is born of; bhārata — O son of Bharata.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Fearlessness; purification of one’s existence; cultivation of spiritual knowledge; charity; self-control; performance of sacrifice; study of the Vedas; austerity; simplicity; nonviolence; truthfulness; freedom from anger; renunciation; tranquillity; aversion to faultfinding; compassion for all living entities; freedom from covetousness; gentleness; modesty; steady determination; vigor; forgiveness; fortitude; cleanliness; and freedom from envy and from the passion for honor – these transcendental qualities, O son of Bharata, belong to godly men endowed with divine nature.

TEXT 4
दम्भो दर्पोऽभिमानश्च क्रोध: पारुष्यमेव च ।
अज्ञानं चाभिजातस्य पार्थ सम्पदमासुरीम् ॥ ४ ॥
dambho darpo ’bhimānaś ca
krodhaḥ pāruṣyam eva ca
ajñānaṁ cābhijātasya
pārtha sampadam āsurīm
Synonyms
dambhaḥ — pride; darpaḥ — arrogance; abhimānaḥ — conceit; ca — and; krodhaḥ — anger; pāruṣyam — harshness; eva — certainly; ca — and; ajñānam — ignorance; ca — and; abhijātasya — of one who is born of; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; sampadam — the qualities; āsurīm — of the demoniac nature.

Translation
Pride, arrogance, conceit, anger, harshness and ignorance – these qualities belong to those of demoniac nature, O son of Pṛthā.

TEXT 5
दैवी सम्पद्विमोक्षाय निबन्धायासुरी मता ।
मा श‍ुच: सम्पदं दैवीमभिजातोऽसि पाण्डव ॥ ५ ॥
daivī sampad vimokṣāya
nibandhāyāsurī matā
mā śucaḥ sampadaṁ daivīm
abhijāto ’si pāṇḍava
Synonyms
daivī — transcendental; sampat — assets; vimokṣāya — meant for liberation; nibandhāya — for bondage; āsurī — demoniac qualities; matā — are considered; mā — do not; śucaḥ — worry; sampadam — assets; daivīm — transcendental; abhijātaḥ — born of; asi — you are; pāṇḍava — O son of Pāṇḍu.

Translation
The transcendental qualities are conducive to liberation, whereas the demoniac qualities make for bondage. Do not worry, O son of Pāṇḍu, for you are born with the divine qualities.

TEXT 6
द्वौ भूतसर्गौ लोकेऽस्मिन्दैव आसुर एव च ।
दैवो विस्तरश: प्रोक्त आसुरं पार्थ मे श‍ृणु ॥ ६ ॥
dvau bhūta-sargau loke ’smin
daiva āsura eva ca
daivo vistaraśaḥ prokta
āsuraṁ pārtha me śṛṇu
Synonyms
dvau — two; bhūta-sargau — created living beings; loke — in the world; asmin — this; daivaḥ — godly; āsuraḥ — demoniac; eva — certainly; ca — and; daivaḥ — the divine; vistaraśaḥ — at great length; proktaḥ — said; āsuram — the demoniac; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; me — from Me; śṛṇu — just hear.

Translation
O son of Pṛthā, in this world there are two kinds of created beings. One is called divine and the other demoniac. I have already explained to you at length the divine qualities. Now hear from Me of the demoniac.

TEXT 7
प्रवृत्तिं च निवृत्तिं च जना न विदुरासुरा: ।
न शौचं नापि चाचारो न सत्यं तेषु विद्यते ॥ ७ ॥
pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca
janā na vidur āsurāḥ
na śaucaṁ nāpi cācāro
na satyaṁ teṣu vidyate
Synonyms
pravṛttim — acting properly; ca — also; nivṛttim — not acting improperly; ca — and; janāḥ — persons; na — never; viduḥ — know; āsurāḥ — of demoniac quality; na — never; śaucam — cleanliness; na — nor; api — also; ca — and; ācāraḥ — behavior; na — never; satyam — truth; teṣu — in them; vidyate — there is.

Translation
Those who are demoniac do not know what is to be done and what is not to be done. Neither cleanliness nor proper behavior nor truth is found in them.

TEXT 8
असत्यमप्रतिष्ठं ते जगदाहुरनीश्वरम् ।
अपरस्परसम्भूतं किमन्यत्कामहैतुकम् ॥ ८ ॥
asatyam apratiṣṭhaṁ te
jagad āhur anīśvaram
aparaspara-sambhūtaṁ
kim anyat kāma-haitukam
Synonyms
asatyam — unreal; apratiṣṭham — without foundation; te — they; jagat — the cosmic manifestation; āhuḥ — say; anīśvaram — with no controller; aparaspara — without cause; sambhūtam — arisen; kim anyat — there is no other cause; kāma-haitukam — it is due to lust only.

Translation
They say that this world is unreal, with no foundation, no God in control. They say it is produced of sex desire and has no cause other than lust.

TEXT 9
एतां दृष्टिमवष्टभ्य नष्टात्मानोऽल्पबुद्धय: ।
प्रभवन्त्युग्रकर्माण: क्षयाय जगतोऽहिता: ॥ ९ ॥
etāṁ dṛṣṭim avaṣṭabhya
naṣṭātmāno ’lpa-buddhayaḥ
prabhavanty ugra-karmāṇaḥ
kṣayāya jagato ’hitāḥ
Synonyms
etām — this; dṛṣṭim — vision; avaṣṭabhya — accepting; naṣṭa — having lost; ātmānaḥ — themselves; alpa-buddhayaḥ — the less intelligent; prabhavanti — flourish; ugra-karmāṇaḥ — engaged in painful activities; kṣayāya — for destruction; jagataḥ — of the world; ahitāḥ — unbeneficial.

Translation
Following such conclusions, the demoniac, who are lost to themselves and who have no intelligence, engage in unbeneficial, horrible works meant to destroy the world.

TEXT 10
काममाश्रित्य दुष्पूरं दम्भमानमदान्विता: ।
मोहाद्‍गृहीत्वासद्‍ग्राहान्प्रवर्तन्तेऽश‍ुचिव्रता: ॥ १० ॥
kāmam āśritya duṣpūraṁ
dambha-māna-madānvitāḥ
mohād gṛhītvāsad-grāhān
pravartante ’śuci-vratāḥ
Synonyms
kāmam — lust; āśritya — taking shelter of; duṣpūram — insatiable; dambha — of pride; māna — and false prestige; mada-anvitāḥ — absorbed in the conceit; mohāt — by illusion; gṛhītvā — taking; asat — nonpermanent; grāhān — things; pravartante — they flourish; aśuci — to the unclean; vratāḥ — avowed.

Translation
Taking shelter of insatiable lust and absorbed in the conceit of pride and false prestige, the demoniac, thus illusioned, are always sworn to unclean work, attracted by the impermanent.

TEXTS 11-12
चिन्तामपरिमेयां च प्रलयान्तामुपाश्रिता: ।
कामोपभोगपरमा एतावदिति निश्चिता: ॥ ११ ॥
आशापाशशतैर्बद्धा: कामक्रोधपरायणा: ।
ईहन्ते कामभोगार्थमन्यायेनार्थसञ्चयान् ॥ १२ ॥
cintām aparimeyāṁ ca
pralayāntām upāśritāḥ
kāmopabhoga-paramā
etāvad iti niścitāḥ
āśā-pāśa-śatair baddhāḥ
kāma-krodha-parāyaṇāḥ
īhante kāma-bhogārtham
anyāyenārtha-sañcayān
Synonyms
cintām — fears and anxieties; aparimeyām — immeasurable; ca — and; pralaya-antām — unto the point of death; upāśritāḥ — having taken shelter of; kāma-upabhoga — sense gratification; paramāḥ — the highest goal of life; etāvat — thus; iti — in this way; niścitāḥ — having ascertained; āśā-pāśa — entanglements in a network of hope; śataiḥ — by hundreds; baddhāḥ — being bound; kāma — of lust; krodha — and anger; parāyaṇāḥ — always situated in the mentality; īhante — they desire; kāma — lust; bhoga — sense enjoyment; artham — for the purpose of; anyāyena — illegally; artha — of wealth; sañcayān — accumulation.

Translation
They believe that to gratify the senses is the prime necessity of human civilization. Thus until the end of life their anxiety is immeasurable. Bound by a network of hundreds of thousands of desires and absorbed in lust and anger, they secure money by illegal means for sense gratification.

TEXTS 13-15
इदमद्य मया लब्धमिमं प्राप्स्ये मनोरथम् ।
इदमस्तीदमपि मे भविष्यति पुनर्धनम् ॥ १३ ॥
असौ मया हत: शत्रुर्हनिष्ये चापरानपि ।
ईश्वरोऽहमहं भोगी सिद्धोऽहं बलवान्सुखी ॥ १४ ॥
आढ्योऽभिजनवानस्मि कोऽन्योऽस्ति सदृशो मया ।
यक्ष्ये दास्यामि मोदिष्य इत्यज्ञानविमोहिता: ॥ १५ ॥
idam adya mayā labdham
imaṁ prāpsye manoratham
idam astīdam api me
bhaviṣyati punar dhanam
asau mayā hataḥ śatrur
haniṣye cāparān api
īśvaro ’ham ahaṁ bhogī
siddho ’haṁ balavān sukhī
āḍhyo ’bhijanavān asmi
ko ’nyo ’sti sadṛśo mayā
yakṣye dāsyāmi modiṣya
ity ajñāna-vimohitāḥ
Synonyms
idam — this; adya — today; mayā — by me; labdham — gained; imam — this; prāpsye — I shall gain; manaḥ-ratham — according to my desires; idam — this; asti — there is; idam — this; api — also; me — mine; bhaviṣyati — it will increase in the future; punaḥ — again; dhanam — wealth; asau — that; mayā — by me; hataḥ — has been killed; śatruḥ — enemy; haniṣye — I shall kill; ca — also; aparān — others; api — certainly; īśvaraḥ — the lord; aham — I am; aham — I am; bhogī — the enjoyer; siddhaḥ — perfect; aham — I am; bala-vān — powerful; sukhī — happy; āḍhyaḥ — wealthy; abhijana-vān — surrounded by aristocratic relatives; asmi — I am; kaḥ — who; anyaḥ — other; asti — there is; sadṛśaḥ — like; mayā — me; yakṣye — I shall sacrifice; dāsyāmi — I shall give charity; modiṣye — I shall rejoice; iti — thus; ajñāna — by ignorance; vimohitāḥ — deluded.

Translation
The demoniac person thinks: “So much wealth do I have today, and I will gain more according to my schemes. So much is mine now, and it will increase in the future, more and more. He is my enemy, and I have killed him, and my other enemies will also be killed. I am the lord of everything. I am the enjoyer. I am perfect, powerful and happy. I am the richest man, surrounded by aristocratic relatives. There is none so powerful and happy as I am. I shall perform sacrifices, I shall give some charity, and thus I shall rejoice.” In this way, such persons are deluded by ignorance.

TEXT 16
अनेकचित्तविभ्रान्ता मोहजालसमावृता: ।
प्रसक्ता: कामभोगेषु पतन्ति नरकेऽश‍ुचौ ॥ १६ ॥
aneka-citta-vibhrāntā
moha-jāla-samāvṛtāḥ
prasaktāḥ kāma-bhogeṣu
patanti narake ’śucau
Synonyms
aneka — numerous; citta — by anxieties; vibhrāntāḥ — perplexed; moha — of illusions; jāla — by a network; samāvṛtāḥ — surrounded; prasaktāḥ — attached; kāma-bhogeṣu — to sense gratification; patanti — they glide down; narake — into hell; aśucau — unclean.

Translation
Thus perplexed by various anxieties and bound by a network of illusions, they become too strongly attached to sense enjoyment and fall down into hell.

TEXT 17
आत्मसम्भाविता: स्तब्धा धनमानमदान्विता: ।
यजन्ते नामयज्ञैस्ते दम्भेनाविधिपूर्वकम् ॥ १७ ॥
ātma-sambhāvitāḥ stabdhā
dhana-māna-madānvitāḥ
yajante nāma-yajñais te
dambhenāvidhi-pūrvakam
Synonyms
ātma-sambhāvitāḥ — self-complacent; stabdhāḥ — impudent; dhana-māna — of wealth and false prestige; mada — in the delusion; anvitāḥ — absorbed; yajante — they perform sacrifice; nāma — in name only; yajñaiḥ — with sacrifices; te — they; dambhena — out of pride; avidhi-pūrvakam — without following any rules and regulations.

Translation
Self-complacent and always impudent, deluded by wealth and false prestige, they sometimes proudly perform sacrifices in name only, without following any rules or regulations.

TEXT 18
अहङ्कारं बलं दर्पं कामं क्रोधं च संश्रिता: ।
मामात्मपरदेहेषु प्रद्विषन्तोऽभ्यसूयका: ॥ १८ ॥
ahaṅkāraṁ balaṁ darpaṁ
kāmaṁ krodhaṁ ca saṁśritāḥ
mām ātma-para-deheṣu
pradviṣanto ’bhyasūyakāḥ
Synonyms
ahaṅkāram — false ego; balam — strength; darpam — pride; kāmam — lust; krodham — anger; ca — also; saṁśritāḥ — having taken shelter of; mām — Me; ātma — in their own; para — and in other; deheṣu — bodies; pradviṣantaḥ — blaspheming; abhyasūyakāḥ — envious.

Translation
Bewildered by false ego, strength, pride, lust and anger, the demons become envious of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is situated in their own bodies and in the bodies of others, and blaspheme against the real religion.

TEXT 19
तानहं द्विषत: क्रूरान्संसारेषु नराधमान् ।
क्षिपाम्यजस्रमश‍ुभानासुरीष्वेव योनिषु ॥ १९ ॥
tān ahaṁ dviṣataḥ krūrān
saṁsāreṣu narādhamān
kṣipāmy ajasram aśubhān
āsurīṣv eva yoniṣu
Synonyms
tān — those; aham — I; dviṣataḥ — envious; krūrān — mischievous; saṁsāreṣu — into the ocean of material existence; nara-adhamān — the lowest of mankind; kṣipāmi — I put; ajasram — forever; aśubhān — inauspicious; āsurīṣu — demoniac; eva — certainly; yoniṣu — into the wombs.

Translation
Those who are envious and mischievous, who are the lowest among men, I perpetually cast into the ocean of material existence, into various demoniac species of life.

TEXT 20
आसुरीं योनिमापन्ना मूढा जन्मनि जन्मनि ।
मामप्राप्यैव कौन्तेय ततो यान्त्यधमां गतिम् ॥ २० ॥
āsurīṁ yonim āpannā
mūḍhā janmani janmani
mām aprāpyaiva kaunteya
tato yānty adhamāṁ gatim
Synonyms
āsurīm — demoniac; yonim — species; āpannāḥ — gaining; mūḍhāḥ — the foolish; janmani janmani — in birth after birth; mām — Me; aprāpya — without achieving; eva — certainly; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; tataḥ — thereafter; yānti — go; adhamām — condemned; gatim — destination.

Translation
Attaining repeated birth amongst the species of demoniac life, O son of Kuntī, such persons can never approach Me. Gradually they sink down to the most abominable type of existence.

TEXT 21
त्रिविधं नरकस्येदं द्वारं नाशनमात्मन: ।
काम: क्रोधस्तथा लोभस्तस्मादेतत्‍त्रयं त्यजेत् ॥ २१ ॥
tri-vidhaṁ narakasyedaṁ
dvāraṁ nāśanam ātmanaḥ
kāmaḥ krodhas tathā lobhas
tasmād etat trayaṁ tyajet
Synonyms
tri-vidham — of three kinds; narakasya — of hell; idam — this; dvāram — gate; nāśanam — destructive; ātmanaḥ — of the self; kāmaḥ — lust; krodhaḥ — anger; tathā — as well as; lobhaḥ — greed; tasmāt — therefore; etat — these; trayam — three; tyajet — one must give up.

Translation
There are three gates leading to this hell – lust, anger and greed. Every sane man should give these up, for they lead to the degradation of the soul.

TEXT 22
एतैर्विमुक्त: कौन्तेय तमोद्वारैस्त्रिभिर्नर: ।
आचरत्यात्मन: श्रेयस्ततो याति परां गतिम् ॥ २२ ॥
etair vimuktaḥ kaunteya
tamo-dvārais tribhir naraḥ
ācaraty ātmanaḥ śreyas
tato yāti parāṁ gatim
Synonyms
etaiḥ — from these; vimuktaḥ — being liberated; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; tamaḥ-dvāraiḥ — from the gates of ignorance; tribhiḥ — of three kinds; naraḥ — a person; ācarati — performs; ātmanaḥ — for the self; śreyaḥ — benediction; tataḥ — thereafter; yāti — he goes; parām — to the supreme; gatim — destination.

Translation
The man who has escaped these three gates of hell, O son of Kuntī, performs acts conducive to self-realization and thus gradually attains the supreme destination.

TEXT 23
य: शास्त्रविधिमुत्सृज्य वर्तते कामकारत: ।
न स सिद्धिमवाप्‍नोति न सुखं न परां गतिम् ॥ २३ ॥
yaḥ śāstra-vidhim utsṛjya
vartate kāma-kārataḥ
na sa siddhim avāpnoti
na sukhaṁ na parāṁ gatim
Synonyms
yaḥ — anyone who; śāstra-vidhim — the regulations of the scriptures; utsṛjya — giving up; vartate — remains; kāma-kārataḥ — acting whimsically in lust; na — never; saḥ — he; siddhim — perfection; avāpnoti — achieves; na — never; sukham — happiness; na — never; parām — the supreme; gatim — perfectional stage.

Translation
He who discards scriptural injunctions and acts according to his own whims attains neither perfection, nor happiness, nor the supreme destination.

TEXT 24
तस्माच्छास्त्रं प्रमाणं ते कार्याकार्यव्यवस्थितौ ।
ज्ञात्वा शास्त्रविधानोक्तं कर्म कर्तुमिहार्हसि ॥ २४ ॥
tasmāc chāstraṁ pramāṇaṁ te
kāryākārya-vyavasthitau
jñātvā śāstra-vidhānoktaṁ
karma kartum ihārhasi
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; śāstram — the scriptures; pramāṇam — evidence; te — your; kārya — duty; akārya — and forbidden activities; vyavasthitau — in determining; jñātvā — knowing; śāstra — of scripture; vidhāna — the regulations; uktam — as declared; karma — work; kartum — do; iha — in this world; arhasi — you should.

Translation
One should therefore understand what is duty and what is not duty by the regulations of the scriptures. Knowing such rules and regulations, one should act so that he may gradually be elevated.