TEXT 1
सन्न्यासस्य महाबाहो तत्त्वमिच्छामि वेदितुम् ।
त्यागस्य च हृषीकेश पृथक्केशिनिषूदन ॥ १ ॥
arjuna uvāca
sannyāsasya mahā-bāho
tattvam icchāmi veditum
tyāgasya ca hṛṣīkeśa
pṛthak keśi-niṣūdana
Synonyms
arjunaḥ uvāca — Arjuna said; sannyāsasya — of renunciation; mahā-bāho — O mighty-armed one; tattvam — the truth; icchāmi — I wish; veditum — to understand; tyāgasya — of renunciation; ca — also; hṛṣīkeśa — O master of the senses; pṛthak — differently; keśi-niṣūdana — O killer of the Keśī demon.

Translation
Arjuna said: O mighty-armed one, I wish to understand the purpose of renunciation [tyāga] and of the renounced order of life [sannyāsa], O killer of the Keśī demon, master of the senses.

TEXT 2
काम्यानां कर्मणां न्यासं सन्न्यासं कवयो विदु: ।
सर्वकर्मफलत्यागं प्राहुस्त्यागं विचक्षणा: ॥ २ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
kāmyānāṁ karmaṇāṁ nyāsaṁ
sannyāsaṁ kavayo viduḥ
sarva-karma-phala-tyāgaṁ
prāhus tyāgaṁ vicakṣaṇāḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; kāmyānām — with desire; karmaṇām — of activities; nyāsam — renunciation; sannyāsam — the renounced order of life; kavayaḥ — the learned; viduḥ — know; sarva — of all; karma — activities; phala — of results; tyāgam — renunciation; prāhuḥ — call; tyāgam — renunciation; vicakṣaṇāḥ — the experienced.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: The giving up of activities that are based on material desire is what great learned men call the renounced order of life [sannyāsa]. And giving up the results of all activities is what the wise call renunciation [tyāga].

TEXT 3
त्याज्यं दोषवदित्येके कर्म प्राहुर्मनीषिण: ।
यज्ञदानतप:कर्म न त्याज्यमिति चापरे ॥ ३ ॥
tyājyaṁ doṣa-vad ity eke
karma prāhur manīṣiṇaḥ
yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma
na tyājyam iti cāpare
Synonyms
tyājyam — must be given up; doṣa-vat — as an evil; iti — thus; eke — one group; karma — work; prāhuḥ — they say; manīṣiṇaḥ — great thinkers; yajña — of sacrifice; dāna — charity; tapaḥ — and penance; karma — works; na — never; tyājyam — are to be given up; iti — thus; ca — and; apare — others.

Translation
Some learned men declare that all kinds of fruitive activities should be given up as faulty, yet other sages maintain that acts of sacrifice, charity and penance should never be abandoned.

TEXT 4
निश्चयं श‍ृणु मे तत्र त्यागे भरतसत्तम ।
त्यागो हि पुरुषव्याघ्र त्रिविध: सम्प्रकीर्तित: ॥ ४ ॥
niścayaṁ śṛṇu me tatra
tyāge bharata-sattama
tyāgo hi puruṣa-vyāghra
tri-vidhaḥ samprakīrtitaḥ
Synonyms
niścayam — certainty; śṛṇu — hear; me — from Me; tatra — therein; tyāge — in the matter of renunciation; bharata-sat-tama — O best of the Bhāratas; tyāgaḥ — renunciation; hi — certainly; puruṣa-vyāghra — O tiger among human beings; tri-vidhaḥ — of three kinds; samprakīrtitaḥ — is declared.

Translation
O best of the Bhāratas, now hear My judgment about renunciation. O tiger among men, renunciation is declared in the scriptures to be of three kinds.

TEXT 5
यज्ञदानतप:कर्म न त्याज्यं कार्यमेव तत् ।
यज्ञो दानं तपश्चैव पावनानि मनीषिणाम् ॥ ५ ॥
yajña-dāna-tapaḥ-karma
na tyājyaṁ kāryam eva tat
yajño dānaṁ tapaś caiva
pāvanāni manīṣiṇām
Synonyms
yajña — of sacrifice; dāna — charity; tapaḥ — and penance; karma — activity; na — never; tyājyam — to be given up; kāryam — must be done; eva — certainly; tat — that; yajñaḥ — sacrifice; dānam — charity; tapaḥ — penance; ca — also; eva — certainly; pāvanāni — purifying; manīṣiṇām — even for the great souls.

Translation
Acts of sacrifice, charity and penance are not to be given up; they must be performed. Indeed, sacrifice, charity and penance purify even the great souls.

TEXT 6
एतान्यपि तु कर्माणि सङ्गं त्यक्त्वा फलानि च ।
कर्तव्यानीति मे पार्थ निश्चितं मतमुत्तमम् ॥ ६ ॥
etāny api tu karmāṇi
saṅgaṁ tyaktvā phalāni ca
kartavyānīti me pārtha
niścitaṁ matam uttamam
Synonyms
etāni — all these; api — certainly; tu — but; karmāṇi — activities; saṅgam — association; tyaktvā — renouncing; phalāni — results; ca — also; kartavyāni — should be done as duty; iti — thus; me — My; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; niścitam — definite; matam — opinion; uttamam — the best.

Translation
All these activities should be performed without attachment or any expectation of result. They should be performed as a matter of duty, O son of Pṛthā. That is My final opinion.

TEXT 7
नियतस्य तु सन्न्यास: कर्मणो नोपपद्यते ।
मोहात्तस्य परित्यागस्तामस: परिकीर्तित: ॥ ७ ॥
niyatasya tu sannyāsaḥ
karmaṇo nopapadyate
mohāt tasya parityāgas
tāmasaḥ parikīrtitaḥ
Synonyms
niyatasya — prescribed; tu — but; sannyāsaḥ — renunciation; karmaṇaḥ — of activities; na — never; upapadyate — is deserved; mohāt — by illusion; tasya — of them; parityāgaḥ — renunciation; tāmasaḥ — in the mode of ignorance; parikīrtitaḥ — is declared.

Translation
Prescribed duties should never be renounced. If one gives up his prescribed duties because of illusion, such renunciation is said to be in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT 8
दु:खमित्येव यत्कर्म कायक्ल‍ेशभयात्त्यजेत् ।
स कृत्वा राजसं त्यागं नैव त्यागफलं लभेत् ॥ ८ ॥
duḥkham ity eva yat karma
kāya-kleśa-bhayāt tyajet
sa kṛtvā rājasaṁ tyāgaṁ
naiva tyāga-phalaṁ labhet
Synonyms
duḥkham — unhappy; iti — thus; eva — certainly; yat — which; karma — work; kāya — for the body; kleśa — trouble; bhayāt — out of fear; tyajet — gives up; saḥ — he; kṛtvā — after doing; rājasam — in the mode of passion; tyāgam — renunciation; na — not; eva — certainly; tyāga — of renunciation; phalam — the results; labhet — gains.

Translation
Anyone who gives up prescribed duties as troublesome or out of fear of bodily discomfort is said to have renounced in the mode of passion. Such action never leads to the elevation of renunciation.

TEXT 9
कार्यमित्येव यत्कर्म नियतं क्रियतेऽर्जुन ।
सङ्गं त्यक्त्वा फलं चैव स त्याग: सात्त्विको मत: ॥ ९ ॥
kāryam ity eva yat karma
niyataṁ kriyate ’rjuna
saṅgaṁ tyaktvā phalaṁ caiva
sa tyāgaḥ sāttviko mataḥ
Synonyms
kāryam — it must be done; iti — thus; eva — indeed; yat — which; karma — work; niyatam — prescribed; kriyate — is performed; arjuna — O Arjuna; saṅgam — association; tyaktvā — giving up; phalam — the result; ca — also; eva — certainly; saḥ — that; tyāgaḥ — renunciation; sāttvikaḥ — in the mode of goodness; mataḥ — in My opinion.

Translation
O Arjuna, when one performs his prescribed duty only because it ought to be done, and renounces all material association and all attachment to the fruit, his renunciation is said to be in the mode of goodness.

TEXT 10
न द्वेष्ट्यकुशलं कर्म कुशले नानुषज्ज‍ते ।
त्यागी सत्त्वसमाविष्टो मेधावी छिन्नसंशय: ॥ १० ॥
na dveṣṭy akuśalaṁ karma
kuśale nānuṣajjate
tyāgī sattva-samāviṣṭo
medhāvī chinna-saṁśayaḥ
Synonyms
na — never; dveṣṭi — hates; akuśalam — inauspicious; karma — work; kuśale — in the auspicious; na — nor; anuṣajjate — becomes attached; tyāgī — the renouncer; sattva — in goodness; samāviṣṭaḥ — absorbed; medhāvī — intelligent; chinna — having cut off; saṁśayaḥ — all doubts.

Translation
The intelligent renouncer situated in the mode of goodness, neither hateful of inauspicious work nor attached to auspicious work, has no doubts about work.

TEXT 11
न हि देहभृता शक्यं त्यक्तुं कर्माण्यशेषत: ।
यस्तु कर्मफलत्यागी स त्यागीत्यभिधीयते ॥ ११ ॥
na hi deha-bhṛtā śakyaṁ
tyaktuṁ karmāṇy aśeṣataḥ
yas tu karma-phala-tyāgī
sa tyāgīty abhidhīyate
Synonyms
na — never; hi — certainly; deha-bhṛtā — by the embodied; śakyam — is possible; tyaktum — to be renounced; karmāṇi — activities; aśeṣataḥ — altogether; yaḥ — anyone who; tu — but; karma — of work; phala — of the result; tyāgī — the renouncer; saḥ — he; tyāgī — the renouncer; iti — thus; abhidhīyate — is said.

Translation
It is indeed impossible for an embodied being to give up all activities. But he who renounces the fruits of action is called one who has truly renounced.

TEXT 12
अनिष्टमिष्टं मिश्रं च त्रिविधं कर्मण: फलम् ।
भवत्यत्यागिनां प्रेत्य न तु सन्न्यासिनां क्‍वचित् ॥ १२ ॥
aniṣṭam iṣṭaṁ miśraṁ ca
tri-vidhaṁ karmaṇaḥ phalam
bhavaty atyāgināṁ pretya
na tu sannyāsināṁ kvacit
Synonyms
aniṣṭam — leading to hell; iṣṭam — leading to heaven; miśram — mixed; ca — and; tri-vidham — of three kinds; karmaṇaḥ — of work; phalam — the result; bhavati — comes; atyāginām — for those who are not renounced; pretya — after death; na — not; tu — but; sannyāsinām — for the renounced order; kvacit — at any time.

Translation
For one who is not renounced, the threefold fruits of action – desirable, undesirable and mixed – accrue after death. But those who are in the renounced order of life have no such result to suffer or enjoy.

TEXT 13
पञ्चैतानि महाबाहो कारणानि निबोध मे ।
सांख्ये कृतान्ते प्रोक्तानि सिद्धये सर्वकर्मणाम् ॥ १३ ॥
pañcaitāni mahā-bāho
kāraṇāni nibodha me
sāṅkhye kṛtānte proktāni
siddhaye sarva-karmaṇām
Synonyms
pañca — five; etāni — these; mahā-bāho — O mighty-armed one; kāraṇāni — causes; nibodha — just understand; me — from Me; sāṅkhye — in the Vedānta; kṛta-ante — in the conclusion; proktāni — said; siddhaye — for the perfection; sarva — of all; karmaṇām — activities.

Translation
O mighty-armed Arjuna, according to the Vedānta there are five causes for the accomplishment of all action. Now learn of these from Me.

TEXT 14
अधिष्ठानं तथा कर्ता करणं च पृथग्विधम् ।
विविधाश्च पृथक्‍चेष्टा दैवं चैवात्र पञ्चमम् ॥ १४ ॥
adhiṣṭhānaṁ tathā kartā
karaṇaṁ ca pṛthag-vidham
vividhāś ca pṛthak ceṣṭā
daivaṁ caivātra pañcamam
Synonyms
adhiṣṭhānam — the place; tathā — also; kartā — the worker; karaṇam — instruments; ca — and; pṛthak-vidham — of different kinds; vividhāḥ — various; ca — and; pṛthak — separate; ceṣṭāḥ — the endeavors; daivam — the Supreme; ca — also; eva — certainly; atra — here; pañcamam — the fifth.

Translation
The place of action [the body], the performer, the various senses, the many different kinds of endeavor, and ultimately the Supersoul – these are the five factors of action.

TEXT 15
शरीरवाङ्‍मनोभिर्यत्कर्म प्रारभते नर: ।
न्याय्यं वा विपरीतं वा पञ्चैते तस्य हेतव: ॥ १५ ॥
śarīra-vāṅ-manobhir yat
karma prārabhate naraḥ
nyāyyaṁ vā viparītaṁ vā
pañcaite tasya hetavaḥ
Synonyms
śarīra — by the body; vāk — speech; manobhiḥ — and mind; yat — which; karma — work; prārabhate — begins; naraḥ — a person; nyāyyam — right; vā — or; viparītam — the opposite; vā — or; pañca — five; ete — all these; tasya — its; hetavaḥ — causes.

Translation
Whatever right or wrong action a man performs by body, mind or speech is caused by these five factors.

TEXT 16
तत्रैवं सति कर्तारमात्मानं केवलं तु य: ।
पश्यत्यकृतबुद्धित्वान्न स पश्यति दुर्मति: ॥ १६ ॥
tatraivaṁ sati kartāram
ātmānaṁ kevalaṁ tu yaḥ
paśyaty akṛta-buddhitvān
na sa paśyati durmatiḥ
Synonyms
tatra — there; evam — thus; sati — being; kartāram — the worker; ātmānam — himself; kevalam — only; tu — but; yaḥ — anyone who; paśyati — sees; akṛta-buddhitvāt — due to unintelligence; na — never; saḥ — he; paśyati — sees; durmatiḥ — foolish.

Translation
Therefore one who thinks himself the only doer, not considering the five factors, is certainly not very intelligent and cannot see things as they are.

TEXT 17
यस्य नाहंकृतो भावो बुद्धिर्यस्य न लिप्यते ।
हत्वापि स इमाँल्ल‍ोकान्न हन्ति न निबध्यते ॥ १७ ॥
yasya nāhaṅkṛto bhāvo
buddhir yasya na lipyate
hatvāpi sa imāḻ lokān
na hanti na nibadhyate
Synonyms
yasya — one whose; na — never; ahaṅkṛtaḥ — of false ego; bhāvaḥ — nature; buddhiḥ — intelligence; yasya — one whose; na — never; lipyate — is attached; hatvā — killing; api — even; saḥ — he; imān — this; lokān — world; na — never; hanti — kills; na — never; nibadhyate — becomes entangled.

Translation
One who is not motivated by false ego, whose intelligence is not entangled, though he kills men in this world, does not kill. Nor is he bound by his actions.

TEXT 18
ज्ञानं ज्ञेयं परिज्ञाता त्रिविधा कर्मचोदना ।
करणं कर्म कर्तेति त्रिविध: कर्मसङ्‍ग्रह: ॥ १८ ॥
jñānaṁ jñeyaṁ parijñātā
tri-vidhā karma-codanā
karaṇaṁ karma karteti
tri-vidhaḥ karma-saṅgrahaḥ
Synonyms
jñānam — knowledge; jñeyam — the objective of knowledge; parijñātā — the knower; tri-vidhā — of three kinds; karma — of work; codanā — the impetus; karaṇam — the senses; karma — the work; kartā — the doer; iti — thus; tri-vidhaḥ — of three kinds; karma — of work; saṅgrahaḥ — the accumulation.

Translation
Knowledge, the object of knowledge, and the knower are the three factors that motivate action; the senses, the work and the doer are the three constituents of action.

TEXT 19
ज्ञानं कर्म च कर्ता च त्रिधैव गुणभेदत: ।
प्रोच्यते गुणसंख्याने यथावच्छृणु तान्यपि ॥ १९ ॥
jñānaṁ karma ca kartā ca
tridhaiva guṇa-bhedataḥ
procyate guṇa-saṅkhyāne
yathāvac chṛṇu tāny api
Synonyms
jñānam — knowledge; karma — work; ca — also; kartā — worker; ca — also; tridhā — of three kinds; eva — certainly; guṇa-bhedataḥ — in terms of different modes of material nature; procyate — are said; guṇa-saṅkhyāne — in terms of different modes; yathā-vat — as they are; śṛṇu — hear; tāni — all of them; api — also.

Translation
According to the three different modes of material nature, there are three kinds of knowledge, action and performer of action. Now hear of them from Me.

TEXT 20
सर्वभूतेषु येनैकं भावमव्ययमीक्षते ।
अविभक्तं विभक्तेषु तज्ज्ञानं विद्धि सात्त्विकम् ॥ २० ॥
sarva-bhūteṣu yenaikaṁ
bhāvam avyayam īkṣate
avibhaktaṁ vibhakteṣu
taj jñānaṁ viddhi sāttvikam
Synonyms
sarva-bhūteṣu — in all living entities; yena — by which; ekam — one; bhāvam — situation; avyayam — imperishable; īkṣate — one sees; avibhaktam — undivided; vibhakteṣu — in the numberless divided; tat — that; jñānam — knowledge; viddhi — know; sāttvikam — in the mode of goodness.

Translation
That knowledge by which one undivided spiritual nature is seen in all living entities, though they are divided into innumerable forms, you should understand to be in the mode of goodness.

TEXT 21
पृथक्त्वेन तु यज्ज्ञानं नानाभावान्पृथग्विधान् ।
वेत्ति सर्वेषु भूतेषु तज्ज्ञानं विद्धि राजसम् ॥ २१ ॥
pṛthaktvena tu yaj jñānaṁ
nānā-bhāvān pṛthag-vidhān
vetti sarveṣu bhūteṣu
taj jñānaṁ viddhi rājasam
Synonyms
pṛthaktvena — because of division; tu — but; yat — which; jñānam — knowledge; nānā-bhāvān — multifarious situations; pṛthak-vidhān — different; vetti — knows; sarveṣu — in all; bhūteṣu — living entities; tat — that; jñānam — knowledge; viddhi — must be known; rājasam — in terms of passion.

Translation
That knowledge by which one sees that in every different body there is a different type of living entity you should understand to be in the mode of passion.

TEXT 22
यत्तु कृत्स्नवदेकस्मिन्कार्ये सक्तमहैतुकम् ।
अतत्त्वार्थवदल्पं च तत्तामसमुदाहृतम् ॥ २२ ॥
yat tu kṛtsna-vad ekasmin
kārye saktam ahaitukam
atattvārtha-vad alpaṁ ca
tat tāmasam udāhṛtam
Synonyms
yat — that which; tu — but; kṛtsna-vat — as all in all; ekasmin — in one; kārye — work; saktam — attached; ahaitukam — without cause; atattva-artha-vat — without knowledge of reality; alpam — very meager; ca — and; tat — that; tāmasam — in the mode of darkness; udāhṛtam — is said to be.

Translation
And that knowledge by which one is attached to one kind of work as the all in all, without knowledge of the truth, and which is very meager, is said to be in the mode of darkness.

TEXT 23
नियतं सङ्गरहितमरागद्वेषत: कृतम् ।
अफलप्रेप्सुना कर्म यत्तत्सात्त्विकमुच्यते ॥ २३ ॥
niyataṁ saṅga-rahitam
arāga-dveṣataḥ kṛtam
aphala-prepsunā karma
yat tat sāttvikam ucyate
Synonyms
niyatam — regulated; saṅga-rahitam — without attachment; arāga-dveṣataḥ — without love or hatred; kṛtam — done; aphala-prepsunā — by one without desire for fruitive result; karma — action; yat — which; tat — that; sāttvikam — in the mode of goodness; ucyate — is called.

Translation
That action which is regulated and which is performed without attachment, without love or hatred, and without desire for fruitive results is said to be in the mode of goodness.

TEXT 24
यत्तु कामेप्सुना कर्म साहङ्कारेण वा पुन: ।
क्रियते बहुलायासं तद्राजसमुदाहृतम् ॥ २४ ॥
yat tu kāmepsunā karma
sāhaṅkāreṇa vā punaḥ
kriyate bahulāyāsaṁ
tad rājasam udāhṛtam
Synonyms
yat — that which; tu — but; kāma-īpsunā — by one with desires for fruitive results; karma — work; sa-ahaṅkāreṇa — with ego; vā — or; punaḥ — again; kriyate — is performed; bahula-āyāsam — with great labor; tat — that; rājasam — in the mode of passion; udāhṛtam — is said to be.

Translation
But action performed with great effort by one seeking to gratify his desires, and enacted from a sense of false ego, is called action in the mode of passion.

TEXT 25
अनुबन्धं क्षयं हिंसामनपेक्ष्य च पौरुषम् ।
मोहादारभ्यते कर्म यत्तत्तामसमुच्यते ॥ २५ ॥
anubandhaṁ kṣayaṁ hiṁsām
anapekṣya ca pauruṣam
mohād ārabhyate karma
yat tat tāmasam ucyate
Synonyms
anubandham — of future bondage; kṣayam — destruction; hiṁsām — and distress to others; anapekṣya — without considering the consequences; ca — also; pauruṣam — self-sanctioned; mohāt — by illusion; ārabhyate — is begun; karma — work; yat — which; tat — that; tāmasam — in the mode of ignorance; ucyate — is said to be.

Translation
That action performed in illusion, in disregard of scriptural injunctions, and without concern for future bondage or for violence or distress caused to others is said to be in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT 26
मुक्तसङ्गोऽनहंवादी धृत्युत्साहसमन्वित: ।
सिद्ध्यसिद्ध्योर्निर्विकार: कर्ता सात्त्विक उच्यते ॥ २६ ॥
mukta-saṅgo ’nahaṁ-vādī
dhṛty-utsāha-samanvitaḥ
siddhy-asiddhyor nirvikāraḥ
kartā sāttvika ucyate
Synonyms
mukta-saṅgaḥ — liberated from all material association; anaham-vādī — without false ego; dhṛti — with determination; utsāha — and great enthusiasm; samanvitaḥ — qualified; siddhi — in perfection; asiddhyoḥ — and failure; nirvikāraḥ — without change; kartā — worker; sāttvikaḥ — in the mode of goodness; ucyate — is said to be.

Translation
One who performs his duty without association with the modes of material nature, without false ego, with great determination and enthusiasm, and without wavering in success or failure is said to be a worker in the mode of goodness.

TEXT 27
रागी कर्मफलप्रेप्सुर्लुब्धो हिंसात्मकोऽश‍ुचि: ।
हर्षशोकान्वित: कर्ता राजस: परिकीर्तित: ॥ २७ ॥
rāgī karma-phala-prepsur
lubdho hiṁsātmako ’śuciḥ
harṣa-śokānvitaḥ kartā
rājasaḥ parikīrtitaḥ
Synonyms
rāgī — very much attached; karma-phala — the fruit of the work; prepsuḥ — desiring; lubdhaḥ — greedy; hiṁsā-ātmakaḥ — always envious; aśuciḥ — unclean; harṣa-śoka-anvitaḥ — subject to joy and sorrow; kartā — such a worker; rājasaḥ — in the mode of passion; parikīrtitaḥ — is declared.

Translation
The worker who is attached to work and the fruits of work, desiring to enjoy those fruits, and who is greedy, always envious, impure, and moved by joy and sorrow, is said to be in the mode of passion.

TEXT 28
अयुक्त: प्राकृत: स्तब्ध: शठो नैष्कृतिकोऽलस: ।
विषादी दीर्घसूत्री च कर्ता तामस उच्यते ॥ २८ ॥
ayuktaḥ prākṛtaḥ stabdhaḥ
śaṭho naiṣkṛtiko ’lasaḥ
viṣādī dīrgha-sūtrī ca
kartā tāmasa ucyate
Synonyms
ayuktaḥ — not referring to the scriptural injunctions; prākṛtaḥ — materialistic; stabdhaḥ — obstinate; śaṭhaḥ — deceitful; naiṣkṛtikaḥ — expert in insulting others; alasaḥ — lazy; viṣādī — morose; dīrgha-sūtrī — procrastinating; ca — also; kartā — worker; tāmasaḥ — in the mode of ignorance; ucyate — is said to be.

Translation
The worker who is always engaged in work against the injunctions of the scripture, who is materialistic, obstinate, cheating and expert in insulting others, and who is lazy, always morose and procrastinating is said to be a worker in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT 29
बुद्धेर्भेदं धृतेश्चैव गुणतस्त्रिविधं श‍ृणु ।
प्रोच्यमानमशेषेण पृथक्त्वेन धनञ्जय ॥ २९ ॥
buddher bhedaṁ dhṛteś caiva
guṇatas tri-vidhaṁ śṛṇu
procyamānam aśeṣeṇa
pṛthaktvena dhanañ-jaya
Synonyms
buddheḥ — of intelligence; bhedam — the differences; dhṛteḥ — of steadiness; ca — also; eva — certainly; guṇataḥ — by the modes of material nature; tri-vidham — of three kinds; śṛṇu — just hear; procyamānam — as described by Me; aśeṣeṇa — in detail; pṛthaktvena — differently; dhanam-jaya — O winner of wealth.

Translation
O winner of wealth, now please listen as I tell you in detail of the different kinds of understanding and determination, according to the three modes of material nature.

TEXT 30
प्रवृत्तिं च निवृत्तिं च कार्याकार्ये भयाभये ।
बन्धं मोक्षं च या वेत्ति बुद्धि: सा पार्थ सात्त्विकी ॥ ३० ॥
pravṛttiṁ ca nivṛttiṁ ca
kāryākārye bhayābhaye
bandhaṁ mokṣaṁ ca yā vetti
buddhiḥ sā pārtha sāttvikī
Synonyms
pravṛttim — doing; ca — also; nivṛttim — not doing; ca — and; kārya — what ought to be done; akārye — and what ought not to be done; bhaya — fear; abhaye — and fearlessness; bandham — bondage; mokṣam — liberation; ca — and; yā — that which; vetti — knows; buddhiḥ — understanding; sā — that; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; sāttvikī — in the mode of goodness.

Translation
O son of Pṛthā, that understanding by which one knows what ought to be done and what ought not to be done, what is to be feared and what is not to be feared, what is binding and what is liberating, is in the mode of goodness.

TEXT 31
यया धर्ममधर्मं च कार्यं चाकार्यमेव च ।
अयथावत्प्रजानाति बुद्धि: सा पार्थ राजसी ॥ ३१ ॥
yayā dharmam adharmaṁ ca
kāryaṁ cākāryam eva ca
ayathāvat prajānāti
buddhiḥ sā pārtha rājasī
Synonyms
yayā — by which; dharmam — the principles of religion; adharmam — irreligion; ca — and; kāryam — what ought to be done; ca — also; akāryam — what ought not to be done; eva — certainly; ca — also; ayathā-vat — imperfectly; prajānāti — knows; buddhiḥ — intelligence; sā — that; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; rājasī — in the mode of passion.

Translation
O son of Pṛthā, that understanding which cannot distinguish between religion and irreligion, between action that should be done and action that should not be done, is in the mode of passion.

TEXT 32
अधर्मं धर्ममिति या मन्यते तमसावृता ।
सर्वार्थान्विपरीतांश्च बुद्धि: सा पार्थ तामसी ॥ ३२ ॥
adharmaṁ dharmam iti yā
manyate tamasāvṛtā
sarvārthān viparītāṁś ca
buddhiḥ sā pārtha tāmasī
Synonyms
adharmam — irreligion; dharmam — religion; iti — thus; yā — which; manyate — thinks; tamasā — by illusion; āvṛtā — covered; sarva-arthān — all things; viparītān — in the wrong direction; ca — also; buddhiḥ — intelligence; sā — that; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; tāmasī — in the mode of ignorance.

Translation
That understanding which considers irreligion to be religion and religion to be irreligion, under the spell of illusion and darkness, and strives always in the wrong direction, O Pārtha, is in the mode of ignorance.

TEXT 33
धृत्या यया धारयते मन:प्राणेन्द्रियक्रिया: ।
योगेनाव्यभिचारिण्या धृति: सा पार्थ सात्त्विकी ॥ ३३ ॥
dhṛtyā yayā dhārayate
manaḥ-prāṇendriya-kriyāḥ
yogenāvyabhicāriṇyā
dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha sāttvikī
Synonyms
dhṛtyā — determination; yayā — by which; dhārayate — one sustains; manaḥ — of the mind; prāṇa — life; indriya — and senses; kriyāḥ — the activities; yogena — by yoga practice; avyabhicāriṇyā — without any break; dhṛtiḥ — determination; sā — that; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; sāttvikī — in the mode of goodness.

Translation
O son of Pṛthā, that determination which is unbreakable, which is sustained with steadfastness by yoga practice, and which thus controls the activities of the mind, life and senses is determination in the mode of goodness.

TEXT 34
यया तु धर्मकामार्थान्धृत्या धारयतेऽर्जुन ।
प्रसङ्गेन फलाकाङ्क्षी धृति: सा पार्थ राजसी ॥ ३४ ॥
yayā tu dharma-kāmārthān
dhṛtyā dhārayate ’rjuna
prasaṅgena phalākāṅkṣī
dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha rājasī
Synonyms
yayā — by which; tu — but; dharma — religiosity; kāma — sense gratification; arthān — and economic development; dhṛtyā — by determination; dhārayate — one sustains; arjuna — O Arjuna; prasaṅgena — because of attachment; phala-ākāṅkṣī — desiring fruitive results; dhṛtiḥ — determination; sā — that; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; rājasī — in the mode of passion.

Translation
But that determination by which one holds fast to fruitive results in religion, economic development and sense gratification is of the nature of passion, O Arjuna.

TEXT 35
यया स्वप्‍नं भयं शोकं विषादं मदमेव च ।
न विमुञ्चति दुर्मेधा धृति: सा पार्थ तामसी ॥ ३५ ॥
yayā svapnaṁ bhayaṁ śokaṁ
viṣādaṁ madam eva ca
na vimuñcati durmedhā
dhṛtiḥ sā pārtha tāmasī
Synonyms
yayā — by which; svapnam — dreaming; bhayam — fearfulness; śokam — lamentation; viṣādam — moroseness; madam — illusion; eva — certainly; ca — also; na — never; vimuñcati — one gives up; durmedhā — unintelligent; dhṛtiḥ — determination; sā — that; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; tāmasī — in the mode of ignorance.

Translation
And that determination which cannot go beyond dreaming, fearfulness, lamentation, moroseness and illusion – such unintelligent determination, O son of Pṛthā, is in the mode of darkness.

TEXT 36
सुखं त्विदानीं त्रिविधं श‍ृणु मे भरतर्षभ ।
अभ्यासाद्रमते यत्र दु:खान्तं च निगच्छति ॥ ३६ ॥
sukhaṁ tv idānīṁ tri-vidhaṁ
śṛṇu me bharatarṣabha
abhyāsād ramate yatra
duḥkhāntaṁ ca nigacchati
Synonyms
sukham — happiness; tu — but; idānīm — now; tri-vidham — of three kinds; śṛṇu — hear; me — from Me; bharata-ṛṣabha — O best amongst the Bhāratas; abhyāsāt — by practice; ramate — one enjoys; yatra — where; duḥkha — of distress; antam — the end; ca — also; nigacchati — gains.

Translation
O best of the Bhāratas, now please hear from Me about the three kinds of happiness by which the conditioned soul enjoys, and by which he sometimes comes to the end of all distress.

TEXT 37
यत्तदग्रे विषमिव परिणामेऽमृतोपमम् ।
तत्सुखं सात्त्विकं प्रोक्तमात्मबुद्धिप्रसादजम् ॥ ३७ ॥
yat tad agre viṣam iva
pariṇāme ’mṛtopamam
tat sukhaṁ sāttvikaṁ proktam
ātma-buddhi-prasāda-jam
Synonyms
yat — which; tat — that; agre — in the beginning; viṣam iva — like poison; pariṇāme — at the end; amṛta — nectar; upamam — compared to; tat — that; sukham — happiness; sāttvikam — in the mode of goodness; proktam — is said; ātma — in the self; buddhi — of intelligence; prasāda-jam — born of the satisfaction.

Translation
That which in the beginning may be just like poison but at the end is just like nectar and which awakens one to self-realization is said to be happiness in the mode of goodness.

TEXT 38
विषयेन्द्रियसंयोगाद्यत्तदग्रेऽमृतोपमम् ।
परिणामे विषमिव तत्सुखं राजसं स्मृतम् ॥ ३८ ॥
viṣayendriya-saṁyogād
yat tad agre ’mṛtopamam
pariṇāme viṣam iva
tat sukhaṁ rājasaṁ smṛtam
Synonyms
viṣaya — of the objects of the senses; indriya — and the senses; saṁyogāt — from the combination; yat — which; tat — that; agre — in the beginning; amṛta-upamam — just like nectar; pariṇāme — at the end; viṣam iva — like poison; tat — that; sukham — happiness; rājasam — in the mode of passion; smṛtam — is considered.

Translation
That happiness which is derived from contact of the senses with their objects and which appears like nectar at first but poison at the end is said to be of the nature of passion.

TEXT 39
यदग्रे चानुबन्धे च सुखं मोहनमात्मन: ।
निद्रालस्यप्रमादोत्थं तत्तामसमुदाहृतम् ॥ ३९ ॥
yad agre cānubandhe ca
sukhaṁ mohanam ātmanaḥ
nidrālasya-pramādotthaṁ
tat tāmasam udāhṛtam
Synonyms
yat — that which; agre — in the beginning; ca — also; anubandhe — at the end; ca — also; sukham — happiness; mohanam — illusory; ātmanaḥ — of the self; nidrā — sleep; ālasya — laziness; pramāda — and illusion; uttham — produced of; tat — that; tāmasam — in the mode of ignorance; udāhṛtam — is said to be.

Translation
And that happiness which is blind to self-realization, which is delusion from beginning to end and which arises from sleep, laziness and illusion is said to be of the nature of ignorance.

TEXT 40
न तदस्ति पृथिव्यां वा दिवि देवेषु वा पुन: ।
सत्त्वं प्रकृतिजैर्मुक्तं यदेभि: स्यात्‍त्रिभिर्गुणै: ॥ ४० ॥
na tad asti pṛthivyāṁ vā
divi deveṣu vā punaḥ
sattvaṁ prakṛti-jair muktaṁ
yad ebhiḥ syāt tribhir guṇaiḥ
Synonyms
na — not; tat — that; asti — there is; pṛthivyām — on the earth; vā — or; divi — in the higher planetary system; deveṣu — amongst the demigods; vā — or; punaḥ — again; sattvam — existence; prakṛti-jaiḥ — born of material nature; muktam — liberated; yat — that; ebhiḥ — from the influence of these; syāt — is; tribhiḥ — three; guṇaiḥ — modes of material nature.

Translation
There is no being existing, either here or among the demigods in the higher planetary systems, which is freed from these three modes born of material nature.

TEXT 41
ब्राह्मणक्षत्रियविशां श‍ूद्राणां च परन्तप ।
कर्माणि प्रविभक्तानि स्वभावप्रभवैर्गुणै: ॥ ४१ ॥
brāhmaṇa-kṣatriya-viśāṁ
śūdrāṇāṁ ca paran-tapa
karmāṇi pravibhaktāni
svabhāva-prabhavair guṇaiḥ
Synonyms
brāhmaṇa — of the brāhmaṇas; kṣatriya — the kṣatriyas; viśām — and the vaiśyas; śūdrāṇām — of the śūdras; ca — and; param-tapa — O subduer of the enemies; karmāṇi — the activities; pravibhaktāni — are divided; svabhāva — their own nature; prabhavaiḥ — born of; guṇaiḥ — by the modes of material nature.

Translation
Brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras are distinguished by the qualities born of their own natures in accordance with the material modes, O chastiser of the enemy.

TEXT 42
शमो दमस्तप: शौचं क्षान्तिरार्जवमेव च ।
ज्ञानं विज्ञानमास्तिक्यं ब्रह्मकर्म स्वभावजम् ॥ ४२ ॥
śamo damas tapaḥ śaucaṁ
kṣāntir ārjavam eva ca
jñānaṁ vijñānam āstikyaṁ
brahma-karma svabhāva-jam
Synonyms
śamaḥ — peacefulness; damaḥ — self-control; tapaḥ — austerity; śaucam — purity; kṣāntiḥ — tolerance; ārjavam — honesty; eva — certainly; ca — and; jñānam — knowledge; vijñānam — wisdom; āstikyam — religiousness; brahma — of a brāhmaṇa; karma — duty; svabhāva-jam — born of his own nature.

Translation
Peacefulness, self-control, austerity, purity, tolerance, honesty, knowledge, wisdom and religiousness – these are the natural qualities by which the brāhmaṇas work.

TEXT 43
शौर्यं तेजो धृतिर्दाक्ष्यं युद्धे चाप्यपलायनम् ।
दानमीश्वरभावश्च क्षात्रं कर्म स्वभावजम् ॥ ४३ ॥
śauryaṁ tejo dhṛtir dākṣyaṁ
yuddhe cāpy apalāyanam
dānam īśvara-bhāvaś ca
kṣātraṁ karma svabhāva-jam
Synonyms
śauryam — heroism; tejaḥ — power; dhṛtiḥ — determination; dākṣyam — resourcefulness; yuddhe — in battle; ca — and; api — also; apalāyanam — not fleeing; dānam — generosity; īśvara — of leadership; bhāvaḥ — the nature; ca — and; kṣātram — of a kṣatriya; karma — duty; svabhāva-jam — born of his own nature.

Translation
Heroism, power, determination, resourcefulness, courage in battle, generosity and leadership are the natural qualities of work for the kṣatriyas.

TEXT 44
कृषिगोरक्ष्यवाणिज्यं वैश्यकर्म स्वभावजम् ।
परिचर्यात्मकं कर्म श‍ूद्रस्यापि स्वभावजम् ॥ ४४ ॥
kṛṣi-go-rakṣya-vāṇijyaṁ
vaiśya-karma svabhāva-jam
paricaryātmakaṁ karma
śūdrasyāpi svabhāva-jam
Synonyms
kṛṣi — plowing; go — of cows; rakṣya — protection; vāṇijyam — trade; vaiśya — of a vaiśya; karma — duty; svabhāva-jam — born of his own nature; paricaryā — service; ātmakam — consisting of; karma — duty; śūdrasya — of the śūdra; api — also; svabhāva-jam — born of his own nature.

Translation
Farming, cow protection and business are the natural work for the vaiśyas, and for the śūdras there are labor and service to others.

TEXT 45
स्वे स्वे कर्मण्यभिरत: संसिद्धिं लभते नर
स्वकर्मनिरत: सिद्धिं यथा विन्दति तच्‍छृणु ॥ ४५ ॥
sve sve karmaṇy abhirataḥ
saṁsiddhiṁ labhate naraḥ
sva-karma-nirataḥ siddhiṁ
yathā vindati tac chṛṇu
Synonyms
sve sve — each his own; karmaṇi — work; abhirataḥ — following; saṁsiddhim — perfection; labhate — achieves; naraḥ — a man; sva-karma — in his own duty; nirataḥ — engaged; siddhim — perfection; yathā — as; vindati — attains; tat — that; śṛṇu — listen.

Translation
By following his qualities of work, every man can become perfect. Now please hear from Me how this can be done.

TEXT 46
यत: प्रवृत्तिर्भूतानां येन सर्वमिदं ततम् ।
स्वकर्मणा तमभ्यर्च्य सिद्धिं विन्दति मानव: ॥ ४६ ॥
yataḥ pravṛttir bhūtānāṁ
yena sarvam idaṁ tatam
sva-karmaṇā tam abhyarcya
siddhiṁ vindati mānavaḥ
Synonyms
yataḥ — from whom; pravṛttiḥ — the emanation; bhūtānām — of all living entities; yena — by whom; sarvam — all; idam — this; tatam — is pervaded; sva-karmaṇā — by his own duties; tam — Him; abhyarcya — by worshiping; siddhim — perfection; vindati — achieves; mānavaḥ — a man.

Translation
By worship of the Lord, who is the source of all beings and who is all-pervading, a man can attain perfection through performing his own work.

TEXT 47
श्रेयान्स्वधर्मो विगुण: परधर्मात्स्वनुष्ठितात् ।
स्वभावनियतं कर्म कुर्वन्नाप्‍नोति किल्बिषम् ॥ ४७ ॥
śreyān sva-dharmo viguṇaḥ
para-dharmāt sv-anuṣṭhitāt
svabhāva-niyataṁ karma
kurvan nāpnoti kilbiṣam
Synonyms
śreyān — better; sva-dharmaḥ — one’s own occupation; viguṇaḥ — imperfectly performed; para-dharmāt — than another’s occupation; su-anuṣṭhitāt — perfectly done; svabhāva-niyatam — prescribed according to one’s nature; karma — work; kurvan — performing; na — never; āpnoti — achieves; kilbiṣam — sinful reactions.

Translation
It is better to engage in one’s own occupation, even though one may perform it imperfectly, than to accept another’s occupation and perform it perfectly. Duties prescribed according to one’s nature are never affected by sinful reactions.

TEXT 48
सहजं कर्म कौन्तेय सदोषमपि न त्यजेत् ।
सर्वारम्भा हि दोषेण धूमेनाग्न‍िरिवावृता: ॥ ४८ ॥
saha-jaṁ karma kaunteya
sa-doṣam api na tyajet
sarvārambhā hi doṣeṇa
dhūmenāgnir ivāvṛtāḥ
Synonyms
saha-jam — born simultaneously; karma — work; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; sa-doṣam — with fault; api — although; na — never; tyajet — one should give up; sarva-ārambhāḥ — all ventures; hi — certainly; doṣeṇa — with fault; dhūmena — with smoke; agniḥ — fire; iva — as; āvṛtāḥ — covered.

Translation
Every endeavor is covered by some fault, just as fire is covered by smoke. Therefore one should not give up the work born of his nature, O son of Kuntī, even if such work is full of fault.

TEXT 49
असक्तबुद्धि: सर्वत्र जितात्मा विगतस्पृह: ।
नैष्कर्म्यसिद्धिं परमां सन्न्यासेनाधिगच्छति ॥ ४९ ॥
asakta-buddhiḥ sarvatra
jitātmā vigata-spṛhaḥ
naiṣkarmya-siddhiṁ paramāṁ
sannyāsenādhigacchati
Synonyms
asakta-buddhiḥ — having unattached intelligence; sarvatra — everywhere; jita-ātmā — having control of the mind; vigata-spṛhaḥ — without material desires; naiṣkarmya-siddhim — the perfection of nonreaction; paramām — supreme; sannyāsena — by the renounced order of life; adhigacchati — one attains.

Translation
One who is self-controlled and unattached and who disregards all material enjoyments can obtain, by practice of renunciation, the highest perfect stage of freedom from reaction.

TEXT 50
सिद्धिं प्राप्‍तो यथा ब्रह्म तथाप्‍नोति निबोध मे ।
समासेनैव कौन्तेय निष्ठा ज्ञानस्य या परा ॥ ५० ॥
siddhiṁ prāpto yathā brahma
tathāpnoti nibodha me
samāsenaiva kaunteya
niṣṭhā jñānasya yā parā
Synonyms
siddhim — perfection; prāptaḥ — achieving; yathā — as; brahma — the Supreme; tathā — so; āpnoti — one achieves; nibodha — try to understand; me — from Me; samāsena — summarily; eva — certainly; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; niṣṭhā — the stage; jñānasya — of knowledge; yā — which; parā — transcendental.

Translation
O son of Kuntī, learn from Me how one who has achieved this perfection can attain to the supreme perfectional stage, Brahman, the stage of highest knowledge, by acting in the way I shall now summarize.

TEXTS 51-53
बुद्ध्या विश‍ुद्धया युक्तो धृत्यात्मानं नियम्य च ।
शब्दादीन्विषयांस्त्यक्त्वा रागद्वेषौ व्युदस्य च ॥ ५१ ॥
विविक्तसेवी लघ्वाशी यतवाक्कायमानस: ।
ध्यानयोगपरो नित्यं वैराग्यं समुपाश्रित: ॥ ५२ ॥
अहङ्कारं बलं दर्पं कामं क्रोधं परिग्रहम् ।
विमुच्य निर्मम: शान्तो ब्रह्मभूयाय कल्पते ॥ ५३ ॥
buddhyā viśuddhayā yukto
dhṛtyātmānaṁ niyamya ca
śabdādīn viṣayāṁs tyaktvā
rāga-dveṣau vyudasya ca
vivikta-sevī laghv-āśī
yata-vāk-kāya-mānasaḥ
dhyāna-yoga-paro nityaṁ
vairāgyaṁ samupāśritaḥ
ahaṅkāraṁ balaṁ darpaṁ
kāmaṁ krodhaṁ parigraham
vimucya nirmamaḥ śānto
brahma-bhūyāya kalpate
Synonyms
buddhyā — with the intelligence; viśuddhayā — fully purified; yuktaḥ — engaged; dhṛtyā — by determination; ātmānam — the self; niyamya — regulating; ca — also; śabda-ādīn — such as sound; viṣayān — the sense objects; tyaktvā — giving up; rāga — attachment; dveṣau — and hatred; vyudasya — laying aside; ca — also; vivikta-sevī — living in a secluded place; laghu-āśī — eating a small quantity; yata — having controlled; vāk — speech; kāya — body; mānasaḥ — and mind; dhyāna-yoga-paraḥ — absorbed in trance; nityam — twenty-four hours a day; vairāgyam — detachment; samupāśritaḥ — having taken shelter of; ahaṅkāram — false ego; balam — false strength; darpam — false pride; kāmam — lust; krodham — anger; parigraham — and acceptance of material things; vimucya — being delivered from; nirmamaḥ — without a sense of proprietorship; śāntaḥ — peaceful; brahma-bhūyāya — for self-realization; kalpate — is qualified.

Translation
Being purified by his intelligence and controlling the mind with determination, giving up the objects of sense gratification, being freed from attachment and hatred, one who lives in a secluded place, who eats little, who controls his body, mind and power of speech, who is always in trance and who is detached, free from false ego, false strength, false pride, lust, anger, and acceptance of material things, free from false proprietorship, and peaceful – such a person is certainly elevated to the position of self-realization.

TEXT 54
ब्रह्मभूत: प्रसन्नात्मा न शोचति न काङ्क्षति ।
सम: सर्वेषु भूतेषु मद्भ‍‍क्तिं लभते पराम् ॥ ५४ ॥
brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā
na śocati na kāṅkṣati
samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu
mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām
Synonyms
brahma-bhūtaḥ — being one with the Absolute; prasanna-ātmā — fully joyful; na — never; śocati — laments; na — never; kāṅkṣati — desires; samaḥ — equally disposed; sarveṣu — to all; bhūteṣu — living entities; mat-bhaktim — My devotional service; labhate — gains; parām — transcendental.

Translation
One who is thus transcendentally situated at once realizes the Supreme Brahman and becomes fully joyful. He never laments or desires to have anything. He is equally disposed toward every living entity. In that state he attains pure devotional service unto Me.

TEXT 55
भक्त्य‍ा मामभिजानाति यावान्यश्चास्मि तत्त्वत: ।
ततो मां तत्त्वतो ज्ञात्वा विशते तदनन्तरम् ॥ ५५ ॥
bhaktyā mām abhijānāti
yāvān yaś cāsmi tattvataḥ
tato māṁ tattvato jñātvā
viśate tad-anantaram
Synonyms
bhaktyā — by pure devotional service; mām — Me; abhijānāti — one can know; yāvān — as much as; yaḥ ca asmi — as I am; tattvataḥ — in truth; tataḥ — thereafter; mām — Me; tattvataḥ — in truth; jñātvā — knowing; viśate — he enters; tat-anantaram — thereafter.

Translation
One can understand Me as I am, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, only by devotional service. And when one is in full consciousness of Me by such devotion, he can enter into the kingdom of God.

TEXT 56
सर्वकर्माण्यपि सदा कुर्वाणो मद्‍व्यपाश्रय: ।
मत्प्रसादादवाप्‍नोति शाश्वतं पदमव्ययम् ॥ ५६ ॥
sarva-karmāṇy api sadā
kurvāṇo mad-vyapāśrayaḥ
mat-prasādād avāpnoti
śāśvataṁ padam avyayam
Synonyms
sarva — all; karmāṇi — activities; api — although; sadā — always; kurvāṇaḥ — performing; mat-vyapāśrayaḥ — under My protection; mat-prasādāt — by My mercy; avāpnoti — one achieves; śāśvatam — the eternal; padam — abode; avyayam — imperishable.

Translation
Though engaged in all kinds of activities, My pure devotee, under My protection, reaches the eternal and imperishable abode by My grace.

TEXT 57
चेतसा सर्वकर्माणि मयि सन्न्यस्य मत्पर: ।
बुद्धियोगमुपाश्रित्य मच्च‍ित्त: सततं भव ॥ ५७ ॥
cetasā sarva-karmāṇi
mayi sannyasya mat-paraḥ
buddhi-yogam upāśritya
mac-cittaḥ satataṁ bhava
Synonyms
cetasā — by intelligence; sarva-karmāṇi — all kinds of activities; mayi — unto Me; sannyasya — giving up; mat-paraḥ — under My protection; buddhi-yogam — devotional activities; upāśritya — taking shelter of; mat-cittaḥ — in consciousness of Me; satatam — twenty-four hours a day; bhava — just become.

Translation
In all activities just depend upon Me and work always under My protection. In such devotional service, be fully conscious of Me.

TEXT 58
मच्च‍ित्त: सर्वदुर्गाणि मत्प्रसादात्तरिष्यसि ।
अथ चेत्त्वमहङ्कारान्न श्रोष्यसि विनङ्‍क्ष्यसि ॥ ५८ ॥
mac-cittaḥ sarva-durgāṇi
mat-prasādāt tariṣyasi
atha cet tvam ahaṅkārān
na śroṣyasi vinaṅkṣyasi
Synonyms
mat — of Me; cittaḥ — being in consciousness; sarva — all; durgāṇi — impediments; mat-prasādāt — by My mercy; tariṣyasi — you will overcome; atha — but; cet — if; tvam — you; ahaṅkārāt — by false ego; na śroṣyasi — do not hear; vinaṅkṣyasi — you will be lost.

Translation
If you become conscious of Me, you will pass over all the obstacles of conditioned life by My grace. If, however, you do not work in such consciousness but act through false ego, not hearing Me, you will be lost.

TEXT 59
यदहङ्कारमाश्रित्य न योत्स्य इति मन्यसे ।
मिथ्यैष व्यवसायस्ते प्रकृतिस्त्वां नियोक्ष्यति ॥ ५९ ॥
yad ahaṅkāram āśritya
na yotsya iti manyase
mithyaiṣa vyavasāyas te
prakṛtis tvāṁ niyokṣyati
Synonyms
yat — if; ahaṅkāram — of false ego; āśritya — taking shelter; na yotsye — I shall not fight; iti — thus; manyase — you think; mithyā eṣaḥ — this is all false; vyavasāyaḥ — determination; te — your; prakṛtiḥ — material nature; tvām — you; niyokṣyati — will engage.

Translation
If you do not act according to My direction and do not fight, then you will be falsely directed. By your nature, you will have to be engaged in warfare.

TEXT 60
स्वभावजेन कौन्तेय निबद्ध: स्वेन कर्मणा ।
कर्तुं नेच्छसि यन्मोहात्करिष्यस्यवशोऽपि तत् ॥ ६० ॥
svabhāva-jena kaunteya
nibaddhaḥ svena karmaṇā
kartuṁ necchasi yan mohāt
kariṣyasy avaśo ’pi tat
Synonyms
svabhāva-jena — born of your own nature; kaunteya — O son of Kuntī; nibaddhaḥ — conditioned; svena — by your own; karmaṇā — activities; kartum — to do; na — not; icchasi — you like; yat — that which; mohāt — by illusion; kariṣyasi — you will do; avaśaḥ — involuntarily; api — even; tat — that.

Translation
Under illusion you are now declining to act according to My direction. But, compelled by the work born of your own nature, you will act all the same, O son of Kuntī.

TEXT 61
ईश्वर: सर्वभूतानां हृद्देशेऽर्जुन तिष्ठति ।
भ्रामयन्सर्वभूतानि यन्‍त्रारूढानि मायया ॥ ६१ ॥
īśvaraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
hṛd-deśe ’rjuna tiṣṭhati
bhrāmayan sarva-bhūtāni
yantrārūḍhāni māyayā
Synonyms
īśvaraḥ — the Supreme Lord; sarva-bhūtānām — of all living entities; hṛt-deśe — in the location of the heart; arjuna — O Arjuna; tiṣṭhati — resides; bhrāmayan — causing to travel; sarva-bhūtāni — all living entities; yantra — on a machine; ārūḍhani — being placed; māyayā — under the spell of material energy.

Translation
The Supreme Lord is situated in everyone’s heart, O Arjuna, and is directing the wanderings of all living entities, who are seated as on a machine, made of the material energy.

TEXT 62
तमेव शरणं गच्छ सर्वभावेन भारत ।
तत्प्रसादात्परां शान्तिं स्थानं प्राप्स्यसि शाश्वतम् ॥ ६२ ॥
tam eva śaraṇaṁ gaccha
sarva-bhāvena bhārata
tat-prasādāt parāṁ śāntiṁ
sthānaṁ prāpsyasi śāśvatam
Synonyms
tam — unto Him; eva — certainly; śaraṇam gaccha — surrender; sarva-bhāvena — in all respects; bhārata — O son of Bharata; tat-prasādāt — by His grace; parām — transcendental; śāntim — peace; sthānam — the abode; prāpsyasi — you will get; śāśvatam — eternal.

Translation
O scion of Bharata, surrender unto Him utterly. By His grace you will attain transcendental peace and the supreme and eternal abode.

TEXT 63
इति ते ज्ञानमाख्यातं गुह्याद्‍‍गुह्यतरं मया ।
विमृश्यैतदशेषेण यथेच्छसि तथा कुरु ॥ ६३ ॥
iti te jñānam ākhyātaṁ
guhyād guhya-taraṁ mayā
vimṛśyaitad aśeṣeṇa
yathecchasi tathā kuru
Synonyms
iti — thus; te — unto you; jñānam — knowledge; ākhyātam — described; guhyāt — than confidential; guhya-taram — still more confidential; mayā — by Me; vimṛśya — deliberating; etat — on this; aśeṣeṇa — fully; yathā — as; icchasi — you like; tathā — that; kuru — perform.

Translation
Thus I have explained to you knowledge still more confidential. Deliberate on this fully, and then do what you wish to do.

TEXT 64
सर्वगुह्यतमं भूय: श‍ृणु मे परमं वच: ।
इष्टोऽसि मे दृढमिति ततो वक्ष्यामि ते हितम् ॥ ६४ ॥
sarva-guhyatamaṁ bhūyaḥ
śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ
iṣṭo ’si me dṛḍham iti
tato vakṣyāmi te hitam
Synonyms
sarva-guhya-tamam — the most confidential of all; bhūyaḥ — again; śṛṇu — just hear; me — from Me; paramam — the supreme; vacaḥ — instruction; iṣṭaḥ asi — you are dear; me — to Me; dṛḍham — very; iti — thus; tataḥ — therefore; vakṣyāmi — I am speaking; te — for your; hitam — benefit.

Translation
Because you are My very dear friend, I am speaking to you My supreme instruction, the most confidential knowledge of all. Hear this from Me, for it is for your benefit.

TEXT 65
मन्मना भव मद्भ‍क्तो मद्याजी मां नमस्कुरु ।
मामेवैष्यसि सत्यं ते प्रतिजाने प्रियोऽसि मे ॥ ६५ ॥
man-manā bhava mad-bhakto
mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru
mām evaiṣyasi satyaṁ te
pratijāne priyo ’si me
Synonyms
mat-manāḥ — thinking of Me; bhava — just become; mat-bhaktaḥ — My devotee; mat-yājī — My worshiper; mām — unto Me; namaskuru — offer your obeisances; mām — unto Me; eva — certainly; eṣyasi — you will come; satyam — truly; te — to you; pratijāne — I promise; priyaḥ — dear; asi — you are; me — to Me.

Translation
Always think of Me, become My devotee, worship Me and offer your homage unto Me. Thus you will come to Me without fail. I promise you this because you are My very dear friend.

TEXT 66
सर्वधर्मान्परित्यज्य मामेकं शरणं व्रज ।
अहं त्वां सर्वपापेभ्यो मोक्षयिष्यामि मा श‍ुच: ॥ ६६ ॥
sarva-dharmān parityajya
mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja
ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo
mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ
Synonyms
sarva-dharmān — all varieties of religion; parityajya — abandoning; mām — unto Me; ekam — only; śaraṇam — for surrender; vraja — go; aham — I; tvām — you; sarva — all; pāpebhyaḥ — from sinful reactions; mokṣayiṣyāmi — will deliver; mā — do not; śucaḥ — worry.

Translation
Abandon all varieties of religion and just surrender unto Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful reactions. Do not fear.

TEXT 67
इदं ते नातपस्काय नाभक्ताय कदाचन ।
न चाश‍ुश्रूषवे वाच्यं न च मां योऽभ्यसूयति ॥ ६७ ॥
idaṁ te nātapaskāya
nābhaktāya kadācana
na cāśuśrūṣave vācyaṁ
na ca māṁ yo ’bhyasūyati
Synonyms
idam — this; te — by you; na — never; atapaskāya — to one who is not austere; na — never; abhaktāya — to one who is not a devotee; kadācana — at any time; na — never; ca — also; aśuśrūṣave — to one who is not engaged in devotional service; vācyam — to be spoken; na — never; ca — also; mām — toward Me; yaḥ — anyone who; abhyasūyati — is envious.

Translation
This confidential knowledge may never be explained to those who are not austere, or devoted, or engaged in devotional service, nor to one who is envious of Me.

TEXT 68
य इदं परमं गुह्यं मद्भ‍क्तेष्वभिधास्यति ।
भक्तिं मयि परां कृत्वा मामेवैष्यत्यसंशय: ॥ ६८ ॥
ya idaṁ paramaṁ guhyaṁ
mad-bhakteṣv abhidhāsyati
bhaktiṁ mayi parāṁ kṛtvā
mām evaiṣyaty asaṁśayaḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — anyone who; idam — this; paramam — most; guhyam — confidential secret; mat — of Mine; bhakteṣu — amongst devotees; abhidhāsyati — explains; bhaktim — devotional service; mayi — unto Me; parām — transcendental; kṛtvā — doing; mām — unto Me; eva — certainly; eṣyati — comes; asaṁśayaḥ — without doubt.

Translation
For one who explains this supreme secret to the devotees, pure devotional service is guaranteed, and at the end he will come back to Me.

TEXT 69
न च तस्मान्मनुष्येषु कश्चिन्मे प्रियकृत्तम: ।
भविता न च मे तस्मादन्य: प्रियतरो भुवि ॥ ६९ ॥
na ca tasmān manuṣyeṣu
kaścin me priya-kṛttamaḥ
bhavitā na ca me tasmād
anyaḥ priya-taro bhuvi
Synonyms
na — never; ca — and; tasmāt — than him; manuṣyeṣu — among men; kaścit — anyone; me — to Me; priya-kṛt-tamaḥ — more dear; bhavitā — will become; na — nor; ca — and; me — to Me; tasmāt — than him; anyaḥ — another; priya-taraḥ — dearer; bhuvi — in this world.

Translation
There is no servant in this world more dear to Me than he, nor will there ever be one more dear.

TEXT 70
अध्येष्यते च य इमं धर्म्यं संवादमावयो: ।
ज्ञानयज्ञेन तेनाहमिष्ट: स्यामिति मे मति: ॥ ७० ॥
adhyeṣyate ca ya imaṁ
dharmyaṁ saṁvādam āvayoḥ
jñāna-yajñena tenāham
iṣṭaḥ syām iti me matiḥ
Synonyms
adhyeṣyate — will study; ca — also; yaḥ — he who; imam — this; dharmyam — sacred; saṁvādam — conversation; āvayoḥ — of ours; jñāna — of knowledge; yajñena — by the sacrifice; tena — by him; aham — I; iṣṭaḥ — worshiped; syām — shall be; iti — thus; me — My; matiḥ — opinion.

Translation
And I declare that he who studies this sacred conversation of ours worships Me by his intelligence.

TEXT 71
श्रद्धावाननसूयश्च श‍ृणुयादपि यो नर: ।
सोऽपि मुक्त: शुभाँल्ल‍ोकान्प्राप्‍नुयात्पुण्यकर्मणाम् ॥ ७१ ॥
śraddhāvān anasūyaś ca
śṛṇuyād api yo naraḥ
so ’pi muktaḥ śubhāḻ lokān
prāpnuyāt puṇya-karmaṇām
Synonyms
śraddhā-vān — faithful; anasūyaḥ — not envious; ca — and; śṛṇuyāt — does hear; api — certainly; yaḥ — who; naraḥ — a man; saḥ — he; api — also; muktaḥ — being liberated; śubhān — the auspicious; lokān — planets; prāpnuyāt — he attains; puṇya-karmaṇām — of the pious.

Translation
And one who listens with faith and without envy becomes free from sinful reactions and attains to the auspicious planets where the pious dwell.

TEXT 72
कच्च‍िदेतच्छ्रुतं पार्थ त्वयैकाग्रेण चेतसा ।
कच्च‍िदज्ञानसम्मोह: प्रणष्टस्ते धनञ्जय ॥ ७२ ॥
kaccid etac chrutaṁ pārtha
tvayaikāgreṇa cetasā
kaccid ajñāna-sammohaḥ
praṇaṣṭas te dhanañ-jaya
Synonyms
kaccit — whether; etat — this; śrutam — heard; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā; tvayā — by you; eka-agreṇa — with full attention; cetasā — by the mind; kaccit — whether; ajñāna — of ignorance; sammohaḥ — the illusion; praṇaṣṭaḥ — dispelled; te — of you; dhanam-jaya — O conqueror of wealth (Arjuna).

Translation
O son of Pṛthā, O conqueror of wealth, have you heard this with an attentive mind? And are your ignorance and illusions now dispelled?

TEXT 73
नष्टो मोह: स्मृतिर्लब्धा त्वत्प्रसादान्मयाच्युत ।
स्थितोऽस्मि गतसन्देह: करिष्ये वचनं तव ॥ ७३ ॥
arjuna uvāca
naṣṭo mohaḥ smṛtir labdhā
tvat-prasādān mayācyuta
sthito ’smi gata-sandehaḥ
kariṣye vacanaṁ tava
Synonyms
arjunaḥ uvāca — Arjuna said; naṣṭaḥ — dispelled; mohaḥ — illusion; smṛtiḥ — memory; labdhā — regained; tvat-prasādāt — by Your mercy; mayā — by me; acyuta — O infallible Kṛṣṇa; sthitaḥ — situated; asmi — I am; gata — removed; sandehaḥ — all doubts; kariṣye — I shall execute; vacanam — order; tava — Your.

Translation
Arjuna said: My dear Kṛṣṇa, O infallible one, my illusion is now gone. I have regained my memory by Your mercy. I am now firm and free from doubt and am prepared to act according to Your instructions.

TEXT 74
इत्यहं वासुदेवस्य पार्थस्य च महात्मन: ।
संवादमिममश्रौषमद्भुतं रोमहर्षणम् ॥ ७४ ॥
sañjaya uvāca
ity ahaṁ vāsudevasya
pārthasya ca mahātmanaḥ
saṁvādam imam aśrauṣam
adbhutaṁ roma-harṣaṇam
Synonyms
sañjayaḥ uvāca — Sañjaya said; iti — thus; aham — I; vāsudevasya — of Kṛṣṇa; pārthasya — and Arjuna; ca — also; mahā-ātmanaḥ — of the great soul; saṁvādam — discussion; imam — this; aśrauṣam — have heard; adbhutam — wonderful; roma-harṣaṇam — making the hair stand on end.

Translation
Sañjaya said: Thus have I heard the conversation of two great souls, Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna. And so wonderful is that message that my hair is standing on end.

TEXT 75
व्यासप्रसादाच्छ्रुतवानेतद्‍गुह्यमहं परम् ।
योगं योगेश्वरात्कृष्णात्साक्षात्कथयत: स्वयम् ॥ ७५ ॥
vyāsa-prasādāc chrutavān
etad guhyam ahaṁ param
yogaṁ yogeśvarāt kṛṣṇāt
sākṣāt kathayataḥ svayam
Synonyms
vyāsa-prasādāt — by the mercy of Vyāsadeva; śrutavān — have heard; etat — this; guhyam — confidential; aham — I; param — the supreme; yogam — mysticism; yoga-īśvarāt — from the master of all mysticism; kṛṣṇāt — from Kṛṣṇa; sākṣāt — directly; kathayataḥ — speaking; svayam — personally.

Translation
By the mercy of Vyāsa, I have heard these most confidential talks directly from the master of all mysticism, Kṛṣṇa, who was speaking personally to Arjuna.

TEXT 76
राजन्संस्मृत्य संस्मृत्य संवादमिममद्भुतम् ।
केशवार्जुनयो: पुण्यं हृष्यामि च मुहुर्मुहु: ॥ ७६ ॥
rājan saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya
saṁvādam imam adbhutam
keśavārjunayoḥ puṇyaṁ
hṛṣyāmi ca muhur muhuḥ
Synonyms
rājan — O King; saṁsmṛtya — remembering; saṁsmṛtya — remembering; saṁvādam — message; imam — this; adbhutam — wonderful; keśava — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; arjunayoḥ — and Arjuna; puṇyam — pious; hṛṣyāmi — I am taking pleasure; ca — also; muhuḥ muhuḥ — repeatedly.

Translation
O King, as I repeatedly recall this wondrous and holy dialogue between Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, I take pleasure, being thrilled at every moment.

TEXT 77
तच्च‍ संस्मृत्य संस्मृत्य रूपमत्यद्भुतं हरे: ।
विस्मयो मे महान्‍राजन्हृष्यामि च पुन: पुन: ॥ ७७ ॥
tac ca saṁsmṛtya saṁsmṛtya
rūpam aty-adbhutaṁ hareḥ
vismayo me mahān rājan
hṛṣyāmi ca punaḥ punaḥ
Synonyms
tat — that; ca — also; saṁsmṛtya — remembering; saṁsmṛtya — remembering; rūpam — form; ati — greatly; adbhutam — wonderful; hareḥ — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; vismayaḥ — wonder; me — my; mahān — great; rājan — O King; hṛṣyāmi — I am enjoying; ca — also; punaḥ punaḥ — repeatedly.

Translation
O King, as I remember the wonderful form of Lord Kṛṣṇa, I am struck with wonder more and more, and I rejoice again and again.

TEXT 78
यत्र योगेश्वर: कृष्णो यत्र पार्थो धनुर्धर: ।
तत्र श्रीर्विजयो भूतिर्ध्रुवा नीतिर्मतिर्मम ॥ ७८ ॥
yatra yogeśvaraḥ kṛṣṇo
yatra pārtho dhanur-dharaḥ
tatra śrīr vijayo bhūtir
dhruvā nītir matir mama
Synonyms
yatra — where; yoga-īśvaraḥ — the master of mysticism; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; yatra — where; pārthaḥ — the son of Pṛthā; dhanuḥ-dharaḥ — the carrier of the bow and arrow; tatra — there; śrīḥ — opulence; vijayaḥ — victory; bhūtiḥ — exceptional power; dhruvā — certain; nītiḥ — morality; matiḥ mama — my opinion.

Translation
Wherever there is Kṛṣṇa, the master of all mystics, and wherever there is Arjuna, the supreme archer, there will also certainly be opulence, victory, extraordinary power, and morality. That is my opinion.