Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं पुत्रेषु नष्टेषु देवमातादितिस्तदा ।
हृते त्रिविष्टपे दैत्यै: पर्यतप्यदनाथवत् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ putreṣu naṣṭeṣu
deva-mātāditis tadā
hṛte tri-viṣṭape daityaiḥ
paryatapyad anāthavat
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — in this way; putreṣu — when her sons; naṣṭeṣu — disappearing from their position; deva-mātā — the mother of the demigods; aditiḥ — Aditi; tadā — at that time; hṛte — because of being lost; tri-viṣṭape — the kingdom of heaven; daityaiḥ — by the influence of the demons; paryatapyat — began to lament; anātha-vat — as if she had no protector.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, when Aditi’s sons, the demigods, had thus disappeared from heaven and the demons had occupied their places, Aditi began lamenting, as if she had no protector.

Text 2
एकदा कश्यपस्तस्या आश्रमं भगवानगात् ।
निरुत्सवं निरानन्दं समाधेर्विरतश्चिरात् ॥ २ ॥
ekadā kaśyapas tasyā
āśramaṁ bhagavān agāt
nirutsavaṁ nirānandaṁ
samādher virataś cirāt
Synonyms
ekadā — one day; kaśyapaḥ — the great sage Kaśyapa Muni; tasyāḥ — of Aditi; āśramam — to the shelter; bhagavān — greatly powerful; agāt — went; nirutsavam — without enthusiasm; nirānandam — without jubilation; samādheḥ — his trance; virataḥ — stopping; cirāt — after a long time.

Translation
After many, many days, the great powerful sage Kaśyapa Muni arose from a trance of meditation and returned home to see the āśrama of Aditi neither jubilant nor festive.

Text 3
स पत्नीं दीनवदनां कृतासनपरिग्रह: ।
सभाजितो यथान्यायमिदमाह कुरूद्वह ॥ ३ ॥
sa patnīṁ dīna-vadanāṁ
kṛtāsana-parigrahaḥ
sabhājito yathā-nyāyam
idam āha kurūdvaha
Synonyms
saḥ — Kaśyapa Muni; patnīm — unto his wife; dīna-vadanām — having a dry face; kṛta-āsana-parigrahaḥ — after accepting a sitting place; sabhājitaḥ — being honored by Aditi; yathā-nyāyam — according to time and place; idam āha — spoke as follows; kuru-udvaha — O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the best of the Kurus.

Translation
O best of the Kurus, when Kaśyapa Muni had been properly received and welcomed, he took his seat and then spoke as follows to his wife, Aditi, who was very morose.

Text 4
अप्यभद्रं न विप्राणां भद्रे लोकेऽधुनागतम् ।
न धर्मस्य न लोकस्य मृत्योश्छन्दानुवर्तिन: ॥ ४ ॥
apy abhadraṁ na viprāṇāṁ
bhadre loke ’dhunāgatam
na dharmasya na lokasya
mṛtyoś chandānuvartinaḥ
Synonyms
api — whether; abhadram — ill fortune; na — not; viprāṇām — of the brāhmaṇas; bhadre — O most gentle Aditi; loke — in this world; adhunā — at the present moment; āgatam — has come; na — not; dharmasya — of religious principles; na — not; lokasya — of the people in general; mṛtyoḥ — death; chanda-anuvartinaḥ — who are followers of the whims of death.

Translation
O most gentle one, I wonder whether anything inauspicious has now taken place in regard to religious principles, the brāhmaṇas or the people in general, who are subject to the whims of death.

Text 5
अपि वाकुशलं किञ्चिद् गृहेषु गृहमेधिनि ।
धर्मस्यार्थस्य कामस्य यत्र योगो ह्ययोगिनाम् ॥ ५ ॥
api vākuśalaṁ kiñcid
gṛheṣu gṛha-medhini
dharmasyārthasya kāmasya
yatra yogo hy ayoginām
Synonyms
api — I am wondering; vā — either; akuśalam — inauspiciousness; kiñcit — some; gṛheṣu — at home; gṛha-medhini — O my wife, who are attached to household life; dharmasya — of the principles of religion; arthasya — of the economic condition; kāmasya — of satisfaction of desires; yatra — at home; yogaḥ — the result of meditation; hi — indeed; ayoginām — even of those who are not transcendentalists.

Translation
O my wife, who are very much attached to household life, if the principles of religion, economic development and satisfaction of the senses are properly followed in household life, one’s activities are as good as those of a transcendentalist. I wonder whether there have been any discrepancies in following these principles.

Text 6
अपि वातिथयोऽभ्येत्य कुटुम्बासक्तया त्वया ।
गृहादपूजिता याता: प्रत्युत्थानेन वा क्‍वचित् ॥ ६ ॥
api vātithayo ’bhyetya
kuṭumbāsaktayā tvayā
gṛhād apūjitā yātāḥ
pratyutthānena vā kvacit
Synonyms
api — whether; vā — either; atithayaḥ — guests who come without an invitation; abhyetya — coming to the home; kuṭumba-āsaktayā — who were too attached to the family members; tvayā — by you; gṛhāt — from the house; apūjitāḥ — without being properly welcomed; yātāḥ — went away; pratyutthānena — by standing up; vā — either; kvacit — sometimes.

Translation
I wonder whether because of being too attached to the members of your family, you failed to properly receive uninvited guests, who therefore were not welcomed and went away.

Text 7
गृहेषु येष्वतिथयो नार्चिता: सलिलैरपि ।
यदि निर्यान्ति ते नूनं फेरुराजगृहोपमा: ॥ ७ ॥
gṛheṣu yeṣv atithayo
nārcitāḥ salilair api
yadi niryānti te nūnaṁ
pherurāja-gṛhopamāḥ
Synonyms
gṛheṣu — at home; yeṣu — which; atithayaḥ — uninvited guests; na — not; arcitāḥ — welcomed; salilaiḥ api — even by offering a glass of water; yadi — if; niryānti — they go away; te — such household life; nūnam — indeed; pheru-rāja — of jackals; gṛha — the homes; upamāḥ — like.

Translation
Homes from which guests go away without having been received even with an offering of a little water are like those holes in the field which are the homes of jackals.

Text 8
अप्यग्नयस्तु वेलायां न हुता हविषा सति ।
त्वयोद्विग्नधिया भद्रे प्रोषिते मयि कर्हिचित् ॥ ८ ॥
apy agnayas tu velāyāṁ
na hutā haviṣā sati
tvayodvigna-dhiyā bhadre
proṣite mayi karhicit
Synonyms
api — whether; agnayaḥ — fires; tu — indeed; velāyām — in the fire sacrifice; na — not; hutāḥ — offered; haviṣā — by ghee; sati — O chaste woman; tvayā — by you; udvigna-dhiyā — because of some anxiety; bhadre — O auspicious woman; proṣite — was away from home; mayi — when I; karhicit — sometimes.

Translation
O chaste and auspicious woman, when I left home for other places, were you in so much anxiety that you did not offer oblations of ghee into the fire?

Text 9
यत्पूजया कामदुघान्याति लोकान्गृहान्वित: ।
ब्राह्मणोऽग्निश्च वै विष्णो: सर्वदेवात्मनो मुखम् ॥ ९ ॥
yat-pūjayā kāma-dughān
yāti lokān gṛhānvitaḥ
brāhmaṇo ’gniś ca vai viṣṇoḥ
sarva-devātmano mukham
Synonyms
yat-pūjayā — by worshiping the fire and brāhmaṇas; kāma-dughān — which fulfill one’s desires; yāti — one goes; lokān — to the destination of the higher planetary system; gṛha-anvitaḥ — a person attached to household life; brāhmaṇaḥ — the brāhmaṇas; agniḥ ca — and the fire; vai — indeed; viṣṇoḥ — of Lord Viṣṇu; sarva-deva-ātmanaḥ — the soul of all the demigods; mukham — the mouth.

Translation
By worshiping the fire and the brāhmaṇas, a householder can achieve the desired goal of residing in the higher planets, for the sacrificial fire and the brāhmaṇas are to be considered the mouth of Lord Viṣṇu, who is the Supersoul of all the demigods.

Text 10
अपि सर्वे कुशलिनस्तव पुत्रा मनस्विनि ।
लक्षयेऽस्वस्थमात्मानं भवत्या लक्षणैरहम् ॥ १० ॥
api sarve kuśalinas
tava putrā manasvini
lakṣaye ’svastham ātmānaṁ
bhavatyā lakṣaṇair aham
Synonyms
api — whether; sarve — all; kuśalinaḥ — in full auspiciousness; tava — your; putrāḥ — sons; manasvini — O great-minded lady; lakṣaye — I see; asvastham — not in tranquillity; ātmānam — the mind; bhavatyāḥ — of you; lakṣaṇaiḥ — by symptoms; aham — I.

Translation
O great-minded lady, are all your sons faring well? Seeing your withered face, I can perceive that your mind is not tranquil. How is this so?

Text 11
श्रीअदितिरुवाच
भद्रं द्विजगवां ब्रह्मन्धर्मस्यास्य जनस्य च ।
त्रिवर्गस्य परं क्षेत्रं गृहमेधिन्गृहा इमे ॥ ११ ॥
śrī-aditir uvāca
bhadraṁ dvija-gavāṁ brahman
dharmasyāsya janasya ca
tri-vargasya paraṁ kṣetraṁ
gṛhamedhin gṛhā ime
Synonyms
śrī-aditiḥ uvāca — Śrīmatī Aditi said; bhadram — all auspiciousness; dvija-gavām — of the brāhmaṇas and the cows; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; dharmasya asya — of the religious principles mentioned in śāstra; janasya — of the people in general; ca — and; tri-vargasya — of the three processes of elevation (dharma, artha and kāma); param — the supreme; kṣetram — field; gṛhamedhin — O my husband, who are attached to household life; gṛhāḥ — your home; ime — all these things.

Translation
Aditi said: O my respected brāhmaṇa husband, all is well with the brāhmaṇas, the cows, religion and the welfare of other people. O master of the house, the three principles of dharma, artha and kāma flourish in household life, which is consequently full of good fortune.

Text 12
अग्नयोऽतिथयो भृत्या भिक्षवो ये च लिप्सव: ।
सर्वं भगवतो ब्रह्मन्ननुध्यानान्न रिष्यति ॥ १२ ॥
agnayo ’tithayo bhṛtyā
bhikṣavo ye ca lipsavaḥ
sarvaṁ bhagavato brahmann
anudhyānān na riṣyati
Synonyms
agnayaḥ — worshiping the fires; atithayaḥ — receiving the guests; bhṛtyāḥ — satisfying the servants; bhikṣavaḥ — pleasing the beggars; ye — all of them who; ca — and; lipsavaḥ — as they desire (are taken care of); sarvam — all of them; bhagavataḥ — of you, my lord; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; anudhyānāt — from always thinking; na riṣyati — nothing is missed (everything is properly done).

Translation
O beloved husband, the fires, guests, servants and beggars are all being properly cared for by me. Because I always think of you, there is no possibility that any of the religious principles will be neglected.

Text 13
को नु मे भगवन्कामो न सम्पद्येत मानस: ।
यस्या भवान्प्रजाध्यक्ष एवं धर्मान्प्रभाषते ॥ १३ ॥
ko nu me bhagavan kāmo
na sampadyeta mānasaḥ
yasyā bhavān prajādhyakṣa
evaṁ dharmān prabhāṣate
Synonyms
kaḥ — what; nu — indeed; me — my; bhagavan — O lord; kāmaḥ — desire; na — not; sampadyeta — can be fulfilled; mānasaḥ — within my mind; yasyāḥ — of me; bhavān — your good self; prajā-adhyakṣaḥ — Prajāpati; evam — thus; dharmān — religious principles; prabhāṣate — talks.

Translation
O my lord, since you are a Prajāpati and are personally my instructor in the principles of religion, where is the possibility that all my desires will not be fulfilled?

Text 14
तवैव मारीच मन:शरीरजा:
प्रजा इमा: सत्त्वरजस्तमोजुष: ।
समो भवांस्तास्वसुरादिषु प्रभो
तथापि भक्तं भजते महेश्वर: ॥ १४ ॥
tavaiva mārīca manaḥ-śarīrajāḥ
prajā imāḥ sattva-rajas-tamo-juṣaḥ
samo bhavāṁs tāsv asurādiṣu prabho
tathāpi bhaktaṁ bhajate maheśvaraḥ
Synonyms
tava — your; eva — indeed; mārīca — O son of Marīci; manaḥ-śarīra-jāḥ — born either of your body or of your mind (all the demons and demigods); prajāḥ — born of you; imāḥ — all of them; sattva-rajaḥ-tamaḥ-juṣaḥ — infected with sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa or tamo-guṇa; samaḥ — equal; bhavān — your good self; tāsu — to every one of them; asura-ādiṣu — beginning with the asuras; prabho — O my lord; tathā api — still; bhaktam — unto the devotees; bhajate — takes care of; mahā-īśvaraḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme controller.

Translation
O son of Marīci, because you are a great personality you are equal toward all the demons and demigods, who are born either from your body or from your mind and who possess one or another of the three qualities — sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa or tamo-guṇa. But although the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the supreme controller, is equal toward all living entities, He is especially favorable to the devotees.

Text 15
तस्मादीश भजन्त्या मे श्रेयश्चिन्तय सुव्रत ।
हृतश्रियो हृतस्थानान्सपत्नै: पाहि न: प्रभो ॥ १५ ॥
tasmād īśa bhajantyā me
śreyaś cintaya suvrata
hṛta-śriyo hṛta-sthānān
sapatnaiḥ pāhi naḥ prabho
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; īśa — O powerful controller; bhajantyāḥ — of your servitor; me — me; śreyaḥ — auspiciousness; cintaya — just consider; su-vrata — O most gentle one; hṛta-śriyaḥ — bereft of all opulence; hṛta-sthānān — bereft of a residence; sapatnaiḥ — by the competitors; pāhi — please protect; naḥ — us; prabho — O my lord.

Translation
Therefore, most gentle lord, kindly favor your maidservant. We have now been deprived of our opulence and residence by our competitors, the demons. Kindly give us protection.

Text 16
परैर्विवासिता साहं मग्ना व्यसनसागरे ।
ऐश्वर्यं श्रीर्यश: स्थानं हृतानि प्रबलैर्मम ॥ १६ ॥
parair vivāsitā sāhaṁ
magnā vyasana-sāgare
aiśvaryaṁ śrīr yaśaḥ sthānaṁ
hṛtāni prabalair mama
Synonyms
paraiḥ — by our enemies; vivāsitā — taken away from our residential quarters; sā — the same; aham — I; magnā — drowned; vyasana-sāgare — in an ocean of trouble; aiśvaryam — opulence; śrīḥ — beauty; yaśaḥ — reputation; sthānam — place; hṛtāni — all taken away; prabalaiḥ — very powerful; mama — my.

Translation
The demons, our formidably powerful enemies, have taken away our opulence, our beauty, our fame and even our residence. Indeed, we have now been exiled, and we are drowning in an ocean of trouble.

Text 17
यथा तानि पुन: साधो प्रपद्येरन् ममात्मजा: ।
तथा विधेहि कल्याणं धिया कल्याणकृत्तम ॥ १७ ॥
yathā tāni punaḥ sādho
prapadyeran mamātmajāḥ
tathā vidhehi kalyāṇaṁ
dhiyā kalyāṇa-kṛttama
Synonyms
yathā — as; tāni — all of our lost things; punaḥ — again; sādho — O great saintly person; prapadyeran — can regain; mama — my; ātmajāḥ — offspring (sons); tathā — so; vidhehi — kindly do; kalyāṇam — auspiciousness; dhiyā — by consideration; kalyāṇa-kṛt-tama — O you who are the best person to act for our welfare.

Translation
O best of sages, best of all those who grant auspicious benedictions, please consider our situation and bestow upon my sons the benedictions by which they can regain what they have lost.

Text 18
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवमभ्यर्थितोऽदित्या कस्तामाह स्मयन्निव ।
अहो मायाबलं विष्णो: स्‍नेहबद्धमिदं जगत् ॥ १८ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evam abhyarthito ’dityā
kas tām āha smayann iva
aho māyā-balaṁ viṣṇoḥ
sneha-baddham idaṁ jagat
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — in this way; abhyarthitaḥ — being requested; adityā — by Aditi; kaḥ — Kaśyapa Muni; tām — unto her; āha — said; smayan — smiling; iva — just like; aho — alas; māyā-balam — the influence of the illusory energy; viṣṇoḥ — of Lord Viṣṇu; sneha-baddham — influenced by this affection; idam — this; jagat — whole world.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: When Kaśyapa Muni was thus requested by Aditi, he slightly smiled. “Alas,” he said, “how powerful is the illusory energy of Lord Viṣṇu, by which the entire world is bound by affection for children!”

Text 19
क्‍व देहो भौतिकोऽनात्मा क्‍व चात्मा प्रकृते: पर: ।
कस्य के पतिपुत्राद्या मोह एव हि कारणम् ॥ १९ ॥
kva deho bhautiko ’nātmā
kva cātmā prakṛteḥ paraḥ
kasya ke pati-putrādyā
moha eva hi kāraṇam
Synonyms
kva — where is; dehaḥ — this material body; bhautikaḥ — made of five elements; anātmā — not the spirit soul; kva — where is; ca — also; ātmā — the spirit soul; prakṛteḥ — to the material world; paraḥ — transcendental; kasya — of whom; ke — who is; pati — husband; putra-ādyāḥ — or son and so on; mohaḥ — illusion; eva — indeed; hi — certainly; kāraṇam — cause.

Translation
Kaśyapa Muni continued: What is this material body, made of five elements? It is different from the spirit soul. Indeed, the spirit soul is completely different from the material elements from which the body is made. But because of bodily attachment, one is regarded as a husband or son. These illusory relationships are caused by misunderstanding.

Text 20
उपतिष्ठस्व पुरुषं भगवन्तं जनार्दनम् ।
सर्वभूतगुहावासं वासुदेवं जगद्गुरुम् ॥ २० ॥
upatiṣṭhasva puruṣaṁ
bhagavantaṁ janārdanam
sarva-bhūta-guhā-vāsaṁ
vāsudevaṁ jagad-gurum
Synonyms
upatiṣṭhasva — just try to worship; puruṣam — the Supreme Person; bhagavantam — the Personality of Godhead; janārdanam — who can kill all the enemies; sarva-bhūta-guhā-vāsam — living within the core of the heart of everyone; vāsudevam — Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, who is all-pervading and is the son of Vasudeva; jagat-gurum — the spiritual master and teacher of the whole world.

Translation
My dear Aditi, engage in devotional service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the master of everything, who can subdue everyone’s enemies, and who sits within everyone’s heart. Only that Supreme Person — Kṛṣṇa, or Vāsudeva — can bestow all auspicious benedictions upon everyone, for He is the spiritual master of the universe.

Text 21
स विधास्यति ते कामान्हरिर्दीनानुकम्पन: ।
अमोघा भगवद्भ‍क्तिर्नेतरेति मतिर्मम ॥ २१ ॥
sa vidhāsyati te kāmān
harir dīnānukampanaḥ
amoghā bhagavad-bhaktir
netareti matir mama
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Vāsudeva); vidhāsyati — will undoubtedly fulfill; te — your; kāmān — desires; hariḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dīna — unto the poor; anukampanaḥ — very merciful; amoghā — infallible; bhagavat-bhaktiḥ — devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; na — not; itarā — anything but bhagavad-bhakti; iti — thus; matiḥ — opinion; mama — my.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is very merciful to the poor, will fulfill all of your desires, for devotional service unto Him is infallible. Any method other than devotional service is useless. That is my opinion.

Text 22
श्रीअदितिरुवाच
केनाहं विधिना ब्रह्मन्नुपस्थास्ये जगत्पतिम् ।
यथा मे सत्यसङ्कल्पो विदध्यात् स मनोरथम् ॥ २२ ॥
śrī-aditir uvāca
kenāhaṁ vidhinā brahmann
upasthāsye jagat-patim
yathā me satya-saṅkalpo
vidadhyāt sa manoratham
Synonyms
śrī-aditiḥ uvāca — Śrīmatī Aditi began to pray; kena — by which; aham — I; vidhinā — by regulative principles; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; upasthāsye — can please; jagat-patim — the Lord of the universe, Jagannātha; yathā — by which; me — my; satya-saṅkalpaḥ — desire may actually be fulfilled; vidadhyāt — may fulfill; saḥ — He (the Supreme Lord); manoratham — ambitions or desires.

Translation
Śrīmatī Aditi said: O brāhmaṇa, tell me the regulative principles by which I may worship the supreme master of the world so that He will be pleased with me and fulfill all my desires.

Text 23
आदिश त्वं द्विजश्रेष्ठ विधिं तदुपधावनम् ।
आशु तुष्यति मे देव: सीदन्त्या: सह पुत्रकै: ॥ २३ ॥
ādiśa tvaṁ dvija-śreṣṭha
vidhiṁ tad-upadhāvanam
āśu tuṣyati me devaḥ
sīdantyāḥ saha putrakaiḥ
Synonyms
ādiśa — just instruct me; tvam — O my husband; dvija-śreṣṭha — O best of the brāhmaṇas; vidhim — the regulative principles; tat — the Lord; upadhāvanam — the process of worshiping; āśu — very soon; tuṣyati — becomes satisfied; me — unto me; devaḥ — the Lord; sīdantyāḥ — now lamenting; saha — with; putrakaiḥ — all my sons, the demigods.

Translation
O best of the brāhmaṇas, kindly instruct me in the perfect method of worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead in devotional service, by which the Lord may very soon be pleased with me and save me, along with my sons, from this most dangerous condition.

Text 24
श्रीकश्यप उवाच
एतन्मे भगवान्पृष्ट: प्रजाकामस्य पद्मज: ।
यदाह ते प्रवक्ष्यामि व्रतं केशवतोषणम् ॥ २४ ॥
śrī-kaśyapa uvāca
etan me bhagavān pṛṣṭaḥ
prajā-kāmasya padmajaḥ
yad āha te pravakṣyāmi
vrataṁ keśava-toṣaṇam
Synonyms
śrī-kaśyapaḥ uvāca — Kaśyapa Muni said; etat — this; me — by me; bhagavān — the most powerful; pṛṣṭaḥ — when he was requested; prajā-kāmasya — desiring offspring; padma-jaḥ — Lord Brahmā, who was born of a lotus flower; yat — whatever; āha — he said; te — unto you; pravakṣyāmi — I shall explain; vratam — in the form of worship; keśava-toṣaṇam — by which Keśava, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is satisfied.

Translation
Śrī Kaśyapa Muni said: When I desired offspring, I placed inquiries before Lord Brahmā, who is born from a lotus flower. Now I shall explain to you the same process Lord Brahmā instructed me, by which Keśava, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is satisfied.

Text 25
फाल्गुनस्यामले पक्षे द्वादशाहं पयोव्रतम् ।
अर्चयेदरविन्दाक्षं भक्त्या परमयान्वित: ॥ २५ ॥
phālgunasyāmale pakṣe
dvādaśāhaṁ payo-vratam
arcayed aravindākṣaṁ
bhaktyā paramayānvitaḥ
Synonyms
phālgunasya — of the month of Phālguna (February and March); amale — during the bright; pakṣe — fortnight; dvādaśa-aham — for twelve days, ending with Dvādaśī, the day after Ekādaśī; payaḥ-vratam — accepting the vow of taking only milk; arcayet — one should worship; aravinda-akṣam — the lotus-eyed Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhaktyā — with devotion; paramayā — unalloyed; anvitaḥ — surcharged.

Translation
In the bright fortnight of the month of Phālguna [February and March], for twelve days ending with Dvādaśī, one should observe the vow of subsisting only on milk and should worship the lotus-eyed Supreme Personality of Godhead with all devotion.

Text 26
सिनीवाल्यां मृदालिप्य स्‍नायात् क्रोडविदीर्णया ।
यदि लभ्येत वै स्रोतस्येतं मन्त्रमुदीरयेत् ॥ २६ ॥
sinīvālyāṁ mṛdālipya
snāyāt kroḍa-vidīrṇayā
yadi labhyeta vai srotasy
etaṁ mantram udīrayet
Synonyms
sinīvālyām — on the dark-moon day; mṛdā — with dirt; ālipya — smearing the body; snāyāt — one should bathe; kroḍa-vidīrṇayā — dug up by the tusk of a boar; yadi — if; labhyeta — it is available; vai — indeed; srotasi — in a flowing river; etam mantram — this mantra; udīrayet — one should chant.

Translation
If dirt dug up by a boar is available, on the day of the dark moon one should smear this dirt on his body and then bathe in a flowing river. While bathing, one should chant the following mantra.

Text 27
त्वं देव्यादिवराहेण रसाया: स्थानमिच्छता ।
उद्‌धृतासि नमस्तुभ्यं पाप्मानं मे प्रणाशय ॥ २७ ॥
tvaṁ devy ādi-varāheṇa
rasāyāḥ sthānam icchatā
uddhṛtāsi namas tubhyaṁ
pāpmānaṁ me praṇāśaya
Synonyms
tvam — you; devi — O mother earth; ādi-varāheṇa — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of a boar; rasāyāḥ — from the bottom of the universe; sthānam — a place; icchatā — desiring; uddhṛtā asi — you have been raised; namaḥ tubhyam — I offer my respectful obeisances unto you; pāpmānam — all sinful activities and their reactions; me — of me; praṇāśaya — please undo.

Translation
O mother earth, you were raised by the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of a boar because of your desiring to have a place to stay. I pray that you kindly vanquish all the reactions of my sinful life. I offer my respectful obeisances unto you.

Text 28
निर्वर्तितात्मनियमो देवमर्चेत् समाहित: ।
अर्चायां स्थण्डिले सूर्ये जले वह्नौ गुरावपि ॥ २८ ॥
nirvartitātma-niyamo
devam arcet samāhitaḥ
arcāyāṁ sthaṇḍile sūrye
jale vahnau gurāv api
Synonyms
nirvartita — finished; ātma-niyamaḥ — the daily duties of washing, chanting other mantras and so on, according to one’s practice; devam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; arcet — one should worship; samāhitaḥ — with full attention; arcāyām — unto the Deities; sthaṇḍile — unto the altar; sūrye — unto the sun; jale — unto the water; vahnau — unto the fire; gurau — unto the spiritual master; api — indeed.

Translation
Thereafter, one should perform his daily spiritual duties and then, with great attention, offer worship to the Deity of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and also to the altar, the sun, water, fire and the spiritual master.

Text 29
नमस्तुभ्यं भगवते पुरुषाय महीयसे ।
सर्वभूतनिवासाय वासुदेवाय साक्षिणे ॥ २९ ॥
namas tubhyaṁ bhagavate
puruṣāya mahīyase
sarva-bhūta-nivāsāya
vāsudevāya sākṣiṇe
Synonyms
namaḥ tubhyam — I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; bhagavate — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puruṣāya — the Supreme Person; mahīyase — the best of all personalities; sarva-bhūta-nivāsāya — the person who lives in everyone’s heart; vāsudevāya — the Lord who lives everywhere; sākṣiṇe — the witness of everything.

Translation
O Supreme Personality of Godhead, greatest of all, who lives in everyone’s heart and in whom everyone lives, O witness of everything, O Vāsudeva, supreme and all-pervading person, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

Text 30
नमोऽव्यक्ताय सूक्ष्माय प्रधानपुरुषाय च ।
चतुर्विंशद्गुणज्ञाय गुणसङ्ख्यानहेतवे ॥ ३० ॥
namo ’vyaktāya sūkṣmāya
pradhāna-puruṣāya ca
catur-viṁśad-guṇa-jñāya
guṇa-saṅkhyāna-hetave
Synonyms
namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; avyaktāya — who are never seen by material eyes; sūkṣmāya — transcendental; pradhāna-puruṣāya — the Supreme Person; ca — also; catuḥ-viṁśat — twenty-four; guṇa-jñāya — the knower of the elements; guṇa-saṅkhyāna — of the sāṅkhya-yoga system; hetave — the original cause.

Translation
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, the Supreme Person. Being very subtle, You are never visible to material eyes. You are the knower of the twenty-four elements, and You are the inaugurator of the sāṅkhya-yoga system.

Text 31
नमो द्विशीर्ष्णे त्रिपदे चतु:श‍ृङ्गाय तन्तवे ।
सप्तहस्ताय यज्ञाय त्रयीविद्यात्मने नम: ॥ ३१ ॥
namo dvi-śīrṣṇe tri-pade
catuḥ-śṛṅgāya tantave
sapta-hastāya yajñāya
trayī-vidyātmane namaḥ
Synonyms
namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; dvi-śīrṣṇe — who have two heads; tri-pade — who have three legs; catuḥ-śṛṅgāya — who have four horns; tantave — who expand; sapta-hastāya — who have seven hands; yajñāya — unto the yajña-puruṣa, the supreme enjoyer; trayī — the three modes of Vedic ritualistic ceremonies; vidyā-ātmane — the Personality of Godhead, the embodiment of all knowledge; namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

Translation
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who have two heads [prāyaṇīya and udāyanīya], three legs [savana-traya], four horns [the four Vedas] and seven hands [the seven chandas, such as Gāyatrī]. I offer my obeisances unto You, whose heart and soul are the three Vedic rituals [karma-kāṇḍa, jñāna-kāṇḍa and upāsanā-kāṇḍa] and who expand these rituals in the form of sacrifice.

Text 32
नम: शिवाय रुद्राय नम: शक्तिधराय च ।
सर्वविद्याधिपतये भूतानां पतये नम: ॥ ३२ ॥
namaḥ śivāya rudrāya
namaḥ śakti-dharāya ca
sarva-vidyādhipataye
bhūtānāṁ pataye namaḥ
Synonyms
namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; śivāya — the incarnation named Lord Śiva; rudrāya — the expansion named Rudra; namaḥ — obeisances; śakti-dharāya — the reservoir of all potencies; ca — and; sarva-vidyā-adhipataye — the reservoir of all knowledge; bhūtānām — of the living entities; pataye — the supreme master; namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

Translation
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, Lord Śiva, or Rudra, who are the reservoir of all potencies, the reservoir of all knowledge, and the master of everyone.

Text 33
नमो हिरण्यगर्भाय प्राणाय जगदात्मने ।
योगैश्वर्यशरीराय नमस्ते योगहेतवे ॥ ३३ ॥
namo hiraṇyagarbhāya
prāṇāya jagad-ātmane
yogaiśvarya-śarīrāya
namas te yoga-hetave
Synonyms
namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; hiraṇyagarbhāya — situated as the four-headed Hiraṇyagarbha, Brahmā; prāṇāya — the source of everyone’s life; jagat-ātmane — the Supersoul of the entire universe; yoga-aiśvarya-śarīrāya — whose body is full of opulences and mystic power; namaḥ te — I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; yoga-hetave — the original master of all mystic power.

Translation
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who are situated as Hiraṇyagarbha, the source of life, the Supersoul of every living entity. Your body is the source of the opulence of all mystic power. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

Text 34
नमस्त आदिदेवाय साक्षिभूताय ते नम: ।
नारायणाय ऋषये नराय हरये नम: ॥ ३४ ॥
namas ta ādi-devāya
sākṣi-bhūtāya te namaḥ
nārāyaṇāya ṛṣaye
narāya haraye namaḥ
Synonyms
namaḥ te — I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; ādi-devāya — who are the original Personality of Godhead; sākṣi-bhūtāya — the witness of everything within the heart of everyone; te — unto You; namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances; nārāyaṇāya — who take the incarnation of Nārāyaṇa; ṛṣaye — the sage; narāya — the incarnation of a human being; haraye — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances.

Translation
I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who are the original Personality of Godhead, the witness in everyone’s heart, and the incarnation of Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi in the form of a human being. O Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

Text 35
नमो मरकतश्यामवपुषेऽधिगतश्रिये ।
केशवाय नमस्तुभ्यं नमस्ते पीतवाससे ॥ ३५ ॥
namo marakata-śyāma-
vapuṣe ’dhigata-śriye
keśavāya namas tubhyaṁ
namas te pīta-vāsase
Synonyms
namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; marakata-śyāma-vapuṣe — whose bodily hue is blackish like the marakata gem; adhigata-śriye — under whose control is mother Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune; keśavāya — Lord Keśava, who killed the Keśī demon; namaḥ tubhyam — I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; namaḥ te — again I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; pīta-vāsase — whose garment is yellow.

Translation
My Lord, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who are dressed in yellow garments, whose bodily hue resembles the marakata gem, and who have full control over the goddess of fortune. O my Lord Keśava, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

Text 36
त्वं सर्ववरद: पुंसां वरेण्य वरदर्षभ ।
अतस्ते श्रेयसे धीरा: पादरेणुमुपासते ॥ ३६ ॥
tvaṁ sarva-varadaḥ puṁsāṁ
vareṇya varadarṣabha
atas te śreyase dhīrāḥ
pāda-reṇum upāsate
Synonyms
tvam — You; sarva-vara-daḥ — who can give all kinds of benedictions; puṁsām — to all living entities; vareṇya — O most worshipable; vara-da-ṛṣabha — O most powerful of all givers of benediction; ataḥ — for this reason; te — Your; śreyase — the source of all auspiciousness; dhīrāḥ — the most sober; pāda-reṇum upāsate — worship the dust of the lotus feet.

Translation
O most exalted and worshipable Lord, best of those who bestow benediction, You can fulfill the desires of everyone, and therefore those who are sober, for their own welfare, worship the dust of Your lotus feet.

Text 37
अन्ववर्तन्त यं देवा: श्रीश्च तत्पादपद्मयो: ।
स्पृहयन्त इवामोदं भगवान्मे प्रसीदताम् ॥ ३७ ॥
anvavartanta yaṁ devāḥ
śrīś ca tat-pāda-padmayoḥ
spṛhayanta ivāmodaṁ
bhagavān me prasīdatām
Synonyms
anvavartanta — engaged in devotional service; yam — unto whom; devāḥ — all the demigods; śrīḥ ca — and the goddess of fortune; tat-pāda-padmayoḥ — of the lotus feet of His Lordship; spṛhayantaḥ — desiring; iva — exactly; āmodam — celestial bliss; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; me — upon me; prasīdatām — may be pleased.

Translation
All the demigods, as well as the goddess of fortune, engage in the service of His lotus feet. Indeed, they respect the fragrance of those lotus feet. May the Supreme Personality of Godhead be pleased with me.

Text 38
एतैर्मन्त्रैर्हृषीकेशमावाहनपुरस्कृतम् ।
अर्चयेच्छ्रद्धया युक्त: पाद्योपस्पर्शनादिभि: ॥ ३८ ॥
etair mantrair hṛṣīkeśam
āvāhana-puraskṛtam
arcayec chraddhayā yuktaḥ
pādyopasparśanādibhiḥ
Synonyms
etaiḥ mantraiḥ — by chanting all these mantras; hṛṣīkeśam — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of all senses; āvāhana — calling; puraskṛtam — honoring Him in all respects; arcayet — one should worship; śraddhayā — with faith and devotion; yuktaḥ — engaged; pādya-upasparśana-ādibhiḥ — with the paraphernalia of worship (pādya, arghya, etc.).

Translation
Kaśyapa Muni continued: By chanting all these mantras, welcoming the Supreme Personality of Godhead with faith and devotion, and offering Him items of worship [such as pādya and arghya], one should worship Keśava, Hṛṣīkeśa, Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 39
अर्चित्वा गन्धमाल्याद्यै: पयसा स्‍नपयेद् विभुम् ।
वस्त्रोपवीताभरणपाद्योपस्पर्शनैस्तत: ।
गन्धधूपादिभिश्चार्चेद्‌द्वादशाक्षरविद्यया ॥ ३९ ॥
arcitvā gandha-mālyādyaiḥ
payasā snapayed vibhum
vastropavītābharaṇa-
pādyopasparśanais tataḥ
gandha-dhūpādibhiś cārced
dvādaśākṣara-vidyayā
Synonyms
arcitvā — worshiping in this way; gandha-mālya-ādyaiḥ — with incense, flower garlands, etc.; payasā — with milk; snapayet — should bathe; vibhum — the Lord; vastra — dress; upavīta — sacred thread; ābharaṇa — ornaments; pādya — water for washing the lotus feet; upasparśanaiḥ — touching; tataḥ — thereafter; gandha — fragrance; dhūpa — incense; ādibhiḥ — with all of these; ca — and; arcet — should worship; dvādaśa-akṣara-vidyayā — with the mantra of twelve syllables.

Translation
In the beginning, the devotee should chant the dvādaśākṣara-mantra and offer flower garlands, incense and so on. After worshiping the Lord in this way, one should bathe the Lord with milk and dress Him with proper garments, a sacred thread, and ornaments. After offering water to wash the Lord’s feet, one should again worship the Lord with fragrant flowers, incense and other paraphernalia.

Text 40
श‍ृतं पयसि नैवेद्यं शाल्यन्नं विभवे सति ।
ससर्पि: सगुडं दत्त्वा जुहुयान्मूलविद्यया ॥ ४० ॥
śṛtaṁ payasi naivedyaṁ
śāly-annaṁ vibhave sati
sasarpiḥ saguḍaṁ dattvā
juhuyān mūla-vidyayā
Synonyms
śṛtam — cooked; payasi — in milk; naivedyam — offering to the Deity; śāli-annam — fine rice; vibhave — if available; sati — in this way; sa-sarpiḥ — with ghee (clarified butter); sa-guḍam — with molasses; dattvā — offering Him; juhuyāt — should offer oblations in the fire; mūla-vidyayā — with chanting of the same dvādaśākṣara-mantra

Translation
If one can afford to, one should offer the Deity fine rice boiled in milk with clarified butter and molasses. While chanting the same original mantra, one should offer all this to the fire.

Text 41
निवेदितं तद्भ‍क्ताय दद्याद्भ‍ुञ्जीत वा स्वयम् ।
दत्त्वाचमनमर्चित्वा ताम्बूलं च निवेदयेत् ॥ ४१ ॥
niveditaṁ tad-bhaktāya
dadyād bhuñjīta vā svayam
dattvācamanam arcitvā
tāmbūlaṁ ca nivedayet
Synonyms
niveditam — this offering of prasāda; tat-bhaktāya — unto His devotee; dadyāt — should be offered; bhuñjīta — one should take; vā — either; svayam — personally; dattvā ācamanam — giving water to wash the hands and mouth; arcitvā — in this way worshiping the Deity; tāmbūlam — betel nuts with spices; ca — also; nivedayet — one should offer.

Translation
One should offer all the prasāda to a Vaiṣṇava or offer him some of the prasāda and then take some oneself. After this, one should offer the Deity ācamana and then betel nut and then again worship the Lord.

Text 42
जपेदष्टोत्तरशतं स्तुवीत स्तुतिभि: प्रभुम् ।
कृत्वा प्रदक्षिणं भूमौ प्रणमेद् दण्डवन्मुदा ॥ ४२ ॥
japed aṣṭottara-śataṁ
stuvīta stutibhiḥ prabhum
kṛtvā pradakṣiṇaṁ bhūmau
praṇamed daṇḍavan mudā
Synonyms
japet — should silently murmur; aṣṭottara-śatam — 108 times; stuvīta — should offer prayers; stutibhiḥ — by various prayers of glorification; prabhum — unto the Lord; kṛtvā — thereafter doing; pradakṣiṇam — circumambulation; bhūmau — on the ground; praṇamet — should offer obeisances; daṇḍavat — straight, with the whole body; mudā — with great satisfaction.

Translation
Thereafter, one should silently murmur the mantra 108 times and offer prayers to the Lord for His glorification. Then one should circumambulate the Lord and finally, with great delight and satisfaction, offer obeisances, falling straight like a rod [daṇḍavat].

Text 43
कृत्वा शिरसि तच्छेषां देवमुद्वासयेत् तत: ।
द्वय‍वरान्भोजयेद् विप्रान्पायसेन यथोचितम् ॥ ४३ ॥
kṛtvā śirasi tac-cheṣāṁ
devam udvāsayet tataḥ
dvy-avarān bhojayed viprān
pāyasena yathocitam
Synonyms
kṛtvā — taking; śirasi — on the head; tat-śeṣām — all the remnants (the water and flowers offered to the Deity); devam — unto the Deity; udvāsayet — should be thrown into a sacred place; tataḥ — thereafter; dvi-avarān — a minimum of two; bhojayet — should feed; viprān — brāhmaṇas; pāyasena — with sweet rice; yathā-ucitam — as each deserves.

Translation
After touching to one’s head all the flowers and water offered to the Deity, one should throw them into a sacred place. Then one should feed at least two brāhmaṇas with sweet rice.

Texts 44-45
भुञ्जीत तैरनुज्ञात: सेष्ट: शेषं सभाजितै: ।
ब्रह्मचार्यथ तद्रात्र्यां श्वोभूते प्रथमेऽहनि ॥ ४४ ॥
स्‍नात: शुचिर्यथोक्तेन विधिना सुसमाहित: ।
पयसा स्‍नापयित्वार्चेद् यावद्‌व्रतसमापनम् ॥ ४५ ॥
bhuñjīta tair anujñātaḥ
seṣṭaḥ śeṣaṁ sabhājitaiḥ
brahmacāry atha tad-rātryāṁ
śvo bhūte prathame ’hani
snātaḥ śucir yathoktena
vidhinā susamāhitaḥ
payasā snāpayitvārced
yāvad vrata-samāpanam
Synonyms
bhuñjīta — should take the prasāda; taiḥ — by the brāhmaṇas; anujñātaḥ — being permitted; sa-iṣṭaḥ — with friends and relatives; śeṣam — the remnants; sabhājitaiḥ — properly honored; brahmacārī — observance of celibacy; atha — of course; tat-rātryām — at night; śvaḥ bhūte — at the end of the night, when the morning comes; prathame ahani — on the first day; snātaḥ — bathing; śuciḥ — becoming purified; yathā-uktena — as stated before; vidhinā — by following the regulative principles; su-samāhitaḥ — with great attention; payasā — with milk; snāpayitvā — bathing the Deity; arcet — should offer worship; yāvat — as long as; vrata-samāpanam — the period of worship is not over.

Translation
One should perfectly honor the respectable brāhmaṇas one has fed, and then, after taking their permission, one should take prasāda with his friends and relatives. For that night, one should observe strict celibacy, and the next morning, after bathing again, with purity and attention one should bathe the Deity of Viṣṇu with milk and worship Him according to the methods formerly stated in detail.

Text 46
पयोभक्षो व्रतमिदं चरेद् विष्णवर्चनाद‍ृत: ।
पूर्ववज्जुहुयादग्निं ब्राह्मणांश्चापि भोजयेत् ॥ ४६ ॥
payo-bhakṣo vratam idaṁ
cared viṣṇv-arcanādṛtaḥ
pūrvavaj juhuyād agniṁ
brāhmaṇāṁś cāpi bhojayet
Synonyms
payaḥ-bhakṣaḥ — one who drinks milk only; vratam idam — this process of worshiping with a vow; caret — one should execute; viṣṇu-arcana-ādṛtaḥ — worshiping Lord Viṣṇu with great faith and devotion; pūrva-vat — as prescribed previously; juhuyāt — one should offer oblations; agnim — into the fire; brāhmaṇān — unto the brāhmaṇas; ca api — as well as; bhojayet — should feed.

Translation
Worshiping Lord Viṣṇu with great faith and devotion and living only by drinking milk, one should follow this vow. One should also offer oblations to the fire and feed the brāhmaṇas as mentioned before.

Text 47
एवं त्वहरह: कुर्याद्‌द्वादशाहं पयोव्रतम् ।
हरेराराधनं होममर्हणं द्विजतर्पणम् ॥ ४७ ॥
evaṁ tv ahar ahaḥ kuryād
dvādaśāhaṁ payo-vratam
harer ārādhanaṁ homam
arhaṇaṁ dvija-tarpaṇam
Synonyms
evam — in this way; tu — indeed; ahaḥ ahaḥ — day after day; kuryāt — should execute; dvādaśa-aham — until twelve days; payaḥ-vratam — the observance of the vrata known as payo-vrata; hareḥ ārādhanam — worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead; homam — by executing a fire sacrifice; arhaṇam — worshiping the Deity; dvija-tarpaṇam — and satisfying the brāhmaṇas by feeding them.

Translation
In this way, until twelve days have passed, one should observe this payo-vrata, worshiping the Lord every day, executing the routine duties, performing sacrifices and feeding the brāhmaṇas.

Text 48
प्रतिपद्दिनमारभ्य यावच्छुक्लत्रयोदशीम् ।
ब्रह्मचर्यमध:स्वप्नं स्‍नानं त्रिषवणं चरेत् ॥ ४८ ॥
pratipad-dinam ārabhya
yāvac chukla-trayodaśīm
brahmacaryam adhaḥ-svapnaṁ
snānaṁ tri-ṣavaṇaṁ caret
Synonyms
pratipat-dinam — on the day of pratipat; ārabhya — beginning; yāvat — until; śukla — of the bright fortnight; trayodaśīm — the thirteenth day of the moon (the second day after Ekādaśī); brahmacaryam — observing complete celibacy; adhaḥ-svapnam — lying down on the floor; snānam — bathing; tri-savanam — three times (morning, evening and noon); caret — one should execute.

Translation
From pratipat until the thirteenth day of the next bright moon [śukla-trayodaśī], one should observe complete celibacy, sleep on the floor, bathe three times a day and thus execute the vow.

Text 49
वर्जयेदसदालापं भोगानुच्चावचांस्तथा ।
अहिंस्र: सर्वभूतानां वासुदेवपरायण: ॥ ४९ ॥
varjayed asad-ālāpaṁ
bhogān uccāvacāṁs tathā
ahiṁsraḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
vāsudeva-parāyaṇaḥ
Synonyms
varjayet — one should give up; asat-ālāpam — unnecessary talk on material subject matters; bhogān — sense gratification; ucca-avacān — superior or inferior; tathā — as well as; ahiṁsraḥ — without being envious; sarva-bhūtānām — of all living entities; vāsudeva-parāyaṇaḥ — simply being a devotee of Lord Vāsudeva.

Translation
During this period, one should not unnecessarily talk of material subjects or topics of sense gratification, one should be completely free from envy of all living entities, and one should be a pure and simple devotee of Lord Vāsudeva.

Text 50
त्रयोदश्यामथो विष्णो: स्‍नपनं पञ्चकैर्विभो: ।
कारयेच्छास्त्रद‍ृष्टेन विधिना विधिकोविदै: ॥ ५० ॥
trayodaśyām atho viṣṇoḥ
snapanaṁ pañcakair vibhoḥ
kārayec chāstra-dṛṣṭena
vidhinā vidhi-kovidaiḥ
Synonyms
trayodaśyām — on the thirteenth day of the moon; atho — thereafter; viṣṇoḥ — of Lord Viṣṇu; snapanam — bathing; pañcakaiḥ — by pañcāmṛta, five substances; vibhoḥ — the Lord; kārayet — one should execute; śāstra-dṛṣṭena — enjoined in the scripture; vidhinā — under regulative principles; vidhi-kovidaiḥ — assisted by the priests who know the regulative principles.

Translation
Thereafter, following the directions of the śāstra with help from brāhmaṇas who know the śāstra, on the thirteenth day of the moon one should bathe Lord Viṣṇu with five substances [milk, yogurt, ghee, sugar and honey].

Texts 51-52
पूजां च महतीं कुर्याद् वित्तशाठ्यविवर्जित: ।
चरुं निरूप्य पयसि शिपिविष्टाय विष्णवे ॥ ५१ ॥
सूक्तेन तेन पुरुषं यजेत सुसमाहित: ।
नैवेद्यं चातिगुणवद् दद्यात्पुरुषतुष्टिदम् ॥ ५२ ॥
pūjāṁ ca mahatīṁ kuryād
vitta-śāṭhya-vivarjitaḥ
caruṁ nirūpya payasi
śipiviṣṭāya viṣṇave
sūktena tena puruṣaṁ
yajeta susamāhitaḥ
naivedyaṁ cātiguṇavad
dadyāt puruṣa-tuṣṭidam
Synonyms
pūjām — worship; ca — also; mahatīm — very gorgeous; kuryāt — should do; vitta-śāṭhya — miserly mentality (not spending sufficient money); vivarjitaḥ — giving up; carum — grains offered in the yajña; nirūpya — seeing properly; payasi — with milk; śipiviṣṭāya — unto the Supersoul, who is situated in the heart of every living entity; viṣṇave — unto Lord Viṣṇu; sūktena — by chanting the Vedic mantra known as Puruṣa-sūkta; tena — by that; puruṣam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yajeta — one should worship; su-samāhitaḥ — with great attention; naivedyam — food offered to the Deity; ca — and; ati-guṇa-vat — prepared very gorgeously with all varieties of taste; dadyāt — should offer; puruṣa-tuṣṭi-dam — everything extremely pleasing to the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
Giving up the miserly habit of not spending money, one should arrange for the gorgeous worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, who is situated in the heart of every living entity. With great attention, one must prepare an oblation of grains boiled in ghee and milk and must chant the Puruṣa-sūkta mantra. The offerings of food should be of varieties of tastes. In this way, one should worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 53
आचार्यं ज्ञानसम्पन्नं वस्त्राभरणधेनुभि: ।
तोषयेद‍ृत्विजश्चैव तद्विद्ध्याराधनं हरे: ॥ ५३ ॥
ācāryaṁ jñāna-sampannaṁ
vastrābharaṇa-dhenubhiḥ
toṣayed ṛtvijaś caiva
tad viddhy ārādhanaṁ hareḥ
Synonyms
ācāryam — the spiritual master; jñāna-sampannam — very advanced in spiritual knowledge; vastra-ābharaṇa-dhenubhiḥ — with clothing, ornaments and many cows; toṣayet — should satisfy; ṛtvijaḥ — the priests recommended by the spiritual master; ca eva — as well as; tat viddhi — try to understand that; ārādhanam — worship; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
One should satisfy the spiritual master [ācārya], who is very learned in Vedic literature, and should satisfy his assistant priests [known as hotā, udgātā, adhvaryu and brahma]. One should please them by offering them clothing, ornaments and cows. This is the ceremony called viṣṇu-ārādhana, or worship of Lord Viṣṇu.

Text 54
भोजयेत् तान्गुणवता सदन्नेन शुचिस्मिते ।
अन्यांश्च ब्राह्मणाञ्छक्त्या ये च तत्र समागता: ॥ ५४ ॥
bhojayet tān guṇavatā
sad-annena śuci-smite
anyāṁś ca brāhmaṇāñ chaktyā
ye ca tatra samāgatāḥ
Synonyms
bhojayet — should distribute prasāda; tān — unto all of them; guṇa-vatā — by rich foods; sat-annena — with food prepared with ghee and milk, which is supposed to be very pure; śuci-smite — O most pious lady; anyān ca — others also; brāhmaṇān — brāhmaṇas; śaktyā — as far as possible; ye — all of them who; ca — also; tatra — there (at the ceremonies); samāgatāḥ — assembled.

Translation
O most auspicious lady, one should perform all the ceremonies under the direction of learned ācāryas and should satisfy them and their priests. By distributing prasāda, one should also satisfy the brāhmaṇas and others who have assembled.

Text 55
दक्षिणां गुरवे दद्याद‍ृत्विग्भ्यश्च यथार्हत: ।
अन्नाद्येनाश्वपाकांश्च प्रीणयेत्समुपागतान् ॥ ५५ ॥
dakṣiṇāṁ gurave dadyād
ṛtvigbhyaś ca yathārhataḥ
annādyenāśva-pākāṁś ca
prīṇayet samupāgatān
Synonyms
dakṣiṇām — some contribution of money or gold; gurave — unto the spiritual master; dadyāt — one should give; ṛtvigbhyaḥ ca — and to the priests engaged by the spiritual master; yathā-arhataḥ — as far as possible; anna-adyena — by distributing prasāda; āśva-pākān — even to the caṇḍālas, persons habituated to eating the flesh of dogs; ca — also; prīṇayet — one should please; samupāgatān — because they have assembled there for the ceremony.

Translation
One should satisfy the spiritual master and assistant priests by giving them cloth, ornaments, cows and also some monetary contribution. And by distributing prasāda one should satisfy everyone assembled, including even the lowest of men, the caṇḍālas [eaters of dog flesh].

Text 56
भुक्तवत्सु च सर्वेषु दीनान्धकृपणादिषु ।
विष्णोस्तत्प्रीणनं विद्वान्भुञ्जीत सह बन्धुभि: ॥ ५६ ॥
bhuktavatsu ca sarveṣu
dīnāndha-kṛpaṇādiṣu
viṣṇos tat prīṇanaṁ vidvān
bhuñjīta saha bandhubhiḥ
Synonyms
bhuktavatsu — after feeding; ca — also; sarveṣu — everyone present there; dīna — very poor; andha — blind; kṛpaṇa — those who are not brāhmaṇas; ādiṣu — and so on; viṣṇoḥ — of Lord Viṣṇu, who is situated in everyone’s heart; tat — that (prasāda); prīṇanam — pleasing; vidvān — one who understands this philosophy; bhuñjīta — should take prasāda himself; saha — with; bandhubhiḥ — friends and relatives.

Translation
One should distribute viṣṇu-prasāda to everyone, including the poor man, the blind man, the nondevotee and the non-brāhmaṇa. Knowing that Lord Viṣṇu is very pleased when everyone is sumptuously fed with viṣṇu-prasāda, the performer of yajña should then take prasāda with his friends and relatives.

Text 57
नृत्यवादित्रगीतैश्च स्तुतिभि: स्वस्तिवाचकै: ।
कारयेत्तत्कथाभिश्च पूजां भगवतोऽन्वहम् ॥ ५७ ॥
nṛtya-vāditra-gītaiś ca
stutibhiḥ svasti-vācakaiḥ
kārayet tat-kathābhiś ca
pūjāṁ bhagavato ’nvaham
Synonyms
nṛtya — by dancing; vāditra — by beating the drum; gītaiḥ — and by singing; ca — also; stutibhiḥ — by chanting auspicious mantras; svasti-vācakaiḥ — by offering prayers; kārayet — should execute; tat-kathābhiḥ — by reciting the Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-gītā and similar literature; ca — also; pūjām — worship; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu; anvaham — every day (from pratipat to trayodaśī).

Translation
Every day from pratipat to trayodaśī, one should continue the ceremony, to the accompaniment of dancing, singing, the beating of a drum, the chanting of prayers and all-auspicious mantras, and recitation of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. In this way, one should worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 58
एतत्पयोव्रतं नाम पुरुषाराधनं परम् ।
पितामहेनाभिहितं मया ते समुदाहृतम् ॥ ५८ ॥
etat payo-vrataṁ nāma
puruṣārādhanaṁ param
pitāmahenābhihitaṁ
mayā te samudāhṛtam
Synonyms
etat — this; payaḥ-vratam — ceremony known as payo-vrata; nāma — by that name; puruṣa-ārādhanam — the process of worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead; param — the best; pitāmahena — by my grandfather, Lord Brahmā; abhihitam — stated; mayā — by me; te — unto you; samudāhṛtam — described in all details.

Translation
This is the religious ritualistic ceremony known as payo-vrata, by which one may worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I received this information from Brahmā, my grandfather, and now I have described it to you in all details.

Text 59
त्वं चानेन महाभागे सम्यक्‌चीर्णेन केशवम् ।
आत्मना शुद्धभावेन नियतात्मा भजाव्ययम् ॥ ५९ ॥
tvaṁ cānena mahā-bhāge
samyak cīrṇena keśavam
ātmanā śuddha-bhāvena
niyatātmā bhajāvyayam
Synonyms
tvam ca — you also; anena — by this process; mahā-bhāge — O greatly fortunate one; samyak cīrṇena — executed properly; keśavam — unto Lord Keśava; ātmanā — by oneself; śuddha-bhāvena — in a pure state of mind; niyata-ātmā — controlling oneself; bhaja — go on worshiping; avyayam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is inexhaustible.

Translation
O most fortunate lady, establishing your mind in a good spirit, execute this process of payo-vrata and thus worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Keśava, who is inexhaustible.

Text 60
अयं वै सर्वयज्ञाख्य: सर्वव्रतमिति स्मृतम् ।
तप:सारमिदं भद्रे दानं चेश्वरतर्पणम् ॥ ६० ॥
ayaṁ vai sarva-yajñākhyaḥ
sarva-vratam iti smṛtam
tapaḥ-sāram idaṁ bhadre
dānaṁ ceśvara-tarpaṇam
Synonyms
ayam — this; vai — indeed; sarva-yajña — all kinds of religious rituals and sacrifices; ākhyaḥ — called; sarva-vratam — all religious ceremonies; iti — thus; smṛtam — understood; tapaḥ-sāram — the essence of all austerities; idam — this; bhadre — O good lady; dānam — acts of charity; ca — and; īśvara — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tarpaṇam — the process of pleasing.

Translation
This payo-vrata is also known as sarva-yajña. In other words, by performing this sacrifice one can perform all other sacrifices automatically. This is also acknowledged to be the best of all ritualistic ceremonies. O gentle lady, it is the essence of all austerities, and it is the process of giving charity and pleasing the supreme controller.

Text 61
त एव नियमा: साक्षात्त एव च यमोत्तमा: ।
तपो दानं व्रतं यज्ञो येन तुष्यत्यधोक्षज: ॥ ६१ ॥
ta eva niyamāḥ sākṣāt
ta eva ca yamottamāḥ
tapo dānaṁ vrataṁ yajño
yena tuṣyaty adhokṣajaḥ
Synonyms
te — that is; eva — indeed; niyamāḥ — all regulative principles; sākṣāt — directly; te — that is; eva — indeed; ca — also; yama-uttamāḥ — the best process of controlling the senses; tapaḥ — austerities; dānam — charity; vratam — observing vows; yajñaḥ — sacrifice; yena — by which process; tuṣyati — is very pleased; adhokṣajaḥ — the Supreme Lord, who is not perceived by material senses.

Translation
This is the best process for pleasing the transcendental Supreme Personality of Godhead, known as Adhokṣaja. It is the best of all regulative principles, the best austerity, the best process of giving charity, and the best process of sacrifice.

Text 62
तस्मादेतद्‌व्रतं भद्रे प्रयता श्रद्धयाचर ।
भगवान्परितुष्टस्ते वरानाशु विधास्यति ॥ ६२ ॥
tasmād etad vrataṁ bhadre
prayatā śraddhayācara
bhagavān parituṣṭas te
varān āśu vidhāsyati
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; etat — this; vratam — observance of a vrata ceremony; bhadre — my dear gentle lady; prayatā — by observing rules and regulations; śraddhayā — with faith; ācara — execute; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; parituṣṭaḥ — being very satisfied; te — unto you; varān — benedictions; āśu — very soon; vidhāsyati — will bestow.

Translation
Therefore, my dear gentle lady, follow this ritualistic vow, strictly observing the regulative principles. By this process, the Supreme Person will very soon be pleased with you and will satisfy all your desires.