Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
आसीद् गिरिवरो राजंस्त्रिकूट इति विश्रुत: ।
क्षीरोदेनावृत: श्रीमान्योजनायुतमुच्छ्रित: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
āsīd girivaro rājaṁs
trikūṭa iti viśrutaḥ
kṣīrodenāvṛtaḥ śrīmān
yojanāyutam ucchritaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; āsīt — there was; girivaraḥ — a very big mountain; rājan — O King; tri-kūṭaḥ — Trikūṭa; iti — thus; viśrutaḥ — celebrated; kṣīra-udena — by the Ocean of Milk; āvṛtaḥ — surrounded; śrīmān — very beautiful; yojana — a measurement of eight miles; ayutam — ten thousand; ucchritaḥ — very high.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, there is a very large mountain called Trikūṭa. It is ten thousand yojanas [eighty thousand miles] high. Being surrounded by the Ocean of Milk, it is very beautifully situated.

Texts 2-3
तावता विस्तृत: पर्यक्त्रिभि: श‍ृङ्गै: पयोनिधिम् ।
दिश: खं रोचयन्नास्ते रौप्यायसहिरण्मयै: ॥ २ ॥
अन्यैश्च ककुभ: सर्वा रत्नधातुविचित्रितै: ।
नानाद्रुमलतागुल्मैर्निर्घोषैर्निर्झराम्भसाम् ॥ ३ ॥
tāvatā vistṛtaḥ paryak
tribhiḥ śṛṅgaiḥ payo-nidhim
diśaḥ khaṁ rocayann āste
raupyāyasa-hiraṇmayaiḥ
anyaiś ca kakubhaḥ sarvā
ratna-dhātu-vicitritaiḥ
nānā-druma-latā-gulmair
nirghoṣair nirjharāmbhasām
Synonyms
tāvatā — in that way; vistṛtaḥ — length and breadth (eighty thousand miles); paryak — all around; tribhiḥ — with three; śṛṅgaiḥ — peaks; payaḥ-nidhim — situated on an island in the Ocean of Milk; diśaḥ — all directions; kham — the sky; rocayan — pleasing; āste — standing; raupya — made of silver; ayasa — iron; hiraṇmayaiḥ — and gold; anyaiḥ — with other peaks; ca — also; kakubhaḥ — directions; sarvāḥ — all; ratna — with jewels; dhātu — and minerals; vicitritaiḥ — decorated very nicely; nānā — with various; druma-latā — trees and creepers; gulmaiḥ — and shrubs; nirghoṣaiḥ — with the sounds of; nirjhara — waterfalls; ambhasām — of water.

Translation
The length and breadth of the mountain are of the same measurement [eighty thousand miles]. Its three principal peaks, which are made of iron, silver and gold, beautify all directions and the sky. The mountain also has other peaks, which are full of jewels and minerals and are decorated with nice trees, creepers and shrubs. The sounds of the waterfalls on the mountain create a pleasing vibration. In this way the mountain stands, increasing the beauty of all directions.

Text 4
स चावनिज्यमानाङ्‍‍घ्रि: समन्तात् पयऊर्मिभि: ।
करोति श्यामलां भूमिं हरिन्मरकताश्मभि: ॥ ४ ॥
sa cāvanijyamānāṅghriḥ
samantāt paya-ūrmibhiḥ
karoti śyāmalāṁ bhūmiṁ
harin-marakatāśmabhiḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — that mountain; ca — also; avanijyamāna-aṅghriḥ — whose foot is always washed; samantāt — all around; payaḥ-ūrmibhiḥ — by waves of milk; karoti — makes; śyāmalām — dark green; bhūmim — ground; harit — green; marakata — with emerald; aśmabhiḥ — stones.

Translation
The ground at the foot of the mountain is always washed by waves of milk that produce emeralds all around in the eight directions [north, south, east, west and the directions midway between them].

Text 5
सिद्धचारणगन्धर्वैर्विद्याधरमहोरगै: ।
किन्नरैरप्सरोभिश्च क्रीडद्भ‍िर्जुष्टकन्दर: ॥ ५ ॥
siddha-cāraṇa-gandharvair
vidyādhara-mahoragaiḥ
kinnarair apsarobhiś ca
krīḍadbhir juṣṭa-kandaraḥ
Synonyms
siddha — by the inhabitants of Siddhaloka; cāraṇa — the inhabitants of Cāraṇaloka; gandharvaiḥ — the inhabitants of Gandharvaloka; vidyādhara — the inhabitants of Vidyādhara-loka; mahā-uragaiḥ — the inhabitants of the serpent loka; kinnaraiḥ — the Kinnaras; apsarobhiḥ — the Apsarās; ca — and; krīḍadbhiḥ — who were engaged in sporting; juṣṭa — enjoyed; kandaraḥ — the caves.

Translation
The inhabitants of the higher planets — the Siddhas, Cāraṇas, Gandharvas, Vidyādharas, serpents, Kinnaras and Apsarās — go to that mountain to sport. Thus all the caves of the mountain are full of these denizens of the heavenly planets.

Text 6
यत्र सङ्गीतसन्नादैर्नदद्गुहममर्षया ।
अभिगर्जन्ति हरय: श्लाघिन: परशङ्कया ॥ ६ ॥
yatra saṅgīta-sannādair
nadad-guham amarṣayā
abhigarjanti harayaḥ
ślāghinaḥ para-śaṅkayā
Synonyms
yatra — in that mountain (Trikūṭa); saṅgīta — of singing; sannādaiḥ — with the vibrations; nadat — resounding; guham — the caves; amarṣayā — because of unbearable anger or envy; abhigarjanti — roar; harayaḥ — the lions; ślāghinaḥ — being very proud of their strength; para-śaṅkayā — because of suspecting another lion.

Translation
Because of the resounding vibrations of the denizens of heaven singing in the caves, the lions there, being very proud of their strength, roar with unbearable envy, thinking that another lion is roaring in that way.

Text 7
नानारण्यपशुव्रातसङ्कुलद्रोण्यलङ्‌कृत: ।
चित्रद्रुमसुरोद्यानकलकण्ठविहङ्गम: ॥ ७ ॥
nānāraṇya-paśu-vrāta-
saṅkula-droṇy-alaṅkṛtaḥ
citra-druma-surodyāna-
kalakaṇṭha-vihaṅgamaḥ
Synonyms
nānā — with varieties of; araṇya-paśu — jungle animals; vrāta — with a multitude; saṅkula — filled; droṇi — with valleys; alaṅkṛtaḥ — very beautifully decorated; citra — with varieties of; druma — trees; sura-udyāna — in gardens maintained by the demigods; kalakaṇṭha — sweetly chirping; vihaṅgamaḥ — birds.

Translation
The valleys beneath Trikūṭa Mountain are beautifully decorated by many varieties of jungle animals, and in the trees, which are maintained in gardens by the demigods, varieties of birds chirp with sweet voices.

Text 8
सरित्सरोभिरच्छोदै: पुलिनैर्मणिवालुकै: ।
देवस्त्रीमज्जनामोदसौरभाम्ब्वनिलैर्युत: ॥ ८ ॥
sarit-sarobhir acchodaiḥ
pulinair maṇi-vālukaiḥ
deva-strī-majjanāmoda-
saurabhāmbv-anilair yutaḥ
Synonyms
sarit — with rivers; sarobhiḥ — and lakes; acchodaiḥ — filled with crystal-clear water; pulinaiḥ — beaches; maṇi — with small gems; vālukaiḥ — resembling grains of sand; deva-strī — of the damsels of the demigods; majjana — by bathing (in that water); āmoda — bodily fragrance; saurabha — very fragrant; ambu — with the water; anilaiḥ — and the air; yutaḥ — enriched (the atmosphere of Trikūṭa Mountain).

Translation
Trikūṭa Mountain has many lakes and rivers, with beaches covered by small gems resembling grains of sand. The water is as clear as crystal, and when the demigod damsels bathe in it, their bodies lend fragrance to the water and the breeze, thus enriching the atmosphere.

Texts 9-13
तस्य द्रोण्यां भगवतो वरुणस्य महात्मन: ।
उद्यानमृतुमन्नाम आक्रीडं सुरयोषिताम् ॥ ९ ॥
सर्वतोऽलङ्‌कृतं दिव्यैर्नित्यपुष्पफलद्रुमै: ।
मन्दारै: पारिजातैश्च पाटलाशोकचम्पकै: ॥ १० ॥
चूतै: पियालै: पनसैराम्रैराम्रातकैरपि ।
क्रमुकैर्नारिकेलैश्च खर्जूरैर्बीजपूरकै: ॥ ११ ॥
मधुकै: शालतालैश्च तमालैरसनार्जुनै: ।
अरिष्टोडुम्बरप्लक्षैर्वटै: किंशुकचन्दनै: ॥ १२ ॥
पिचुमर्दै: कोविदारै: सरलै: सुरदारुभि: ।
द्राक्षेक्षुरम्भाजम्बुभिर्बदर्यक्षाभयामलै: ॥ १३ ॥
tasya droṇyāṁ bhagavato
varuṇasya mahātmanaḥ
udyānam ṛtuman nāma
ākrīḍaṁ sura-yoṣitām
sarvato ’laṅkṛtaṁ divyair
nitya-puṣpa-phala-drumaiḥ
mandāraiḥ pārijātaiś ca
pāṭalāśoka-campakaiḥ
cūtaiḥ piyālaiḥ panasair
āmrair āmrātakair api
kramukair nārikelaiś ca
kharjūrair bījapūrakaiḥ
madhukaiḥ śāla-tālaiś ca
tamālair asanārjunaiḥ
ariṣṭoḍumbara-plakṣair
vaṭaiḥ kiṁśuka-candanaiḥ
picumardaiḥ kovidāraiḥ
saralaiḥ sura-dārubhiḥ
drākṣekṣu-rambhā-jambubhir
badary-akṣābhayāmalaiḥ
Synonyms
tasya — of that mountain (Trikūṭa); droṇyām — in a valley; bhagavataḥ — of the great personality; varuṇasya — the demigod Varuṇa; mahā-ātmanaḥ — who is a great devotee of the Lord; udyānam — a garden; ṛtumat — Ṛtumat; nāma — of the name; ākrīḍam — a place of sporting pastimes; sura-yoṣitām — of the damsels of the demigods; sarvataḥ — everywhere; alaṅkṛtam — beautifully decorated; divyaiḥ — pertaining to the demigods; nitya — always; puṣpa — of flowers; phala — and fruits; drumaiḥ — by trees; mandāraiḥ — mandāra; pārijātaiḥ — pārijāta; ca — also; pāṭala — pāṭala; aśoka — aśoka; campakaiḥ — campaka; cūtaiḥ — cūta fruits; piyālaiḥ — piyāla fruits; panasaiḥ — panasa fruits; āmraiḥ — mangoes; āmrātakaiḥ — sour fruits called āmrātaka; api — also; kramukaiḥ — kramuka fruits; nārikelaiḥ — coconut trees; ca — and; kharjūraiḥ — date trees; bījapūrakaiḥ — pomegranates; madhukaiḥ — madhuka fruits; śāla-tālaiḥ — palm fruits; ca — and; tamālaiḥ — tamāla trees; asana — asana trees; arjunaiḥ — arjuna trees; ariṣṭa — ariṣṭa fruits; uḍumbara — big udumbara trees; plakṣaiḥ — plakṣa trees; vaṭaiḥ — banyan trees; kiṁśuka — red flowers with no scent; candanaiḥ — sandalwood trees; picumardaiḥ — picumarda flowers; kovidāraiḥ — kovidāra fruits; saralaiḥ — sarala trees; sura-dārubhiḥ — sura-dāru trees; drākṣā — grapes; ikṣuḥ — sugarcane; rambhā — bananas; jambubhiḥ — jambu fruits; badarī — badarī fruits; akṣa — akṣa fruits; abhaya — abhaya fruits; āmalaiḥ — āmalakī, a sour fruit.

Translation
In a valley of Trikūṭa Mountain there was a garden called Ṛtumat. This garden belonged to the great devotee Varuṇa and was a sporting place for the damsels of the demigods. Flowers and fruits grew there in all seasons. Among them were mandāras, pārijātas, pāṭalas, aśokas, campakas, cūtas, piyālas, panasas, mangoes, āmrātakas, kramukas, coconut trees, date trees and pomegranates. There were madhukas, palm trees, tamālas, asanas, arjunas, ariṣṭas, uḍumbaras, plakṣas, banyan trees, kiṁśukas and sandalwood trees. There were also picumardas, kovidāras, saralas, sura-dārus, grapes, sugarcane, bananas, jambu, badarīs, akṣas, abhayas and āmalakīs.

Texts 14-19
८.२.१४-१९
बिल्वै: कपित्थैर्जम्बीरैर्वृतो भल्ल‍ातकादिभि: ।
तस्मिन्सर: सुविपुलं लसत्काञ्चनपङ्कजम् ॥ १४ ॥
कुमुदोत्पलकह्लारशतपत्रश्रियोर्जितम् ।
मत्तषट्पदनिर्घुष्टं शकुन्तैश्च कलस्वनै: ॥ १५ ॥
हंसकारण्डवाकीर्णं चक्राह्वै: सारसैरपि ।
जलकुक्कुटकोयष्टिदात्यूहकुलकूजितम् ॥ १६ ॥
मत्स्यकच्छपसञ्चारचलत्पद्मरज:पय: ।
कदम्बवेतसनलनीपवञ्जुलकैर्वृतम् ॥ १७ ॥
कुन्दै: कुरुबकाशोकै: शिरीषै: कूटजेङ्गुदै: ।
कुब्जकै: स्वर्णयूथीभिर्नागपुन्नागजातिभि: ॥ १८ ॥
मल्ल‍िकाशतपत्रैश्च माधवीजालकादिभि: ।
शोभितं तीरजैश्चान्यैर्नित्यर्तुभिरलं द्रुमै: ॥ १९ ॥
bilvaiḥ kapitthair jambīrair
vṛto bhallātakādibhiḥ
tasmin saraḥ suvipulaṁ
lasat-kāñcana-paṅkajam
kumudotpala-kahlāra-
śatapatra-śriyorjitam
matta-ṣaṭ-pada-nirghuṣṭaṁ
śakuntaiś ca kala-svanaiḥ
haṁsa-kāraṇḍavākīrṇaṁ
cakrāhvaiḥ sārasair api
jalakukkuṭa-koyaṣṭi-
dātyūha-kula-kūjitam
matsya-kacchapa-sañcāra-
calat-padma-rajaḥ-payaḥ
kadamba-vetasa-nala-
nīpa-vañjulakair vṛtam
kundaiḥ kurubakāśokaiḥ
śirīṣaiḥ kūṭajeṅgudaiḥ
kubjakaiḥ svarṇa-yūthībhir
nāga-punnāga-jātibhiḥ
mallikā-śatapatraiś ca
mādhavī-jālakādibhiḥ
śobhitaṁ tīra-jaiś cānyair
nityartubhir alaṁ drumaiḥ
Synonyms
bilvaiḥ — bilva trees; kapitthaiḥ — kapittha trees; jambīraiḥ — jambīra trees; vṛtaḥ — surrounded by; bhallātaka-ādibhiḥ — bhallātaka and other trees; tasmin — in that garden; saraḥ — a lake; su-vipulam — which was very large; lasat — shining; kāñcana — golden; paṅka-jam — filled with lotus flowers; kumuda — of kumuda flowers; utpala — utpala flowers; kahlāra — kahlāra flowers; śatapatra — and śatapatra flowers; śriyā — with the beauty; ūrjitam — excellent; matta — intoxicated; ṣaṭ-pada — bees; nirghuṣṭam — hummed; śakuntaiḥ — with the chirping of birds; ca — and; kala-svanaiḥ — whose songs were very melodious; haṁsa — swans; kāraṇḍava — kāraṇḍavas; ākīrṇam — crowded with; cakrāhvaiḥ — cakrāvakas; sārasaiḥ — cranes; api — as well as; jalakukkuṭa — water chickens; koyaṣṭi — koyaṣṭis; dātyūha — dātyūhas; kula — flocks of; kūjitam — murmured; matsya — of the fish; kacchapa — and tortoises; sañcāra — because of the movements; calat — agitating; padma — of the lotuses; rajaḥ — by the pollen; payaḥ — the water (was decorated); kadamba — kadambas; vetasa — vetasas; nala — nalas; nīpa — nīpas; vañjulakaiḥ — vañjulakas; vṛtam — surrounded by; kundaiḥ — kundas; kurubaka — kurubakas; aśokaiḥ — aśokas; śirīṣaiḥ — śirīṣas; kūṭaja — kūṭajas; iṅgudaiḥ — iṅgudas; kubjakaiḥ — kubjakas; svarṇa — yūthībhiḥ – svarṇa–yūthīs; nāga — nāgas; punnāga — punnāgas; jātibhiḥ — jātīs; mallikā — mallikās; śatapatraiḥ — śatapatras; ca — also; mādhavī — mādhavīs; jālakādibhiḥ — jālakās; śobhitam — adorned; tīrajaiḥ — growing on the banks; ca — and; anyaiḥ — others; nitya-ṛtubhiḥ — in all seasons; alam — abundantly; drumaiḥ — with trees (bearing flowers and fruits).

Translation
In that garden there was a very large lake filled with shining golden lotus flowers and the flowers known as kumuda, kahlāra, utpala and śatapatra, which added excellent beauty to the mountain. There were also bilva, kapittha, jambīra and bhallātaka trees. Intoxicated bumblebees drank honey and hummed with the chirping of the birds, whose songs were very melodious. The lake was crowded with swans, kāraṇḍavas, cakrāvakas, cranes, and flocks of water chickens, dātyūhas, koyaṣṭis and other murmuring birds. Because of the agitating movements of the fish and tortoises, the water was decorated with pollen that had fallen from the lotus flowers. The lake was surrounded by kadamba flowers, vetasa flowers, nalas, nīpas, vañjulakas, kundas, kurubakas, aśokas, śirīṣas, kūṭajas, iṅgudas, kubjakas, svarṇa-yūthīs, nāgas, punnāgas, jātīs, mallikās, śatapatras, jālakās and mādhavī-latās. The banks were also abundantly adorned with varieties of trees that yielded flowers and fruits in all seasons. Thus the entire mountain stood gloriously decorated.

Text 20
तत्रैकदा तद्‌गिरिकाननाश्रय:
करेणुभिर्वारणयूथपश्चरन् ।
सकण्टकं कीचकवेणुवेत्रवद्
विशालगुल्मं प्ररुजन्वनस्पतीन् ॥ २० ॥
tatraikadā tad-giri-kānanāśrayaḥ
kareṇubhir vāraṇa-yūtha-paś caran
sakaṇṭakaṁ kīcaka-veṇu-vetravad
viśāla-gulmaṁ prarujan vanaspatīn
Synonyms
tatra — therein; ekadā — once upon a time; tat-giri — of that mountain (Trikūṭa); kānana-āśrayaḥ — who lives in the forest; kareṇubhiḥ — accompanied by female elephants; vāraṇa-yūtha-paḥ — the leader of the elephants; caran — while wandering (toward the lake); sa-kaṇṭakam — a place full of thorns; kīcaka-veṇu-vetra-vat — with plants and creepers of different names; viśāla-gulmam — many thickets; prarujan — breaking; vanaḥ-patīn — trees and plants.

Translation
The leader of the elephants who lived in the forest of the mountain Trikūṭa once wandered toward the lake with his female elephants. He broke many plants, creepers, thickets and trees, not caring for their piercing thorns.

Text 21
यद्गन्धमात्राद्धरयो गजेन्द्रा
व्याघ्रादयो व्यालमृगा: सखड्‌गा: ।
महोरगाश्चापि भयाद्‌द्रवन्ति
सगौरकृष्णा: सरभाश्चमर्य: ॥ २१ ॥
yad-gandha-mātrād dharayo gajendrā
vyāghrādayo vyāla-mṛgāḥ sakhaḍgāḥ
mahoragāś cāpi bhayād dravanti
sagaura-kṛṣṇāḥ sarabhāś camaryaḥ
Synonyms
yat-gandha-mātrāt — simply by the scent of that elephant; harayaḥ — lions; gaja-indrāḥ — other elephants; vyāghra-ādayaḥ — ferocious animals like tigers; vyāla-mṛgāḥ — other ferocious animals; sakhaḍgāḥ — rhinoceroses; mahā-uragāḥ — big, big serpents; ca — also; api — indeed; bhayāt — because of fear; dravanti — running away; sa — with; gaura-kṛṣṇāḥ — some of them white, some of them black; sarabhāḥ — sarabhas; camaryaḥ — also camarīs.

Translation
Simply by catching scent of that elephant, all the other elephants, the tigers and the other ferocious animals, such as lions, rhinoceroses, great serpents and black and white sarabhas, fled in fear. The camarī deer also fled.

Text 22
गोपुच्छशालावृकमर्कटाश्च ।
अन्यत्र क्षुद्रा हरिणा: शशादय-
श्चरन्त्यभीता यदनुग्रहेण ॥ २२ ॥
vṛkā varāhā mahiṣarkṣa-śalyā
gopuccha-śālāvṛka-markaṭāś ca
anyatra kṣudrā hariṇāḥ śaśādayaś
caranty abhītā yad-anugraheṇa
Synonyms
vṛkāḥ — foxes; varāhāḥ — boars; mahiṣa — buffalos; ṛkṣa — bears; śalyāḥ — porcupines; gopuccha — a type of deer; śālāvṛka — wolves; markaṭāḥ — monkeys; ca — and; anyatra — elsewhere; kṣudrāḥ — small animals; hariṇāḥ — deer; śaśa-ādayaḥ — rabbits and others; caranti — roaming (in the forest); abhītāḥ — without fear; yat-anugraheṇa — by the mercy of that elephant.

Translation
By the mercy of this elephant, animals like the foxes, wolves, buffalos, bears, boars, gopucchas, porcupines, monkeys, rabbits, the other deer and many other small animals loitered elsewhere in the forest. They were not afraid of him.

Texts 23-24
स घर्मतप्त: करिभि: करेणुभि-
र्वृतो मदच्युत्करभैरनुद्रुत: ।
गिरिं गरिम्णा परित: प्रकम्पयन्
निषेव्यमाणोऽलिकुलैर्मदाशनै: ॥ २३ ॥
सरोऽनिलं पङ्कजरेणुरूषितं
जिघ्रन्विदूरान्मदविह्वलेक्षण: ।
वृत: स्वयूथेन तृषार्दितेन तत्
सरोवराभ्यासमथागमद्‌द्रुतम् ॥ २४ ॥
sa gharma-taptaḥ karibhiḥ kareṇubhir
vṛto madacyut-karabhair anudrutaḥ
giriṁ garimṇā paritaḥ prakampayan
niṣevyamāṇo ’likulair madāśanaiḥ
saro ’nilaṁ paṅkaja-reṇu-rūṣitaṁ
jighran vidūrān mada-vihvalekṣaṇaḥ
vṛtaḥ sva-yūthena tṛṣārditena tat
sarovarābhyāsam athāgamad drutam
Synonyms
saḥ — he (the leader of the elephants); gharma-taptaḥ — perspiring; karibhiḥ — by other elephants; kareṇubhiḥ — as well as female elephants; vṛtaḥ — surrounded; mada-cyut — liquor dripping from his mouth; karabhaiḥ — by small elephants; anudrutaḥ — was followed; girim — that mountain; garimṇā — by the weight of the body; paritaḥ — all around; prakampayan — causing to tremble; niṣevyamāṇaḥ — being served; alikulaiḥ — by the bumblebees; mada-aśanaiḥ — who drank honey; saraḥ — from the lake; anilam — the breeze; paṅkaja-reṇu-rūṣitam — carrying the dust from the lotus flowers; jighran — smelling; vidūrāt — from a distance; mada-vihvala — being intoxicated; īkṣaṇaḥ — whose vision; vṛtaḥ — surrounded; sva-yūthena — by his own associates; tṛṣārditena — who were afflicted by thirst; tat — that; sarovara-abhyāsam — to the bank of the lake; atha — thus; agamat — went; drutam — very soon.

Translation
Surrounded by the herd’s other elephants, including females, and followed by the young ones, Gajapati, the leader of the elephants, made Trikūṭa Mountain tremble all around because of the weight of his body. He was perspiring, liquor dripped from his mouth, and his vision was overwhelmed by intoxication. He was being served by bumblebees who drank honey, and from a distance he could smell the dust of the lotus flowers, which was carried from the lake by the breeze. Thus surrounded by his associates, who were afflicted by thirst, he soon arrived at the bank of the lake.

Text 25
विगाह्य तस्मिन्नमृताम्बु निर्मलं
हेमारविन्दोत्पलरेणुरूषितम् ।
पपौ निकामं निजपुष्करोद्‌धृत-
मात्मानमद्भ‍ि: स्‍नपयन्गतक्लम: ॥ २५ ॥
vigāhya tasminn amṛtāmbu nirmalaṁ
hemāravindotpala-reṇu-rūṣitam
papau nikāmaṁ nija-puṣkaroddhṛtam
ātmānam adbhiḥ snapayan gata-klamaḥ
Synonyms
vigāhya — entering; tasmin — into the lake; amṛta-ambu — water as pure as nectar; nirmalam — crystal clear; hema — very cold; aravinda-utpala — from the lilies and lotuses; reṇu — with the dust; rūṣitam — which was mixed; papau — he drank; nikāmam — until fully satisfied; nija — own; puṣkara-uddhṛtam — drawing with his trunk; ātmānam — himself; adbhiḥ — with water; snapayan — bathing thoroughly; gata-klamaḥ — was relieved of all fatigue.

Translation
The King of the elephants entered the lake, bathed thoroughly and was relieved of his fatigue. Then, with the aid of his trunk, he drank the cold, clear, nectarean water, which was mixed with the dust of lotus flowers and water lilies, until he was fully satisfied.

Text 26
स पुष्करेणोद्‌धृतशीकराम्बुभि-
र्निपाययन्संस्‍नपयन्यथा गृही ।
घृणी करेणु: करभांश्च दुर्मदो
नाचष्ट कृच्छ्रं कृपणोऽजमायया ॥ २६ ॥
sa puṣkareṇoddhṛta-śīkarāmbubhir
nipāyayan saṁsnapayan yathā gṛhī
ghṛṇī kareṇuḥ karabhāṁś ca durmado
nācaṣṭa kṛcchraṁ kṛpaṇo ’ja-māyayā
Synonyms
saḥ — he (the leader of the elephants); puṣkareṇa — with his trunk; uddhṛta — by drawing out; śīkara-ambubhiḥ — and sprinkling the water; nipāyayan — causing them to drink; saṁsnapayan — and bathing them; yathā — as; gṛhī — a householder; ghṛṇī — always kind (to the members of his family); kareṇuḥ — to his wives, the female elephants; karabhān — to the children; ca — as well as; durmadaḥ — who is too attached to the members of his family; na — not; ācaṣṭa — considered; kṛcchram — hardship; kṛpaṇaḥ — being without spiritual knowledge; aja-māyayā — because of the influence of the external, illusory energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
Like a human being who lacks spiritual knowledge and is too attached to the members of his family, the elephant, being illusioned by the external energy of Kṛṣṇa, had his wives and children bathe and drink the water. Indeed, he raised water from the lake with his trunk and sprayed it over them. He did not mind the hard labor involved in this endeavor.

Text 27
तं तत्र कश्चिन्नृप दैवचोदितो
ग्राहो बलीयांश्चरणे रुषाग्रहीत् ।
यद‍ृच्छयैवं व्यसनं गतो गजो
यथाबलं सोऽतिबलो विचक्रमे ॥ २७ ॥
taṁ tatra kaścin nṛpa daiva-codito
grāho balīyāṁś caraṇe ruṣāgrahīt
yadṛcchayaivaṁ vyasanaṁ gato gajo
yathā-balaṁ so ’tibalo vicakrame
Synonyms
tam — him (Gajendra); tatra — there (in the water); kaścit — someone; nṛpa — O King; daiva-coditaḥ — inspired by providence; grāhaḥ — crocodile; balīyān — very powerful; caraṇe — his foot; ruṣā — angrily; agrahīt — captured; yadṛcchayā — occurring due to providence; evam — such; vyasanam — a dangerous position; gataḥ — having obtained; gajaḥ — the elephant; yathā-balam — according to his strength; saḥ — he; ati-balaḥ — with great endeavor; vicakrame — tried to get out.

Translation
By the arrangement of providence, O King, a strong crocodile was angry at the elephant and attacked the elephant’s leg in the water. The elephant was certainly strong, and he tried his best to get free from this danger sent by providence.

Text 28
तथातुरं यूथपतिं करेणवो
विकृष्यमाणं तरसा बलीयसा ।
विचुक्रुशुर्दीनधियोऽपरे गजा:
पार्ष्णिग्रहास्तारयितुं न चाशकन् ॥ २८ ॥
tathāturaṁ yūtha-patiṁ kareṇavo
vikṛṣyamāṇaṁ tarasā balīyasā
vicukruśur dīna-dhiyo ’pare gajāḥ
pārṣṇi-grahās tārayituṁ na cāśakan
Synonyms
tathā — then; āturam — that grave condition; yūtha-patim — the leader of the elephants; kareṇavaḥ — his wives; vikṛṣyamāṇam — being attacked; tarasā — by the strength; balīyasā — by the strength (of the crocodile); vicukruśuḥ — began to cry; dīna-dhiyaḥ — who were less intelligent; apare — the other; gajāḥ — elephants; pārṣṇi-grahāḥ — grasping him from behind; tārayitum — to free; na — not; ca — also; aśakan — were able.

Translation
Thereafter, seeing Gajendra in that grave condition, his wives felt very, very sorry and began to cry. The other elephants wanted to help Gajendra, but because of the crocodile’s great strength, they could not rescue him by grasping him from behind.

Text 29
नियुध्यतोरेवमिभेन्द्रनक्रयो-
र्विकर्षतोरन्तरतो बहिर्मिथ: ।
समा: सहस्रं व्यगमन् महीपते
सप्राणयोश्चित्रममंसतामरा: ॥ २९ ॥
niyudhyator evam ibhendra-nakrayor
vikarṣator antarato bahir mithaḥ
samāḥ sahasraṁ vyagaman mahī-pate
saprāṇayoś citram amaṁsatāmarāḥ
Synonyms
niyudhyatoḥ — fighting; evam — in this way; ibha-indra — of the elephant; nakrayoḥ — and the crocodile; vikarṣatoḥ — pulling; antarataḥ — in the water; bahiḥ — outside the water; mithaḥ — one another; samāḥ — years; sahasram — one thousand; vyagaman — passed; mahī-pate — O King; sa-prāṇayoḥ — both alive; citram — wonderful; amaṁsata — considered; amarāḥ — the demigods.

Translation
O King, the elephant and the crocodile fought in this way, pulling one another in and out of the water, for one thousand years. Upon seeing the fight, the demigods were very surprised.

Text 30
ततो गजेन्द्रस्य मनोबलौजसां
कालेन दीर्घेण महानभूद् व्यय: ।
विकृष्यमाणस्य जलेऽवसीदतो
विपर्ययोऽभूत् सकलं जलौकस: ॥ ३० ॥
tato gajendrasya mano-balaujasāṁ
kālena dīrgheṇa mahān abhūd vyayaḥ
vikṛṣyamāṇasya jale ’vasīdato
viparyayo ’bhūt sakalaṁ jalaukasaḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; gaja-indrasya — of the King of the elephants; manaḥ — of the strength of enthusiasm; bala — the physical strength; ojasām — and the strength of the senses; kālena — because of years of fighting; dīrgheṇa — prolonged; mahān — great; abhūt — became; vyayaḥ — the expenditure; vikṛṣyamāṇasya — who was being pulled (by the crocodile); jale — into the water (a foreign place); avasīdataḥ — reduced (mental, physical and sensory strength); viparyayaḥ — the opposite; abhūt — became; sakalam — all of them; jala-okasaḥ — the crocodile, whose home is the water.

Translation
Thereafter, because of being pulled into the water and fighting for many long years, the elephant became diminished in his mental, physical and sensual strength. The crocodile, on the contrary, being an animal of the water, increased in enthusiasm, physical strength and sensual power.

Text 31
इत्थं गजेन्द्र: स यदाप सङ्कटं
प्राणस्य देही विवशो यद‍ृच्छया ।
अपारयन्नात्मविमोक्षणे चिरं
दध्याविमां बुद्धिमथाभ्यपद्यत ॥ ३१ ॥
itthaṁ gajendraḥ sa yadāpa saṅkaṭaṁ
prāṇasya dehī vivaśo yadṛcchayā
apārayann ātma-vimokṣaṇe ciraṁ
dadhyāv imāṁ buddhim athābhyapadyata
Synonyms
ittham — in this way; gaja-indraḥ — the King of the elephants; saḥ — he; yadā — when; āpa — obtained; saṅkaṭam — such a dangerous position; prāṇasya — of life; dehī — who is embodied; vivaśaḥ — circumstantially helpless; yadṛcchayā — by the will of providence; apārayan — being unable; ātma-vimokṣaṇe — to save himself; ciram — for a long time; dadhyau — began to think seriously; imām — this; buddhim — decision; atha — thereupon; abhyapadyata — reached.

Translation
When the King of the elephants saw that he was under the clutches of the crocodile by the will of providence and, being embodied and circumstantially helpless, could not save himself from danger, he was extremely afraid of being killed. He consequently thought for a long time and finally reached the following decision.

Text 32
न मामिमे ज्ञातय आतुरं गजा:
कुत: करिण्य: प्रभवन्ति मोचितुम् ।
ग्राहेण पाशेन विधातुरावृतो-
ऽप्यहं च तं यामि परं परायणम् ॥ ३२ ॥
na mām ime jñātaya āturaṁ gajāḥ
kutaḥ kariṇyaḥ prabhavanti mocitum
grāheṇa pāśena vidhātur āvṛto
’py ahaṁ ca taṁ yāmi paraṁ parāyaṇam
Synonyms
na — not; mām — me; ime — all these; jñātayaḥ — friends and relatives (the other elephants); āturam — in my distress; gajāḥ — the elephants; kutaḥ — how; kariṇyaḥ — my wives; prabhavanti — are able; mocitum — to deliver (from this dangerous position); grāheṇa — by the crocodile; pāśena — by the network of ropes; vidhātuḥ — of providence; āvṛtaḥ — captured; api — although (I am in such a position); aham — I; ca — also; tam — that (Supreme Personality of Godhead); yāmi — take shelter of; param — who is transcendental; parāyaṇam — and who is the shelter of even the exalted demigods like Brahmā and Śiva.

Translation
The other elephants, who are my friends and relatives, could not rescue me from this danger. What then to speak of my wives? They cannot do anything. It is by the will of providence that I have been attacked by this crocodile, and therefore I shall seek shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is always the shelter of everyone, even of great personalities.

Text 33
य: कश्चनेशो बलिनोऽन्तकोरगात्
प्रचण्डवेगादभिधावतो भृशम् ।
भीतं प्रपन्नं परिपाति यद्भ‍या-
न्मृत्यु: प्रधावत्यरणं तमीमहि ॥ ३३ ॥
yaḥ kaścaneśo balino ’ntakoragāt
pracaṇḍa-vegād abhidhāvato bhṛśam
bhītaṁ prapannaṁ paripāti yad-bhayān
mṛtyuḥ pradhāvaty araṇaṁ tam īmahi
Synonyms
yaḥ — He who (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); kaścana — someone; īśaḥ — the supreme controller; balinaḥ — very powerful; antaka-uragāt — from the great serpent of time, which brings death; pracaṇḍa-vegāt — whose force is fearful; abhidhāvataḥ — who is chasing; bhṛśam — endlessly (every hour and every minute); bhītam — one who is afraid of death; prapannam — who is surrendered (to the Supreme Personality of Godhead); paripāti — He protects; yat-bhayāt — from fear of the Lord; mṛtyuḥ — death itself; pradhāvati — runs away; araṇam — the actual shelter of everyone; tam — unto Him; īmahi — I surrender or take shelter.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is certainly not known to everyone, but He is very powerful and influential. Therefore, although the serpent of eternal time, which is fearful in force, endlessly chases everyone, ready to swallow him, if one who fears this serpent seeks shelter of the Lord, the Lord gives him protection, for even death runs away in fear of the Lord. I therefore surrender unto Him, the great and powerful supreme authority who is the actual shelter of everyone.