Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
बलिरेवं गृहपति: कुलाचार्येण भाषित: ।
तूष्णीं भूत्वा क्षणं राजन्नुवाचावहितो गुरुम् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
balir evaṁ gṛha-patiḥ
kulācāryeṇa bhāṣitaḥ
tūṣṇīṁ bhūtvā kṣaṇaṁ rājann
uvācāvahito gurum
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; baliḥ — Bali Mahārāja; evam — thus; gṛha-patiḥ — the master of the household affairs, although guided by the priests; kula-ācāryeṇa — by the family ācārya or guide; bhāṣitaḥ — being thus addressed; tūṣṇīm — silent; bhūtvā — becoming; kṣaṇam — for a moment; rājan — O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); uvāca — said; avahitaḥ — after full deliberation; gurum — unto his spiritual master.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King Parīkṣit, when Bali Mahārāja was thus advised by his spiritual master, Śukrācārya, his family priest, he remained silent for some time, and then, after full deliberation, he replied to his spiritual master as follows.

Text 2
श्रीबलिरुवाच
सत्यं भगवता प्रोक्तं धर्मोऽयं गृहमेधिनाम् ।
अर्थं कामं यशो वृत्तिं यो न बाधेत कर्हिचित् ॥ २ ॥
śrī-balir uvāca
satyaṁ bhagavatā proktaṁ
dharmo ’yaṁ gṛhamedhinām
arthaṁ kāmaṁ yaśo vṛttiṁ
yo na bādheta karhicit
Synonyms
śrī-baliḥ uvāca — Bali Mahārāja said; satyam — it is truth; bhagavatā — by Your Greatness; proktam — what has already been spoken; dharmaḥ — a religious principle; ayam — that is; gṛhamedhinām — especially for the householders; artham — economic development; kāmam — sense gratification; yaśaḥ vṛttim — reputation and means of livelihood; yaḥ — which religious principle; na — not; bādheta — hinders; karhicit — at any time.

Translation
Bali Mahārāja said: As you have already stated, the principle of religion that does not hinder one’s economic development, sense gratification, fame and means of livelihood is the real occupational duty of the householder. I also think that this religious principle is correct.

Text 3
स चाहं वित्तलोभेन प्रत्याचक्षे कथं द्विजम् ।
प्रतिश्रुत्य ददामीति प्राह्रादि: कितवो यथा ॥ ३ ॥
sa cāhaṁ vitta-lobhena
pratyācakṣe kathaṁ dvijam
pratiśrutya dadāmīti
prāhrādiḥ kitavo yathā
Synonyms
saḥ — such a person as I am; ca — also; aham — I am; vitta-lobhena — for being allured by greed for money; pratyācakṣe — I shall cheat or say no when I have already said yes; katham — how; dvijam — especially to a brāhmaṇa; pratiśrutya — after already having promised; dadāmi — that I shall give; iti — thus; prāhrādiḥ — I who am famous as the grandson of Mahārāja Prahlāda; kitavaḥ — an ordinary cheater; yathā — just like.

Translation
I am the grandson of Mahārāja Prahlāda. How can I withdraw my promise because of greed for money when I have already said that I shall give this land? How can I behave like an ordinary cheater, especially toward a brāhmaṇa?

Text 4
न ह्यसत्यात् परोऽधर्म इति होवाच भूरियम् ।
सर्वं सोढुमलं मन्ये ऋतेऽलीकपरं नरम् ॥ ४ ॥
na hy asatyāt paro ’dharma
iti hovāca bhūr iyam
sarvaṁ soḍhum alaṁ manye
ṛte ’līka-paraṁ naram
Synonyms
na — not; hi — indeed; asatyāt — than compulsion to untruthfulness; paraḥ — more; adharmaḥ — irreligion; iti — thus; ha uvāca — indeed had spoken; bhūḥ — mother earth; iyam — this; sarvam — everything; soḍhum — to bear; alam — I am able; manye — although I think; ṛte — except; alīka-param — the most heinous liar; naram — a human being.

Translation
There is nothing more sinful than untruthfulness. Because of this, mother earth once said, “I can bear any heavy thing except a person who is a liar.”

Text 5
नाहं बिभेमि निरयान्नाधन्यादसुखार्णवात् ।
न स्थानच्यवनान्मृत्योर्यथा विप्रप्रलम्भनात् ॥ ५ ॥
nāhaṁ bibhemi nirayān
nādhanyād asukhārṇavāt
na sthāna-cyavanān mṛtyor
yathā vipra-pralambhanāt
Synonyms
na — not; aham — I; bibhemi — am afraid of; nirayāt — from a hellish condition of life; na — nor; adhanyāt — from a poverty-stricken condition; asukha-arṇavāt — nor from an ocean of distresses; na — nor; sthāna-cyavanāt — from falling from a position; mṛtyoḥ — nor from death; yathā — as; vipra-pralambhanāt — from the cheating of a brāhmaṇa.

Translation
I do not fear hell, poverty, an ocean of distress, falldown from my position or even death itself as much as I fear cheating a brāhmaṇa.

Text 6
यद् यद्धास्यति लोकेऽस्मिन्सम्परेतं धनादिकम् ।
तस्य त्यागे निमित्तं किं विप्रस्तुष्येन्न तेन चेत् ॥ ६ ॥
yad yad dhāsyati loke ’smin
samparetaṁ dhanādikam
tasya tyāge nimittaṁ kiṁ
vipras tuṣyen na tena cet
Synonyms
yat yat — whatsoever; hāsyati — will leave; loke — in the world; asmin — in this; samparetam — one who is already dead; dhana-ādikam — his wealth and riches; tasya — of such wealth; tyāge — in renunciation; nimittam — the purpose; kim — what is; vipraḥ — the brāhmaṇa who is confidentially Lord Viṣṇu; tuṣyet — must be pleased; na — is not; tena — by such (riches); cet — if there is a possibility.

Translation
My lord, you can also see that all the material opulences of this world are certainly separated from their possessor at death. Therefore, if the brāhmaṇa Vāmanadeva is not satisfied by whatever gifts one has given, why not please Him with the riches one is destined to lose at death?

Text 7
श्रेय: कुर्वन्ति भूतानां साधवो दुस्त्यजासुभि: ।
दध्यङ्‌शिबिप्रभृतय: को विकल्पो धरादिषु ॥ ७ ॥
śreyaḥ kurvanti bhūtānāṁ
sādhavo dustyajāsubhiḥ
dadhyaṅ-śibi-prabhṛtayaḥ
ko vikalpo dharādiṣu
Synonyms
śreyaḥ — activities of the utmost importance; kurvanti — execute; bhūtānām — of the general mass of people; sādhavaḥ — the saintly persons; dustyaja — which are extremely hard to give up; asubhiḥ — by their lives; dadhyaṅ — Mahārāja Dadhīci; śibi — Mahārāja Śibi; prabhṛtayaḥ — and similar great personalities; kaḥ — what; vikalpaḥ — consideration; dharā-ādiṣu — in giving the land to the brāhmaṇa.

Translation
Dadhīci, Śibi and many other great personalities were willing to sacrifice even their lives for the benefit of the people in general. This is the evidence of history. So why not give up this insignificant land? What is the serious consideration against it?

Text 8
यैरियं बुभुजे ब्रह्मन्दैत्येन्द्रैरनिवर्तिभि: ।
तेषां कालोऽग्रसील्ल‍ोकान् न यशोऽधिगतं भुवि ॥ ८ ॥
yair iyaṁ bubhuje brahman
daityendrair anivartibhiḥ
teṣāṁ kālo ’grasīl lokān
na yaśo ’dhigataṁ bhuvi
Synonyms
yaiḥ — by whom; iyam — this world; bubhuje — was enjoyed; brahman — O best of the brāhmaṇas; daitya-indraiḥ — by great heroes and kings born in demoniac families; anivartibhiḥ — by those who were determined to fight, either to lay down their lives or to win victory; teṣām — of such persons; kālaḥ — the time factor; agrasīt — took away; lokān — all possessions, all objects of enjoyment; na — not; yaśaḥ — the reputation; adhigatam — achieved; bhuvi — in this world.

Translation
O best of the brāhmaṇas, certainly the great demoniac kings who were never reluctant to fight enjoyed this world, but in due course of time everything they had was taken away, except their reputation, by which they continue to exist. In other words, one should try to achieve a good reputation instead of anything else.

Text 9
सुलभा युधि विप्रर्षे ह्यनिवृत्तास्तनुत्यज: ।
न तथा तीर्थ आयाते श्रद्धया ये धनत्यज: ॥ ९ ॥
sulabhā yudhi viprarṣe
hy anivṛttās tanu-tyajaḥ
na tathā tīrtha āyāte
śraddhayā ye dhana-tyajaḥ
Synonyms
su-labhāḥ — very easily obtained; yudhi — in the battlefield; vipra-ṛṣe — O best of the brāhmaṇas; hi — indeed; anivṛttāḥ — not being afraid of fighting; tanu-tyajaḥ — and thus lay down their lives; na — not; tathā — as; tīrthe āyāte — on the arrival of a saintly person who creates holy places; śraddhayā — with faith and devotion; ye — those who; dhana-tyajaḥ — can give up their accumulated wealth.

Translation
O best of the brāhmaṇas, many men have laid down their lives on the battlefield, being unafraid of fighting, but rarely has one gotten the chance to give his accumulated wealth faithfully to a saintly person who creates holy places.

Text 10
मनस्विन: कारुणिकस्य शोभनं
यदर्थिकामोपनयेन दुर्गति: ।
कुत: पुनर्ब्रह्मविदां भवाद‍ृशां
ततो वटोरस्य ददामि वाञ्छितम् ॥ १० ॥
manasvinaḥ kāruṇikasya śobhanaṁ
yad arthi-kāmopanayena durgatiḥ
kutaḥ punar brahma-vidāṁ bhavādṛśāṁ
tato vaṭor asya dadāmi vāñchitam
Synonyms
manasvinaḥ — of persons who are greatly munificent; kāruṇikasya — of persons celebrated as very merciful; śobhanam — very auspicious; yat — that; arthi — of persons in need of money; kāma-upanayena — by satisfying; durgatiḥ — becoming poverty-stricken; kutaḥ — what; punaḥ — again (is to be said); brahma-vidām — of persons well versed in transcendental science (brahma-vidyā); bhavādṛśām — like your good self; tataḥ — therefore; vaṭoḥ — of the brahmacārī; asya — of this Vāmanadeva; dadāmi — I shall give; vāñchitam — whatever He wants.

Translation
By giving charity, a benevolent and merciful person undoubtedly becomes even more auspicious, especially when he gives charity to a person like your good self. Under the circumstances, I must give this little brahmacārī whatever charity He wants from me.

Text 11
यजन्ति यज्ञंक्रतुभिर्यमाद‍ृता
भवन्त आम्नायविधानकोविदा: ।
स एव विष्णुर्वरदोऽस्तु वा परो
दास्याम्यमुष्मै क्षितिमीप्सितां मुने ॥ ११ ॥
yajanti yajñaṁ kratubhir yam ādṛtā
bhavanta āmnāya-vidhāna-kovidāḥ
sa eva viṣṇur varado ’stu vā paro
dāsyāmy amuṣmai kṣitim īpsitāṁ mune
Synonyms
yajanti — worship; yajñam — who is the enjoyer of sacrifice; kratubhiḥ — by the different paraphernalia for sacrifice; yam — unto the Supreme Person; ādṛtāḥ — very respectfully; bhavantaḥ — all of you; āmnāya-vidhāna-kovidāḥ — great saintly persons fully aware of the Vedic principles of performing sacrifice; saḥ — that; eva — indeed; viṣṇuḥ — is Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; varadaḥ — either He is prepared to give benedictions; astu — He becomes; vā — or; paraḥ — comes as an enemy; dāsyāmi — I shall give; amuṣmai — unto Him (unto Lord Viṣṇu, Vāmanadeva); kṣitim — the tract of land; īpsitām — whatever He has desired; mune — O great sage.

Translation
O great sage, great saintly persons like you, being completely aware of the Vedic principles for performing ritualistic ceremonies and yajñas, worship Lord Viṣṇu in all circumstances. Therefore, whether that same Lord Viṣṇu has come here to give me all benedictions or to punish me as an enemy, I must carry out His order and give Him the requested tract of land without hesitation.

Text 12
यद्यप्यसावधर्मेण मां बध्नीयादनागसम् ।
तथाप्येनं न हिंसिष्ये भीतं ब्रह्मतनुं रिपुम् ॥ १२ ॥
yadyapy asāv adharmeṇa
māṁ badhnīyād anāgasam
tathāpy enaṁ na hiṁsiṣye
bhītaṁ brahma-tanuṁ ripum
Synonyms
yadyapi — although; asau — Lord Viṣṇu; adharmeṇa — crookedly, without reference to the straight way; mām — me; badhnīyāt — kills; anāgasam — although I am not sinful; tathāpi — still; enam — against Him; na — not; hiṁsiṣye — I shall take any retaliation; bhītam — because He is afraid; brahma-tanum — having assumed the form of a brāhmaṇa-brahmacārī; ripum — even though He is my enemy.

Translation
Although He is Viṣṇu Himself, out of fear He has covered Himself in the form of a brāhmaṇa to come to me begging. Under the circumstances, because He has assumed the form of a brāhmaṇa, even if He irreligiously arrests me or even kills me, I shall not retaliate, although He is my enemy.

Text 13
एष वा उत्तमश्लोको न जिहासति यद् यश: ।
हत्वा मैनां हरेद् युद्धे शयीत निहतो मया ॥ १३ ॥
eṣa vā uttamaśloko
na jihāsati yad yaśaḥ
hatvā maināṁ hared yuddhe
śayīta nihato mayā
Synonyms
eṣaḥ — this (brahmacārī); vā — either; uttama-ślokaḥ — is Lord Viṣṇu, who is worshiped by Vedic prayers; na — not; jihāsati — desires to give up; yat — because; yaśaḥ — perpetual fame; hatvā — after killing; mā — me; enām — all this land; haret — will take away; yuddhe — in the fight; śayīta — will lie down; nihataḥ — being killed; mayā — by me.

Translation
If this brāhmaṇa really is Lord Viṣṇu, who is worshiped by Vedic hymns, He would never give up His widespread reputation; either He would lie down having been killed by me, or He would kill me in a fight.

Text 14
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवमश्रद्धितं शिष्यमनादेशकरं गुरु: ।
शशाप दैवप्रहित: सत्यसन्धं मनस्विनम् ॥ १४ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evam aśraddhitaṁ śiṣyam
anādeśakaraṁ guruḥ
śaśāpa daiva-prahitaḥ
satya-sandhaṁ manasvinam
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — thus; aśraddhitam — who was not very respectful to the instruction of the spiritual master; śiṣyam — unto such a disciple; anādeśa-karam — who was not prepared to carry out the order of his spiritual master; guruḥ — the spiritual master (Śukrācārya); śaśāpa — cursed; daiva-prahitaḥ — being inspired by the Supreme Lord; satya-sandham — one who was fixed in his truthfulness; manasvinam — who was of a highly elevated character.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Thereafter, the spiritual master, Śukrācārya, being inspired by the Supreme Lord, cursed his exalted disciple Bali Mahārāja, who was so magnanimous and fixed in truthfulness that instead of respecting his spiritual master’s instructions, he wanted to disobey his order.

Text 15
द‍ृढं पण्डितमान्यज्ञ: स्तब्धोऽस्यस्मदुपेक्षया ।
मच्छासनातिगो यस्त्वमचिराद्भ्रश्यसे श्रिय: ॥ १५ ॥
dṛḍhaṁ paṇḍita-māny ajñaḥ
stabdho ’sy asmad-upekṣayā
mac-chāsanātigo yas tvam
acirād bhraśyase śriyaḥ
Synonyms
dṛḍham — so firmly convinced or fixed in your decision; paṇḍita-mānī — considering yourself very learned; ajñaḥ — at the same time foolish; stabdhaḥ — impudent; asi — you have become; asmat — of us; upekṣayā — by disregarding; mat-śāsana-atigaḥ — surpassing the jurisdiction of my administration; yaḥ — such a person (as you); tvam — yourself; acirāt — very soon; bhraśyase — will fall down; śriyaḥ — from all opulence.

Translation
Although you have no knowledge, you have become a so-called learned person, and therefore you dare be so impudent as to disobey my order. Because of disobeying me, you shall very soon be bereft of all your opulence.

Text 16
एवं शप्त: स्वगुरुणा सत्यान्न चलितो महान् ।
वामनाय ददावेनामर्चित्वोदकपूर्वकम् ॥ १६ ॥
evaṁ śaptaḥ sva-guruṇā
satyān na calito mahān
vāmanāya dadāv enām
arcitvodaka-pūrvakam
Synonyms
evam — in this way; śaptaḥ — being cursed; sva-guruṇā — by his own spiritual master; satyāt — from truthfulness; na — not; calitaḥ — who moved; mahān — the great personality; vāmanāya — unto Lord Vāmanadeva; dadau — gave in charity; enām — all the land; arcitvā — after worshiping; udaka-pūrvakam — preceded by offering of water.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Even after being cursed in this way by his own spiritual master, Bali Mahārāja, being a great personality, never deviated from his determination. Therefore, according to custom, he first offered water to Vāmanadeva and then offered Him the gift of land he had promised.

Text 17
विन्ध्यावलिस्तदागत्य पत्नी जालकमालिनी ।
आनिन्ये कलशं हैममवनेजन्यपां भृतम् ॥ १७ ॥
vindhyāvalis tadāgatya
patnī jālaka-mālinī
āninye kalaśaṁ haimam
avanejany-apāṁ bhṛtam
Synonyms
vindhyāvaliḥ — Vindhyāvali; tadā — at that time; āgatya — coming there; patnī — the wife of Mahārāja Bali; jālaka-mālinī — decorated with a necklace of pearls; āninye — caused to be brought; kalaśam — a waterpot; haimam — made of gold; avanejani-apām — with water for the sake of washing the Lord’s feet; bhṛtam — filled.

Translation
Bali Mahārāja’s wife, known as Vindhyāvali, who was decorated with a necklace of pearls, immediately came and had a large golden waterpot brought there, full of water with which to worship the Lord by washing His feet.

Text 18
यजमान: स्वयं तस्य श्रीमत् पादयुगं मुदा ।
अवनिज्यावहन्मूर्ध्नि तदपो विश्वपावनी: ॥ १८ ॥
yajamānaḥ svayaṁ tasya
śrīmat pāda-yugaṁ mudā
avanijyāvahan mūrdhni
tad apo viśva-pāvanīḥ
Synonyms
yajamānaḥ — the worshiper (Bali Mahārāja); svayam — personally; tasya — of Lord Vāmanadeva; śrīmat pāda-yugam — the most auspicious and beautiful pair of lotus feet; mudā — with great jubilation; avanijya — properly washing; avahat — took; mūrdhni — on his head; tat — that; apaḥ — water; viśva-pāvanīḥ — which gives liberation to the whole universe.

Translation
Bali Mahārāja, the worshiper of Lord Vāmanadeva, jubilantly washed the Lord’s lotus feet and then took the water on his head, for that water delivers the entire universe.

Text 19
तदासुरेन्द्रं दिवि देवतागणा
गन्धर्वविद्याधरसिद्धचारणा: ।
तत्कर्म सर्वेऽपि गृणन्त आर्जवं
प्रसूनवर्षैर्ववृषुर्मुदान्विता: ॥ १९ ॥
tadāsurendraṁ divi devatā-gaṇā
gandharva-vidyādhara-siddha-cāraṇāḥ
tat karma sarve ’pi gṛṇanta ārjavaṁ
prasūna-varṣair vavṛṣur mudānvitāḥ
Synonyms
tadā — at that time; asura-indram — unto the King of the demons, Bali Mahārāja; divi — in the higher planetary system; devatā-gaṇāḥ — the residents known as the demigods; gandharva — the Gandharvas; vidyādhara — the Vidyādharas; siddha — the residents of Siddhaloka; cāraṇāḥ — the residents of Cāraṇaloka; tat — that; karma — action; sarve api — all of them; gṛṇantaḥ — declaring; ārjavam — plain and simple; prasūna-varṣaiḥ — with a shower of flowers; vavṛṣuḥ — released; mudā-anvitāḥ — being very pleased with him.

Translation
At that time, the residents of the higher planetary system, namely the demigods, the Gandharvas, the Vidyādharas, the Siddhas and the Cāraṇas, all being very pleased by Bali Mahārāja’s simple, nonduplicitous act, praised his qualities and showered upon him millions of flowers.

Text 20
नेदुर्मुहुर्दुन्दुभय: सहस्रशो
गन्धर्वकिम्पूरुषकिन्नरा जगु: ।
मनस्विनानेन कृतं सुदुष्करं
विद्वानदाद् यद् रिपवे जगत्‍त्रयम् ॥ २० ॥
nedur muhur dundubhayaḥ sahasraśo
gandharva-kimpūruṣa-kinnarā jaguḥ
manasvinānena kṛtaṁ suduṣkaraṁ
vidvān adād yad ripave jagat-trayam
Synonyms
neduḥ — began to beat; muhuḥ — again and again; dundubhayaḥ — trumpets and kettledrums; sahasraśaḥ — by thousands and thousands; gandharva — the residents of Gandharvaloka; kimpūruṣa — the residents of Kimpuruṣaloka; kinnarāḥ — and the residents of Kinnaraloka; jaguḥ — began to sing and declare; manasvinā — by the most exalted personality; anena — by Bali Mahārāja; kṛtam — was done; su-duṣkaram — an extremely difficult task; vidvān — because of his being the most learned person; adāt — gave Him a gift; yat — that; ripave — unto the enemy, Lord Viṣṇu, who was siding with Bali Mahārāja’s enemies, the demigods; jagat-trayam — the three worlds.

Translation
The Gandharvas, the Kimpuruṣas and the Kinnaras sounded thousands and thousands of kettledrums and trumpets again and again, and they sang in great jubilation, declaring, “How exalted a person is Bali Mahārāja, and what a difficult task he has performed! Even though he knew that Lord Viṣṇu was on the side of his enemies, he nonetheless gave the Lord the entire three worlds in charity.”

Text 21
तद् वामनं रूपमवर्धताद्भ‍ुतं
हरेरनन्तस्य गुणत्रयात्मकम् ।
भू: खं दिशो द्यौर्विवरा: पयोधय-
स्तिर्यङ्‌नृदेवा ऋषयो यदासत ॥ २१ ॥
tad vāmanaṁ rūpam avardhatādbhutaṁ
harer anantasya guṇa-trayātmakam
bhūḥ khaṁ diśo dyaur vivarāḥ payodhayas
tiryaṅ-nṛ-devā ṛṣayo yad-āsata
Synonyms
tat — that; vāmanam — incarnation of Lord Vāmana; rūpam — form; avardhata — began to increase more and more; adbhutam — certainly very wonderful; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; anantasya — of the unlimited; guṇa-traya-ātmakam — whose body is expanded by the material energy, consisting of three modes (goodness, passion and ignorance); bhūḥ — the land; kham — the sky; diśaḥ — all directions; dyauḥ — the planetary systems; vivarāḥ — different holes of the universe; payodhayaḥ — great seas and oceans; tiryak — lower animals, birds and beasts; nṛ — human beings; devāḥ — demigods; ṛṣayaḥ — great saintly persons; yat — wherein; āsata — lived.

Translation
The unlimited Supreme Personality of Godhead, who had assumed the form of Vāmana, then began increasing in size, acting in terms of the material energy, until everything in the universe was within His body, including the earth, the planetary systems, the sky, the directions, the various holes in the universe, the seas, the oceans, the birds, beasts, human beings, the demigods and the great saintly persons.

Text 22
काये बलिस्तस्य महाविभूते:
सहर्त्विगाचार्यसदस्य एतत् ।
ददर्श विश्वं त्रिगुणं गुणात्मके
भूतेन्द्रियार्थाशयजीवयुक्तम् ॥ २२ ॥
kāye balis tasya mahā-vibhūteḥ
sahartvig-ācārya-sadasya etat
dadarśa viśvaṁ tri-guṇaṁ guṇātmake
bhūtendriyārthāśaya-jīva-yuktam
Synonyms
kāye — in the body; baliḥ — Mahārāja Bali; tasya — of the Personality of Godhead; mahā-vibhūteḥ — of that person who is equipped with all wonderful opulences; saha-ṛtvik-ācārya-sadasyaḥ — with all the priests, ācāryas and members of the holy assembly; etat — this; dadarśa — saw; viśvam — the whole universe; tri-guṇam — made of three modes of material nature; guṇa-ātmake — in that which is the source of all such qualities; bhūta — with all the gross material elements; indriya — with the senses; artha — with the sense objects; āśaya — with mind, intelligence and false ego; jīva-yuktam — with all the living entities.

Translation
Bali Mahārāja, along with all the priests, ācāryas and members of the assembly, observed the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s universal body, which was full of six opulences. That body contained everything within the universe, including all the gross material elements, the senses, the sense objects, the mind, intelligence and false ego, the various kinds of living entities, and the actions and reactions of the three modes of material nature.

Text 23
रसामचष्टाङ्‍‍घ्रितलेऽथ पादयो-
र्महीं महीध्रान्पुरुषस्य जङ्घयो: ।
पतत्‍त्रिणो जानुनि विश्वमूर्ते-
रूर्वोर्गणं मारुतमिन्द्रसेन: ॥ २३ ॥
rasām acaṣṭāṅghri-tale ’tha pādayor
mahīṁ mahīdhrān puruṣasya jaṅghayoḥ
patattriṇo jānuni viśva-mūrter
ūrvor gaṇaṁ mārutam indrasenaḥ
Synonyms
rasām — the lower planetary system; acaṣṭa — observed; aṅghri-tale — beneath the feet, or on the sole; atha — thereafter; pādayoḥ — on the feet; mahīm — the surface of the land; mahīdhrān — the mountains; puruṣasya — of the giant Personality of Godhead; jaṅghayoḥ — on the calves; patattriṇaḥ — the flying living entities; jānuni — on the knees; viśva-mūrteḥ — of the form of the gigantic Lord; ūrvoḥ — on the thighs; gaṇam mārutam — varieties of air; indra-senaḥ — Bali Mahārāja, who had obtained the soldiers of King Indra and who was situated in the post of Indra.

Translation
Thereafter, Bali Mahārāja, who was occupying the seat of King Indra, could see the lower planetary systems, such as Rasātala, on the soles of the feet of the Lord’s universal form. He saw on the Lord’s feet the surface of the globe, on the surface of His calves all the mountains, on His knees the various birds, and on His thighs the varieties of air.

Text 24
सन्ध्यां विभोर्वाससि गुह्य ऐक्षत्
प्रजापतीञ्जघने आत्ममुख्यान् ।
नाभ्यां नभ: कुक्षिषु सप्तसिन्धू-
नुरुक्रमस्योरसि चर्क्षमालाम् ॥ २४ ॥
sandhyāṁ vibhor vāsasi guhya aikṣat
prajāpatīñ jaghane ātma-mukhyān
nābhyāṁ nabhaḥ kukṣiṣu sapta-sindhūn
urukramasyorasi carkṣa-mālām
Synonyms
sandhyām — the evening twilight; vibhoḥ — of the Supreme; vāsasi — in the garment; guhye — on the private parts; aikṣat — he saw; prajāpatīn — the various Prajāpatis, who had given birth to all living entities; jaghane — on the hips; ātma-mukhyān — the confidential ministers of Bali Mahārāja; nābhyām — on the navel; nabhaḥ — the whole sky; kukṣiṣu — on the waist; sapta — seven; sindhūn — oceans; urukramasya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who was acting wonderfully; urasi — on the bosom; ca — also; ṛkṣa-mālām — the clusters of stars.

Translation
Bali Mahārāja saw beneath the garments of the Lord, who acts wonderfully, the evening twilight. In the Lord’s private parts he saw the Prajāpatis, and in the round portion of the waist he saw himself with his confidential associates. In the Lord’s navel he saw the sky, on the Lord’s waist he saw the seven oceans, and on the Lord’s bosom he saw all the clusters of stars.

Texts 25-29
हृद्यङ्ग धर्मं स्तनयोर्मुरारे-
र्ऋतं च सत्यं च मनस्यथेन्दुम् ।
श्रियं च वक्षस्यरविन्दहस्तां
कण्ठे च सामानि समस्तरेफान् ॥ २५ ॥
इन्द्रप्रधानानमरान्भुजेषु
तत्कर्णयो: ककुभो द्यौश्च मूर्ध्नि ।
केशेषु मेघाञ्छ्वसनं नासिकाया-
मक्ष्णोश्च सूर्यं वदने च वह्निम् ॥ २६ ॥
वाण्यां च छन्दांसि रसे जलेशं
भ्रुवोर्निषेधं च विधिं च पक्ष्मसु ।
अहश्च रात्रिं च परस्य पुंसो
मन्युं ललाटेऽधर एव लोभम् ॥ २७ ॥
स्पर्शे च कामं नृप रेतसाम्भ:
पृष्ठे त्वधर्मं क्रमणेषु यज्ञम् ।
छायासु मृत्युं हसिते च मायां
तनूरुहेष्वोषधिजातयश्च ॥ २८ ॥
नदीश्च नाडीषु शिला नखेषु
बुद्धावजं देवगणानृषींश्च ।
प्राणेषु गात्रे स्थिरजङ्गमानि
सर्वाणि भूतानि ददर्श वीर: ॥ २९ ॥
hṛdy aṅga dharmaṁ stanayor murārer
ṛtaṁ ca satyaṁ ca manasy athendum
śriyaṁ ca vakṣasy aravinda-hastāṁ
kaṇṭhe ca sāmāni samasta-rephān
indra-pradhānān amarān bhujeṣu
tat-karṇayoḥ kakubho dyauś ca mūrdhni
keśeṣu meghāñ chvasanaṁ nāsikāyām
akṣṇoś ca sūryaṁ vadane ca vahnim
vāṇyāṁ ca chandāṁsi rase jaleśaṁ
bhruvor niṣedhaṁ ca vidhiṁ ca pakṣmasu
ahaś ca rātriṁ ca parasya puṁso
manyuṁ lalāṭe ’dhara eva lobham
sparśe ca kāmaṁ nṛpa retasāmbhaḥ
pṛṣṭhe tv adharmaṁ kramaṇeṣu yajñam
chāyāsu mṛtyuṁ hasite ca māyāṁ
tanū-ruheṣv oṣadhi-jātayaś ca
nadīś ca nāḍīṣu śilā nakheṣu
buddhāv ajaṁ deva-gaṇān ṛṣīṁś ca
prāṇeṣu gātre sthira-jaṅgamāni
sarvāṇi bhūtāni dadarśa vīraḥ
Synonyms
hṛdi — within the heart; aṅga — my dear King Parīkṣit; dharmam — religion; stanayoḥ — on the bosom; murāreḥ — of Murāri, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ṛtam — very pleasing words; ca — also; satyam — truthfulness; ca — also; manasi — in the mind; atha — thereafter; indum — the moon; śriyam — the goddess of fortune; ca — also; vakṣasi — on the chest; aravinda-hastām — who always carries a lotus flower in her hand; kaṇṭhe — on the neck; ca — also; sāmāni — all the Vedas (Sāma, Yajur, Ṛg and Atharva); samasta-rephān — all sound vibrations; indra-pradhānān — headed by King Indra; amarān — all the demigods; bhujeṣu — on the arms; tat-karṇayoḥ — on the ears; kakubhaḥ — all the directions; dyauḥ ca — the luminaries; mūrdhni — on the top of the head; keśeṣu — within the hair; meghān — the clouds; śvasanam — breathing air; nāsikāyām — on the nostrils; akṣṇoḥ ca — in the eyes; sūryam — the sun; vadane — in the mouth; ca — also; vahnim — fire; vāṇyām — in His speech; ca — also; chandāṁsi — the Vedic hymns; rase — in the tongue; jala-īśam — the demigod of the water; bhruvoḥ — on the eyebrows; niṣedham — warnings; ca — also; vidhim — regulative principles; ca — also; pakṣmasu — in the eyelids; ahaḥ ca — daytime; rātrim — night; ca — also; parasya — of the supreme; puṁsaḥ — of the person; manyum — anger; lalāṭe — on the forehead; adhare — on the lips; eva — indeed; lobham — greed; sparśe — in His touch; ca — also; kāmam — lusty desires; nṛpa — O King; retasā — by semen; ambhaḥ — water; pṛṣṭhe — on the back; tu — but; adharmam — irreligion; kramaṇeṣu — in the wonderful activities; yajñam — fire sacrifice; chāyāsu — in the shadows; mṛtyum — death; hasite — in His smiling; ca — also; māyām — the illusory energy; tanū-ruheṣu — in the hair on the body; oṣadhi-jātayaḥ — all species of drugs, herbs and plants; ca — and; nadīḥ — the rivers; ca — also; nāḍīṣu — in the veins; śilāḥ — stones; nakheṣu — in the nails; buddhau — in the intelligence; ajam — Lord Brahmā; deva-gaṇān — the demigods; ṛṣīn ca — and the great sages; prāṇeṣu — in the senses; gātre — in the body; sthira-jaṅgamāni — moving and stationary; sarvāṇi — all of them; bhūtāni — living entities; dadarśa — saw; vīraḥ — Bali Mahārāja.

Translation
My dear King, on the heart of Lord Murāri he saw religion; on the chest, both pleasing words and truthfulness; in the mind, the moon; on the bosom, the goddess of fortune, with a lotus flower in her hand; on the neck, all the Vedas and all sound vibrations; on the arms, all the demigods, headed by King Indra; in both ears, all the directions; on the head, the upper planetary systems; on the hair, the clouds; in the nostrils, the wind; on the eyes, the sun; and in the mouth, fire. From His words came all the Vedic mantras, on His tongue was the demigod of water, Varuṇadeva, on His eyebrows were the regulative principles, and on His eyelids were day and night. [When His eyes were open it was daytime, and when they were closed it was night.] On His forehead was anger, and on His lips was greed. O King, in His touch were lusty desires, in His semen were all the waters, on His back was irreligion, and in His wonderful activities or steps was the fire of sacrifice. On His shadow was death, in His smile was the illusory energy, and on the hairs of His body were all the drugs and herbs. In His veins were all the rivers, on His nails were all the stones, in His intelligence were Lord Brahmā, the demigods and the great saintly persons, and throughout His entire body and senses were all living entities, moving and stationary. Bali Mahārāja thus saw everything in the gigantic body of the Lord.

Text 30
सर्वात्मनीदं भुवनं निरीक्ष्य
सर्वेऽसुरा: कश्मलमापुरङ्ग ।
सुदर्शनं चक्रमसह्यतेजो
धनुश्च शार्ङ्गं स्तनयित्नुघोषम् ॥ ३० ॥
sarvātmanīdaṁ bhuvanaṁ nirīkṣya
sarve ’surāḥ kaśmalam āpur aṅga
sudarśanaṁ cakram asahya-tejo
dhanuś ca śārṅgaṁ stanayitnu-ghoṣam
Synonyms
sarva-ātmani — in the supreme whole, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; idam — this universe; bhuvanam — the three worlds; nirīkṣya — by observing; sarve — all; asurāḥ — the demons, the associates of Bali Mahārāja; kaśmalam — lamentation; āpuḥ — received; aṅga — O King; sudarśanam — named Sudarśana; cakram — the disc; asahya — unbearable; tejaḥ — the heat of which; dhanuḥ ca — and the bow; śārṅgam — named Śārṅga; stanayitnu — the resounding of assembled clouds; ghoṣam — sounding like.

Translation
O King, when all the demons, the followers of Mahārāja Bali, saw the universal form of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who held everything within His body, when they saw in the Lord’s hand His disc, known as the Sudarśana cakra, which generates intolerable heat, and when they heard the tumultuous sound of His bow, all of these caused lamentation within their hearts.

Text 31
पर्जन्यघोषो जलज: पाञ्चजन्य:
कौमोदकी विष्णुगदा तरस्विनी ।
विद्याधरोऽसि: शतचन्द्रयुक्त-
स्तूणोत्तमावक्षयसायकौ च ॥ ३१ ॥
parjanya-ghoṣo jalajaḥ pāñcajanyaḥ
kaumodakī viṣṇu-gadā tarasvinī
vidyādharo ’siḥ śata-candra-yuktas
tūṇottamāv akṣayasāyakau ca
Synonyms
parjanya-ghoṣaḥ — having a sound vibration like that of the clouds; jalajaḥ — the Lord’s conchshell; pāñcajanyaḥ — which is known as Pāñcajanya; kaumodakī — known by the name Kaumodakī; viṣṇu-gadā — the club of Lord Viṣṇu; tarasvinī — with great force; vidyādharaḥ — named Vidyādhara; asiḥ — the sword; śata-candra-yuktaḥ — with a shield decorated with hundreds of moons; tūṇa-uttamau — the best of quivers; akṣayasāyakau — named Akṣayasāyaka; ca — also.

Translation
The Lord’s conchshell, named Pāñcajanya, which made sounds like that of a cloud; the very forceful club named Kaumodakī; the sword named Vidyādhara, with a shield decorated with hundreds of moonlike spots; and also Akṣayasāyaka, the best of quivers — all of these appeared together to offer prayers to the Lord.

Texts 32-33
सुनन्दमुख्या उपतस्थुरीशं
पार्षदमुख्या: सहलोकपाला: ।
स्फुरत्किरीटाङ्गदमीनकुण्डल:
श्रीवत्सरत्नोत्तममेखलाम्बरै: ॥ ३२ ॥
मधुव्रतस्रग्वनमालयावृतो
रराज राजन्भगवानुरुक्रम: ।
क्षितिं पदैकेन बलेर्विचक्रमे
नभ: शरीरेण दिशश्च बाहुभि: ॥ ३३ ॥
sunanda-mukhyā upatasthur īśaṁ
pārṣada-mukhyāḥ saha-loka-pālāḥ
sphurat-kirīṭāṅgada-mīna-kuṇḍalaḥ
śrīvatsa-ratnottama-mekhalāmbaraiḥ
madhuvrata-srag-vanamālayāvṛto
rarāja rājan bhagavān urukramaḥ
kṣitiṁ padaikena baler vicakrame
nabhaḥ śarīreṇa diśaś ca bāhubhiḥ
Synonyms
sunanda-mukhyāḥ — the associates of the Lord headed by Sunanda; upatasthuḥ — began to offer prayers; īśam — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pārṣada-mukhyāḥ — other chiefs of the associates; saha-loka-pālāḥ — with the predominant deities of all the planets; sphurat-kirīṭa — with a brilliant helmet; aṅgada — bracelets; mīna-kuṇḍalaḥ — and earrings in the shape of fish; śrīvatsa — the hair named Śrīvatsa on His bosom; ratna-uttama — the best of jewels (Kaustubha); mekhalā — belt; ambaraiḥ — with yellow garments; madhu-vrata — of bees; srak — in which there was a garland; vanamālayā — by a flower garland; āvṛtaḥ — covered; rarāja — predominantly manifested; rājan — O King; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; urukramaḥ — who is prominent by His wonderful activities; kṣitim — the whole surface of the world; padā ekena — by one footstep; baleḥ — of Bali Mahārāja; vicakrame — covered; nabhaḥ — the sky; śarīreṇa — by His body; diśaḥ ca — and all directions; bāhubhiḥ — by His arms.

Translation
These associates, headed by Sunanda and other chief associates and accompanied by all the predominating deities of the various planets, offered prayers to the Lord, who wore a brilliant helmet, bracelets, and glittering earrings that resembled fish. On the Lord’s bosom were the lock of hair called Śrīvatsa and the transcendental jewel named Kaustubha. He wore a yellow garment, covered by a belt, and He was decorated by a flower garland, surrounded by bees. Manifesting Himself in this way, O King, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose activities are wonderful, covered the entire surface of the earth with one footstep, the sky with His body, and all directions with His arms.

Text 34
पदं द्वितीयं क्रमतस्त्रिविष्टपं
न वै तृतीयाय तदीयमण्वपि ।
उरुक्रमस्याङ्‍‍घ्रिरुपर्युपर्यथो
महर्जनाभ्यां तपस: परं गत: ॥ ३४ ॥
padaṁ dvitīyaṁ kramatas triviṣṭapaṁ
na vai tṛtīyāya tadīyam aṇv api
urukramasyāṅghrir upary upary atho
mahar-janābhyāṁ tapasaḥ paraṁ gataḥ
Synonyms
padam — step; dvitīyam — second; kramataḥ — advancing; tri-viṣṭapam — all of the heavenly planets; na — not; vai — indeed; tṛtīyāya — for the third step; tadīyam — of the Lord; aṇu api — only a spot of land remained; urukramasya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who performs uncommon activities; aṅghriḥ — steps occupying above and below; upari upari — higher and higher; atho — now; mahaḥ-janābhyām — than Maharloka and Janaloka; tapasaḥ — that Tapoloka; param — beyond that; gataḥ — approached.

Translation
As the Lord took His second step, He covered the heavenly planets. And not even a spot remained for the third step, for the Lord’s foot extended higher and higher, beyond Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka and even Satyaloka.