Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं विप्रकृतो राजन् बलिर्भगवतासुर: ।
भिद्यमानोऽप्यभिन्नात्मा प्रत्याहाविक्लवं वच: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ viprakṛto rājan
balir bhagavatāsuraḥ
bhidyamāno ’py abhinnātmā
pratyāhāviklavaṁ vacaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — thus, as aforementioned; viprakṛtaḥ — having been put into difficulty; rājan — O King; baliḥ — Mahārāja Bali; bhagavatā — by the Personality of Godhead Vāmanadeva; asuraḥ — the King of the asuras; bhidyamānaḥ api — although situated in this uncomfortable position; abhinna-ātmā — without being disturbed in body or mind; pratyāha — replied; aviklavam — undisturbed; vacaḥ — the following words.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, although the Supreme Personality of Godhead was superficially seen to have acted mischievously toward Bali Mahārāja, Bali Mahārāja was fixed in his determination. Considering himself not to have fulfilled his promise, he spoke as follows.

Text 2
श्रीबलिरुवाच
यद्युत्तमश्लोक भवान् ममेरितं
वचो व्यलीकं सुरवर्य मन्यते ।
करोम्यृतं तन्न भवेत् प्रलम्भनं
पदं तृतीयं कुरु शीर्ष्णि मे निजम् ॥ २ ॥
śrī-balir uvāca
yady uttamaśloka bhavān mameritaṁ
vaco vyalīkaṁ sura-varya manyate
karomy ṛtaṁ tan na bhavet pralambhanaṁ
padaṁ tṛtīyaṁ kuru śīrṣṇi me nijam
Synonyms
śrī-baliḥ uvāca — Bali Mahārāja said; yadi — if; uttamaśloka — O Supreme Lord; bhavān — Your good self; mama — my; īritam — promised; vacaḥ — words; vyalīkam — false; sura-varya — O greatest of all suras (demigods); manyate — You think so; karomi — I shall make it; ṛtam — truth; tat — that (promise); na — not; bhavet — will become; pralambhanam — cheating; padam — step; tṛtīyam — the third; kuru — just do it; śīrṣṇi — on the head; me — my; nijam — Your lotus feet.

Translation
Bali Mahārāja said: O best Personality of Godhead, most worshipable for all the demigods, if You think that my promise has become false, I shall certainly rectify matters to make it truthful. I cannot allow my promise to be false. Please, therefore, place Your third lotus footstep on my head.

Text 3
बिभेमि नाहं निरयात् पदच्युतो
न पाशबन्धाद् व्यसनाद् दुरत्ययात् ।
नैवार्थकृच्छ्राद् भवतो विनिग्रहा-
दसाधुवादाद् भृशमुद्विजे यथा ॥ ३ ॥
bibhemi nāhaṁ nirayāt pada-cyuto
na pāśa-bandhād vyasanād duratyayāt
naivārtha-kṛcchrād bhavato vinigrahād
asādhu-vādād bhṛśam udvije yathā
Synonyms
bibhemi — I do fear; na — not; aham — I; nirayāt — from a position in hell; pada-cyutaḥ — nor do I fear being deprived of my position; na — nor; pāśa-bandhāt — from being arrested by the ropes of Varuṇa; vyasanāt — nor from the distress; duratyayāt — which was unbearable for me; na — nor; eva — certainly; artha-kṛcchrāt — because of poverty, or scarcity of money; bhavataḥ — of Your Lordship; vinigrahāt — from the punishment I am now suffering; asādhu-vādāt — from defamation; bhṛśam — very much; udvije — I become anxious; yathā — as.

Translation
I do not fear being deprived of all my possessions, living in hellish life, being arrested for poverty by the ropes of Varuṇa or being punished by You as much as I fear defamation.

Text 4
पुंसां श्लाघ्यतमं मन्ये दण्डमर्हत्तमार्पितम् ।
यं न माता पिता भ्राता सुहृदश्चादिशन्ति हि ॥ ४ ॥
puṁsāṁ ślāghyatamaṁ manye
daṇḍam arhattamārpitam
yaṁ na mātā pitā bhrātā
suhṛdaś cādiśanti hi
Synonyms
puṁsām — of men; ślāghya-tamam — the most exalted; manye — I consider; daṇḍam — punishment; arhattama-arpitam — given by You, the supreme worshipable Lord; yam — which; na — neither; mātā — mother; pitā — father; bhrātā — brother; suhṛdaḥ — friends; ca — also; ādiśanti — offer; hi — indeed.

Translation
Although a father, mother, brother or friend may sometimes punish one as a well-wisher, they never punish their subordinate like this. But because You are the most worshipable Lord, I regard the punishment You have given me as most exalted.

Text 5
त्वं नूनमसुराणां न: परोक्ष: परमो गुरु: ।
यो नोऽनेकमदान्धानां विभ्रंशं चक्षुरादिशत् ॥ ५ ॥
tvaṁ nūnam asurāṇāṁ naḥ
parokṣaḥ paramo guruḥ
yo no ’neka-madāndhānāṁ
vibhraṁśaṁ cakṣur ādiśat
Synonyms
tvam — Your Lordship; nūnam — indeed; asurāṇām — of the demons; naḥ — as we are; parokṣaḥ — indirect; paramaḥ — the supreme; guruḥ — spiritual master; yaḥ — Your Lordship; naḥ — of us; aneka — many; mada-andhānām — blinded by material opulences; vibhraṁśam — destroying our false prestige; cakṣuḥ — the eye of knowledge; ādiśat — gave.

Translation
Since Your Lordship is indirectly the greatest well-wisher of us demons, You act for our best welfare by posing as if our enemy. Because demons like us always aspire for a position of false prestige, by chastising us You give us the eyes by which to see the right path.

Texts 6-7
यस्मिन् वैरानुबन्धेन व्यूढेन विबुधेतरा: ।
बहवो लेभिरे सिद्धिं यामु हैकान्तयोगिन: ॥ ६ ॥
तेनाहं निगृहीतोऽस्मि भवता भूरिकर्मणा ।
बद्धश्च वारुणै: पाशैर्नातिव्रीडे न च व्यथे ॥ ७ ॥
yasmin vairānubandhena
vyūḍhena vibudhetarāḥ
bahavo lebhire siddhiṁ
yām u haikānta-yoginaḥ
tenāhaṁ nigṛhīto ’smi
bhavatā bhūri-karmaṇā
baddhaś ca vāruṇaiḥ pāśair
nātivrīḍe na ca vyathe
Synonyms
yasmin — unto You; vaira-anubandhena — by continuously treating as an enemy; vyūḍhena — firmly fixed by such intelligence; vibudha-itarāḥ — the demons (those other than the demigods); bahavaḥ — many of them; lebhire — achieved; siddhim — perfection; yām — which; u ha — it is well known; ekānta-yoginaḥ — equal to the achievements of the greatly successful mystic yogīs; tena — therefore; aham — I; nigṛhītaḥ asmi — although I am being punished; bhavatā — by Your Lordship; bhūri-karmaṇā — who can do many wonderful things; baddhaḥ ca — I am arrested and bound; vāruṇaiḥ pāśaiḥ — by the ropes of Varuṇa; na ati-vrīḍe — I am not at all ashamed of this; na ca vyathe — nor am I suffering very much.

Translation
Many demons who were continuously inimical toward You finally achieved the perfection of great mystic yogīs. Your Lordship can perform one work to serve many purposes, and consequently, although You have punished me in many ways, I do not feel ashamed of having been arrested by the ropes of Varuṇa, nor do I feel aggrieved.

Text 8
पितामहो मे भवदीयसम्मत:
प्रह्लाद आविष्कृतसाधुवाद: ।
भवद्विपक्षेण विचित्रवैशसं
सम्प्रापितस्त्वं परम: स्वपित्रा ॥ ८ ॥
pitāmaho me bhavadīya-sammataḥ
prahrāda āviṣkṛta-sādhu-vādaḥ
bhavad-vipakṣeṇa vicitra-vaiśasaṁ
samprāpitas tvaṁ paramaḥ sva-pitrā
Synonyms
pitāmahaḥ — grandfather; me — my; bhavadīya-sammataḥ — approved by the devotees of Your Lordship; prahrādaḥ — Prahlāda Mahārāja; āviṣkṛta-sādhu-vādaḥ — famous, being celebrated everywhere as a devotee; bhavat-vipakṣeṇa — simply going against You; vicitra-vaiśasam — inventing different kinds of harassments; samprāpitaḥ — suffered; tvam — You; paramaḥ — the supreme shelter; sva-pitrā — by his own father.

Translation
My grandfather Prahlāda Mahārāja is famous, being recognized by all Your devotees. Although harassed in many ways by his father, Hiraṇyakaśipu, he still remained faithful, taking shelter at Your lotus feet.

Text 9
किमात्मनानेन जहाति योऽन्तत:
किं रिक्थहारै: स्वजनाख्यदस्युभि: ।
किं जायया संसृतिहेतुभूतया
मर्त्यस्य गेहै: किमिहायुषो व्यय: ॥ ९ ॥
kim ātmanānena jahāti yo ’ntataḥ
kiṁ riktha-hāraiḥ svajanākhya-dasyubhiḥ
kiṁ jāyayā saṁsṛti-hetu-bhūtayā
martyasya gehaiḥ kim ihāyuṣo vyayaḥ
Synonyms
kim — what is the use; ātmanā anena — of this body; jahāti — gives up; yaḥ — which (body); antataḥ — at the end of life; kim — what is the use; riktha-hāraiḥ — the plunderers of wealth; svajana-ākhya-dasyubhiḥ — they who are actually plunderers but who pass by the name of relatives; kim — what is the use; jāyayā — of a wife; saṁsṛti-hetu-bhūtayā — who is the source of increasing material conditions; martyasya — of a person sure to die; gehaiḥ — of houses, family and community; kim — what is the use; iha — in which house; āyuṣaḥ — of the duration of life; vyayaḥ — simply wasting.

Translation
What is the use of the material body, which automatically leaves its owner at the end of life? And what is the use of all one’s family members, who are actually plunderers taking away money that is useful for the service of the Lord in spiritual opulence? What is the use of a wife? She is only the source of increasing material conditions. And what is the use of family, home, country and community? Attachment for them merely wastes the valuable energy of one’s lifetime.

Text 10
इत्थं स निश्चित्य पितामहो महा-
नगाधबोधो भवत: पादपद्मम् ।
ध्रुवं प्रपेदे ह्यकुतोभयं जनाद्
भीत: स्वपक्षक्षपणस्य सत्तम ॥ १० ॥
itthaṁ sa niścitya pitāmaho mahān
agādha-bodho bhavataḥ pāda-padmam
dhruvaṁ prapede hy akutobhayaṁ janād
bhītaḥ svapakṣa-kṣapaṇasya sattama
Synonyms
ittham — because of this (as stated above); saḥ — he, Prahlāda Mahārāja; niścitya — definitely deciding on this point; pitāmahaḥ — my grandfather; mahān — the great devotee; agādha-bodhaḥ — my grandfather, who received unlimited knowledge because of his devotional service; bhavataḥ — of Your Lordship; pāda-padmam — the lotus feet; dhruvam — the infallible, eternal shelter; prapede — surrendered; hi — indeed; akutaḥ-bhayam — completely free of fear; janāt — from ordinary common people; bhītaḥ — being afraid; svapakṣa-kṣapaṇasya — of Your Lordship, who kill the demons on our own side; sat-tama — O best of the best.

Translation
My grandfather, the best of all men, who achieved unlimited knowledge and was worshipable for everyone, was afraid of the common men in this world. Being fully convinced of the substantiality afforded by shelter at Your lotus feet, He took shelter of Your lotus feet, against the will of his father and demoniac friends, who were killed by Your own self.

Text 11
अथाहमप्यात्मरिपोस्तवान्तिकं
दैवेन नीत: प्रसभं त्याजितश्री: ।
इदं कृतान्तान्तिकवर्ति जीवितं
ययाध्रुवं स्तब्धमतिर्न बुध्यते ॥ ११ ॥
athāham apy ātma-ripos tavāntikaṁ
daivena nītaḥ prasabhaṁ tyājita-śrīḥ
idaṁ kṛtāntāntika-varti jīvitaṁ
yayādhruvaṁ stabdha-matir na budhyate
Synonyms
atha — therefore; aham — I; api — also; ātma-ripoḥ — who are the traditional enemy of the family; tava — of Your good self; antikam — the shelter; daivena — by providence; nītaḥ — brought in; prasabham — by force; tyājita — bereft of; śrīḥ — all opulence; idam — this philosophy of life; kṛta-anta-antika-varti — always given the facility for death; jīvitam — the duration of life; yayā — by such material opulence; adhruvam — as temporary; stabdha-matiḥ — such an unintelligent person; na budhyate — cannot understand.

Translation
Only by providence have I been forcibly brought under Your lotus feet and deprived of all my opulence. Because of the illusion created by temporary opulence, people in general, who live under material conditions, facing accidental death at every moment, do not understand that this life is temporary. Only by providence have I been saved from that condition.

Text 12
श्रीशुक उवाच
तस्येत्थं भाषमाणस्य प्रह्लादो भगवत्प्रिय: ।
आजगाम कुरुश्रेष्ठ राकापतिरिवोत्थित: ॥ १२ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
tasyetthaṁ bhāṣamāṇasya
prahrādo bhagavat-priyaḥ
ājagāma kuru-śreṣṭha
rākā-patir ivotthitaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tasya — Bali Mahārāja; ittham — in this way; bhāṣamāṇasya — while describing his fortunate position; prahrādaḥ — Mahārāja Prahlāda, his grandfather; bhagavat-priyaḥ — the most favored devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ājagāma — appeared there; kuru-śreṣṭha — O best of the Kurus, Mahārāja Parīkṣit; rākā-patiḥ — the moon; iva — like; utthitaḥ — having risen.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O best of the Kurus, while Bali Mahārāja was describing his fortunate position in this way, the most dear devotee of the Lord, Prahlāda Mahārāja, appeared there, like the moon rising in the nighttime.

Text 13
तमिन्द्रसेन: स्वपितामहं श्रिया
विराजमानं नलिनायतेक्षणम् ।
प्रांशुं पिशङ्गाम्बरमञ्जनत्विषं
प्रलम्बबाहुं शुभगर्षभमैक्षत ॥ १३ ॥
tam indra-senaḥ sva-pitāmahaṁ śriyā
virājamānaṁ nalināyatekṣaṇam
prāṁśuṁ piśaṅgāmbaram añjana-tviṣaṁ
pralamba-bāhuṁ śubhagarṣabham aikṣata
Synonyms
tam — that Prahlāda Mahārāja; indra-senaḥ — Bali Mahārāja, who now possessed all the military force of Indra; sva-pitāmaham — unto his grandfather; śriyā — present with all beautiful features; virājamānam — standing there; nalina-āyata-īkṣaṇam — with eyes as broad as the petals of a lotus; prāṁśum — a very beautiful body; piśaṅga-ambaram — dressed in yellow garments; añjana-tviṣam — with his body resembling black ointment for the eyes; pralamba-bāhum — very long arms; śubhaga-ṛṣabham — the best of all auspicious persons; aikṣata — he saw.

Translation
Then Bali Mahārāja saw his grandfather Prahlāda Mahārāja, the most fortunate personality, whose dark body resembled black ointment for the eyes. His tall, elegant figure was dressed in yellow garments, he had long arms, and his beautiful eyes were like the petals of a lotus. He was very dear and pleasing to everyone.

Text 14
तस्मै बलिर्वारुणपाशयन्त्रित:
समर्हणं नोपजहार पूर्ववत् ।
ननाम मूर्ध्नाश्रुविलोललोचन:
सव्रीडनीचीनमुखो बभूव ह ॥ १४ ॥
tasmai balir vāruṇa-pāśa-yantritaḥ
samarhaṇaṁ nopajahāra pūrvavat
nanāma mūrdhnāśru-vilola-locanaḥ
sa-vrīḍa-nīcīna-mukho babhūva ha
Synonyms
tasmai — unto Prahlāda Mahārāja; baliḥ — Bali Mahārāja; vāruṇa-pāśa-yantritaḥ — being bound by the ropes of Varuṇa; samarhaṇam — befitting respect; na — not; upajahāra — offered; pūrva-vat — like before; nanāma — he offered obeisances; mūrdhnā — with the head; aśru-vilola-locanaḥ — eyes inundated with tears; sa-vrīḍa — with shyness; nīcīna — downward; mukhaḥ — face; babhūva ha — he so became.

Translation
Being bound by the ropes of Varuṇa, Bali Mahārāja could not offer befitting respect to Prahlāda Mahārāja as he had before. Rather, he simply offered respectful obeisances with his head, his eyes being inundated with tears and his face lowered in shame.

Text 15
स तत्र हासीनमुदीक्ष्य सत्पतिं
हरिं सुनन्दाद्यनुगैरुपासितम् ।
उपेत्य भूमौ शिरसा महामना
ननाम मूर्ध्ना पुलकाश्रुविक्लव: ॥ १५ ॥
sa tatra hāsīnam udīkṣya sat-patiṁ
hariṁ sunandādy-anugair upāsitam
upetya bhūmau śirasā mahā-manā
nanāma mūrdhnā pulakāśru-viklavaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — Prahlāda Mahārāja; tatra — there; ha āsīnam — seated; udīkṣya — after seeing; sat-patim — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, master of the liberated souls; harim — Lord Hari; sunanda-ādi-anugaiḥ — by His followers, like Sunanda; upāsitam — being worshiped; upetya — reaching nearby; bhūmau — on the ground; śirasā — with his head (bowed down); mahā-manāḥ — the great devotee; nanāma — offered obeisances; mūrdhnā — with his head; pulaka-aśru-viklavaḥ — agitated by tears of jubilation.

Translation
When the great personality Prahlāda Mahārāja saw that the Supreme Lord was sitting there, surrounded and worshiped by His intimate associates like Sunanda, he was overwhelmed with tears of jubilation. Approaching the Lord and falling to the ground, he offered obeisances to the Lord with his head.

Text 16
श्रीप्रह्लाद उवाच
त्वयैव दत्तं पदमैन्द्रमूर्जितं
हृतं तदेवाद्य तथैव शोभनम् ।
मन्ये महानस्य कृतो ह्यनुग्रहो
विभ्रंशितो यच्छ्रिय आत्ममोहनात् ॥ १६ ॥
śrī-prahrāda uvāca
tvayaiva dattaṁ padam aindram ūrjitaṁ
hṛtaṁ tad evādya tathaiva śobhanam
manye mahān asya kṛto hy anugraho
vibhraṁśito yac chriya ātma-mohanāt
Synonyms
śrī-prahrādaḥ uvāca — Prahlāda Mahārāja said; tvayā — by Your Lordship; eva — indeed; dattam — which had been given; padam — this position; aindram — of the King of heaven; ūrjitam — very, very great; hṛtam — has been taken away; tat — that; eva — indeed; adya — today; tathā — as; eva — indeed; śobhanam — beautiful; manye — I consider; mahān — very great; asya — of him (Bali Mahārāja); kṛtaḥ — has been done by You; hi — indeed; anugrahaḥ — mercy; vibhraṁśitaḥ — being bereft of; yat — because; śriyaḥ — from that opulence; ātma-mohanāt — which was covering the process of self-realization.

Translation
Prahlāda Mahārāja said: My Lord, it is Your Lordship who gave this Bali the very great opulence of the post of heavenly king, and now, today, it is You who have taken it all away. I think You have acted with equal beauty in both ways. Because his exalted position as King of heaven was putting him in the darkness of ignorance, You have done him a very merciful favor by taking away all his opulence.

Text 17
यया हि विद्वानपि मुह्यते यत-
स्तत् को विचष्टे गतिमात्मनो यथा ।
तस्मै नमस्ते जगदीश्वराय वै
नारायणायाखिललोकसाक्षिणे ॥ १७ ॥
yayā hi vidvān api muhyate yatas
tat ko vicaṣṭe gatim ātmano yathā
tasmai namas te jagad-īśvarāya vai
nārāyaṇāyākhila-loka-sākṣiṇe
Synonyms
yayā — by which material opulence; hi — indeed; vidvān api — even a person fortunately advanced in education; muhyate — becomes bewildered; yataḥ — self-controlled; tat — that; kaḥ — who; vicaṣṭe — can search for; gatim — the progress; ātmanaḥ — of the self; yathā — properly; tasmai — unto Him; namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances; te — unto You; jagat-īśvarāya — unto the Lord of the universe; vai — indeed; nārāyaṇāya — unto His Lordship Nārāyaṇa; akhila-loka-sākṣiṇe — who are the witness of all creation.

Translation
Material opulence is so bewildering that it makes even a learned, self-controlled man forget to search for the goal of self-realization. But the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of the universe, can see everything by His will. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto Him.

Text 18
श्रीशुक उवाच
तस्यानुश‍ृण्वतो राजन् प्रह्लादस्य कृताञ्जले: ।
हिरण्यगर्भो भगवानुवाच मधुसूदनम् ॥ १८ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
tasyānuśṛṇvato rājan
prahrādasya kṛtāñjaleḥ
hiraṇyagarbho bhagavān
uvāca madhusūdanam
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tasya — of Prahlāda Mahārāja; anuśṛṇvataḥ — so that he could hear; rājan — O King Parīkṣit; prahrādasya — of Prahlāda Mahārāja; kṛta-añjaleḥ — who was standing with folded hands; hiraṇyagarbhaḥ — Lord Brahmā; bhagavān — the most powerful; uvāca — said; madhusūdanam — unto Madhusūdana, the Personality of Godhead.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O King Parīkṣit, Lord Brahmā then began to speak to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, within the hearing of Prahlāda Mahārāja, who stood nearby with folded hands.

Text 19
बद्धं वीक्ष्य पतिं साध्वी तत्पत्नी भयविह्वला ।
प्राञ्जलि: प्रणतोपेन्द्रं बभाषेऽवाङ्‌मुखी नृप ॥ १९ ॥
baddhaṁ vīkṣya patiṁ sādhvī
tat-patnī bhaya-vihvalā
prāñjaliḥ praṇatopendraṁ
babhāṣe ’vāṅ-mukhī nṛpa
Synonyms
baddham — arrested; vīkṣya — seeing; patim — her husband; sādhvī — the chaste woman; tat-patnī — Bali Mahārāja’s wife; bhaya-vihvalā — being very disturbed by fear; prāñjaliḥ — with folded hands; praṇatā — having offered obeisances; upendram — unto Vāmanadeva; babhāṣe — addressed; avāk-mukhī — with face downward; nṛpa — O Mahārāja Parīkṣit.

Translation
But Bali Mahārāja’s chaste wife, afraid and aggrieved at seeing her husband arrested, immediately offered obeisances to Lord Vāmanadeva [Upendra]. She folded her hands and spoke as follows.

Text 20
श्रीविन्ध्यावलिरुवाच
क्रीडार्थमात्मन इदं त्रिजगत् कृतं ते
स्वाम्यं तु तत्र कुधियोऽपर ईश कुर्यु: ।
कर्तु: प्रभोस्तव किमस्यत आवहन्ति
त्यक्तह्रियस्त्वदवरोपितकर्तृवादा: ॥ २० ॥
śrī-vindhyāvalir uvāca
krīḍārtham ātmana idaṁ tri-jagat kṛtaṁ te
svāmyaṁ tu tatra kudhiyo ’para īśa kuryuḥ
kartuḥ prabhos tava kim asyata āvahanti
tyakta-hriyas tvad-avaropita-kartṛ-vādāḥ
Synonyms
śrī-vindhyāvaliḥ uvāca — Vindhyāvali, the wife of Bali Mahārāja, said; krīḍā-artham — for the sake of pastimes; ātmanaḥ — of Yourself; idam — this; tri-jagat — the three worlds (this universe); kṛtam — was created; te — by You; svāmyam — proprietorship; tu — but; tatra — thereon; kudhiyaḥ — foolish rascals; apare — others; īśa — O my Lord; kuryuḥ — have established; kartuḥ — for the supreme creator; prabhoḥ — for the supreme maintainer; tava — for Your good self; kim — what; asyataḥ — for the supreme annihilator; āvahanti — they can offer; tyakta-hriyaḥ — shameless, without intelligence; tvat — by You; avaropita — falsely imposed because of a poor fund of knowledge; kartṛ-vādāḥ — the proprietorship of such foolish agnostics.

Translation
Śrīmatī Vindhyāvali said: O my Lord, You have created the entire universe for the enjoyment of Your personal pastimes, but foolish, unintelligent men have claimed proprietorship for material enjoyment. Certainly they are shameless agnostics. Falsely claiming proprietorship, they think they can give charity and enjoy. In such a condition, what good can they do for You, who are the independent creator, maintainer and annihilator of this universe?

Text 21
श्रीब्रह्मोवाच
भूतभावन भूतेश देवदेव जगन्मय ।
मुञ्चैनं हृतसर्वस्वं नायमर्हति निग्रहम् ॥ २१ ॥
śrī-brahmovāca
bhūta-bhāvana bhūteśa
deva-deva jaganmaya
muñcainaṁ hṛta-sarvasvaṁ
nāyam arhati nigraham
Synonyms
śrī-brahmā uvāca — Lord Brahmā said; bhūta-bhāvana — O Supreme Being, well-wisher of everyone, who can cause one to flourish; bhūta-īśa — O master of everyone; deva-deva — O worshipable Deity of the demigods; jagat-maya — O all-pervading one; muñca — please release; enam — this poor Bali Mahārāja; hṛta-sarvasvam — now bereft of everything; na — not; ayam — such a poor man; arhati — deserves; nigraham — punishment.

Translation
Lord Brahmā said: O well-wisher and master of all living entities, O worshipable Deity of all the demigods, O all-pervading Personality of Godhead, now this man has been sufficiently punished, for You have taken everything. Now You can release him. He does not deserve to be punished more.

Text 22
कृत्‍स्‍ना तेऽनेन दत्ता भूर्लोका: कर्मार्जिताश्च ये ।
निवेदितं च सर्वस्वमात्माविक्लवया धिया ॥ २२ ॥
kṛtsnā te ’nena dattā bhūr
lokāḥ karmārjitāś ca ye
niveditaṁ ca sarvasvam
ātmāviklavayā dhiyā
Synonyms
kṛtsnāḥ — all; te — unto You; anena — by Bali Mahārāja; dattāḥ — have been given or returned; bhūḥ lokāḥ — all land and all planets; karma-arjitāḥ ca — whatever he achieved by his pious activities; ye — all of which; niveditam ca — have been offered to You; sarvasvam — everything he possessed; ātmā — even his body; aviklavayā — without hesitation; dhiyā — by such intelligence.

Translation
Bali Mahārāja had already offered everything to Your Lordship. Without hesitation, he has offered his land, the planets and whatever else he earned by his pious activities, including even his own body.

Text 23
यत्पादयोरशठधी: सलिलं प्रदाय
दूर्वाङ्कुरैरपि विधाय सतीं सपर्याम् ।
अप्युत्तमां गतिमसौ भजते त्रिलोकीं
दाश्वानविक्लवमना: कथमार्तिमृच्छेत् ॥ २३ ॥
yat-pādayor aśaṭha-dhīḥ salilaṁ pradāya
dūrvāṅkurair api vidhāya satīṁ saparyām
apy uttamāṁ gatim asau bhajate tri-lokīṁ
dāśvān aviklava-manāḥ katham ārtim ṛcchet
Synonyms
yat-pādayoḥ — at the lotus feet of Your Lordship; aśaṭha-dhīḥ — a great-minded person who is without duplicity; salilam — water; pradāya — offering; dūrvā — with fully grown grass; aṅkuraiḥ — and with buds of flowers; api — although; vidhāya — offering; satīm — most exalted; saparyām — with worship; api — although; uttamām — the most highly elevated; gatim — destination; asau — such a worshiper; bhajate — deserves; tri-lokīm — the three worlds; dāśvān — giving to You; aviklava-manāḥ — without mental duplicity; katham — how; ārtim — the distressed condition of being arrested; ṛcchet — he deserves.

Translation
By offering even water, newly grown grass, or flower buds at Your lotus feet, those who maintain no mental duplicity can achieve the most exalted position within the spiritual world. This Bali Mahārāja, without duplicity, has now offered everything in the three worlds. How then can he deserve to suffer from arrest?

Text 24
श्रीभगवानुवाच
ब्रह्मन् यमनुगृह्णामि तद्विशो विधुनोम्यहम् ।
यन्मद: पुरुष: स्तब्धो लोकं मां चावमन्यते ॥ २४ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
brahman yam anugṛhṇāmi
tad-viśo vidhunomy aham
yan-madaḥ puruṣaḥ stabdho
lokaṁ māṁ cāvamanyate
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; brahman — O Lord Brahmā; yam — unto anyone to whom; anugṛhṇāmi — I show My mercy; tat — his; viśaḥ — material opulence or riches; vidhunomi — take away; aham — I; yat-madaḥ — having false prestige due to this money; puruṣaḥ — such a person; stabdhaḥ — being dull-minded; lokam — the three worlds; mām ca — unto Me also; avamanyate — derides.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Lord Brahmā, because of material opulence a foolish person becomes dull-witted and mad. Thus he has no respect for anyone within the three worlds and defies even My authority. To such a person I show special favor by first taking away all his possessions.

Text 25
यदा कदाचिज्जीवात्मा संसरन् निजकर्मभि: ।
नानायोनिष्वनीशोऽयं पौरुषीं गतिमाव्रजेत् ॥ २५ ॥
yadā kadācij jīvātmā
saṁsaran nija-karmabhiḥ
nānā-yoniṣv anīśo ’yaṁ
pauruṣīṁ gatim āvrajet
Synonyms
yadā — when; kadācit — sometimes; jīva-ātmā — the living entity; saṁsaran — rotating in the cycle of birth and death; nija-karmabhiḥ — because of his own fruitive activities; nānā-yoniṣu — in different species of life; anīśaḥ — not independent (completely under the control of material nature); ayam — this living entity; pauruṣīm gatim — the situation of being human; āvrajet — wants to obtain.

Translation
While rotating in the cycle of birth and death again and again in different species because of his own fruitive activities, the dependent living entity, by good fortune, may happen to become a human being. This human birth is very rarely obtained.

Text 26
जन्मकर्मवयोरूपविद्यैश्वर्यधनादिभि: ।
यद्यस्य न भवेत् स्तम्भस्तत्रायं मदनुग्रह: ॥ २६ ॥
janma-karma-vayo-rūpa-
vidyaiśvarya-dhanādibhiḥ
yady asya na bhavet stambhas
tatrāyaṁ mad-anugrahaḥ
Synonyms
janma — by birth in an aristocratic family; karma — by wonderful activities, pious activities; vayaḥ — by age, especially youth, when one is capable of doing many things; rūpa — by personal beauty, which attracts everyone; vidyā — by education; aiśvarya — by opulence; dhana — by wealth; ādibhiḥ — by other opulences also; yadi — if; asya — of the possessor; na — not; bhavet — there is; stambhaḥ — pride; tatra — in such a condition; ayam — a person; mat-anugrahaḥ — should be considered to have received My special mercy.

Translation
If a human being is born in an aristocratic family or a higher status of life, if he performs wonderful activities, if he is youthful, if he has personal beauty, a good education and good wealth, and if he is nonetheless not proud of his opulences, it is to be understood that he is especially favored by the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 27
मानस्तम्भनिमित्तानां जन्मादीनां समन्तत: ।
सर्वश्रेय:प्रतीपानां हन्त मुह्येन्न मत्पर: ॥ २७ ॥
māna-stambha-nimittānāṁ
janmādīnāṁ samantataḥ
sarva-śreyaḥ-pratīpānāṁ
hanta muhyen na mat-paraḥ
Synonyms
māna — of false prestige; stambha — because of this impudence; nimittānām — which are the causes; janma-ādīnām — such as birth in a high family; samantataḥ — taken together; sarva-śreyaḥ — for the supreme benefit of life; pratīpānām — which are impediments; hanta — also; muhyet — becomes bewildered; na — not; mat-paraḥ — My pure devotee.

Translation
Although aristocratic birth and other such opulences are impediments to advancement in devotional service because they are causes of false prestige and pride, these opulences never disturb a pure devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 28
एष दानवदैत्यानामग्रणी: कीर्तिवर्धन: ।
अजैषीदजयां मायां सीदन्नपि न मुह्यति ॥ २८ ॥
eṣa dānava-daityānām
agranīḥ kīrti-vardhanaḥ
ajaiṣīd ajayāṁ māyāṁ
sīdann api na muhyati
Synonyms
eṣaḥ — this Bali Mahārāja; dānava-daityānām — among the demons and unbelievers; agranīḥ — the foremost devotee; kīrti-vardhanaḥ — the most famous; ajaiṣīt — has already surpassed; ajayām — the insurmountable; māyām — material energy; sīdan — being bereft (of all material opulences); api — although; na — not; muhyati — is bewildered.

Translation
Bali Mahārāja has become the most famous among the demons and nonbelievers, for in spite of being bereft of all material opulences, he is fixed in his devotional service.

Texts 29-30
क्षीणरिक्थश्‍च्युत: स्थानात् क्षिप्तो बद्धश्च शत्रुभि: ।
ज्ञातिभिश्च परित्यक्तो यातनामनुयापित: ॥ २९ ॥
गुरुणा भर्त्सित: शप्तो जहौ सत्यं न सुव्रत: ।
छलैरुक्तो मया धर्मो नायं त्यजति सत्यवाक् ॥ ३० ॥
kṣīṇa-rikthaś cyutaḥ sthānāt
kṣipto baddhaś ca śatrubhiḥ
jñātibhiś ca parityakto
yātanām anuyāpitaḥ
guruṇā bhartsitaḥ śapto
jahau satyaṁ na suvrataḥ
chalair ukto mayā dharmo
nāyaṁ tyajati satya-vāk
Synonyms
kṣīṇa-rikthaḥ — although bereft of all riches; cyutaḥ — fallen; sthānāt — from his superior position; kṣiptaḥ — forcefully thrown away; baddhaḥ ca — and forcefully bound; śatrubhiḥ — by his enemies; jñātibhiḥ ca — and by his family members or relatives; parityaktaḥ — deserted; yātanām — all kinds of suffering; anuyāpitaḥ — unusually severely suffered; guruṇā — by his spiritual master; bhartsitaḥ — rebuked; śaptaḥ — and cursed; jahau — gave up; satyam — truthfulness; na — not; su-vrataḥ — being fixed in his vow; chalaiḥ — pretentiously; uktaḥ — spoken; mayā — by Me; dharmaḥ — the religious principles; na — not; ayam — this Bali Mahārāja; tyajati — does give up; satya-vāk — being true to his word.

Translation
Although bereft of his riches, fallen from his original position, defeated and arrested by his enemies, rebuked and deserted by his relatives and friends, although suffering the pain of being bound and although rebuked and cursed by his spiritual master, Bali Mahārāja, being fixed in his vow, did not give up his truthfulness. It was certainly with pretension that I spoke about religious principles, but he did not give up religious principles, for he is true to his word.

Text 31
एष मे प्रापित: स्थानं दुष्प्रापममरैरपि ।
सावर्णेरन्तरस्यायं भवितेन्द्रो मदाश्रय: ॥ ३१ ॥
eṣa me prāpitaḥ sthānaṁ
duṣprāpam amarair api
sāvarṇer antarasyāyaṁ
bhavitendro mad-āśrayaḥ
Synonyms
eṣaḥ — Bali Mahārāja; me — by Me; prāpitaḥ — has achieved; sthānam — a place; duṣprāpam — extremely difficult to obtain; amaraiḥ api — even by the demigods; sāvarṇeḥ antarasya — during the period of the Manu known as Sāvarṇi; ayam — this Bali Mahārāja; bhavitā — will become; indraḥ — the lord of the heavenly planet; mat-āśrayaḥ — completely under My protection.

Translation
The Lord continued: Because of his great tolerance, I have given him a place not obtainable even by the demigods. He will become King of the heavenly planets during the period of the Manu known as Sāvarṇi.

Text 32
तावत् सुतलमध्यास्तां विश्वकर्मविनिर्मितम् ।
यदाधयो व्याधयश्च क्लमस्तन्द्रा पराभव: ।
नोपसर्गा निवसतां सम्भवन्ति ममेक्षया ॥ ३२ ॥
tāvat sutalam adhyāstāṁ
viśvakarma-vinirmitam
yad ādhayo vyādhayaś ca
klamas tandrā parābhavaḥ
nopasargā nivasatāṁ
sambhavanti mamekṣayā
Synonyms
tāvat — as long as you are not in the post of Lord Indra; sutalam — in the planet known as Sutala; adhyāstām — go live there and occupy the place; viśvakarma-vinirmitam — which is especially created by Viśvakarmā; yat — wherein; ādhayaḥ — miseries pertaining to the mind; vyādhayaḥ — miseries pertaining to the body; ca — also; klamaḥ — fatigue; tandrā — dizziness or laziness; parābhavaḥ — becoming defeated; na — not; upasargāḥ — symptoms of other disturbances; nivasatām — of those who live there; sambhavanti — become possible; mama — of Me; īkṣayā — by the special vigilance.

Translation
Until Bali Mahārāja achieves the position of King of heaven, he shall live on the planet Sutala, which was made by Viśvakarmā according to My order. Because it is especially protected by Me, it is free from mental and bodily miseries, fatigue, dizziness, defeat and all other disturbances. Bali Mahārāja, you may now go live there peacefully.

Text 33
इन्द्रसेन महाराज याहि भो भद्रमस्तु ते ।
सुतलं स्वर्गिभि: प्रार्थ्यं ज्ञातिभि: परिवारित: ॥ ३३ ॥
indrasena mahārāja
yāhi bho bhadram astu te
sutalaṁ svargibhiḥ prārthyaṁ
jñātibhiḥ parivāritaḥ
Synonyms
indrasena — O Mahārāja Bali; mahārāja — O King; yāhi — better go; bhoḥ — O King; bhadram — all auspiciousness; astu — let there be; te — unto you; sutalam — in the planet known as Sutala; svargibhiḥ — by the demigods; prārthyam — desirable; jñātibhiḥ — by your family members; parivāritaḥ — surrounded.

Translation
O Bali Mahārāja [Indrasena], now you may go to the planet Sutala, which is desired even by the demigods. Live there peacefully, surrounded by your friends and relatives. All good fortune unto you.

Text 34
न त्वामभिभविष्यन्ति लोकेशा: किमुतापरे ।
त्वच्छासनातिगान् दैत्यांश्चक्रं मे सूदयिष्यति ॥ ३४ ॥
na tvām abhibhaviṣyanti
lokeśāḥ kim utāpare
tvac-chāsanātigān daityāṁś
cakraṁ me sūdayiṣyati
Synonyms
na — not; tvām — unto you; abhibhaviṣyanti — will be able to conquer; loka-īśāḥ — the predominating deities of the various planets; kim uta apare — what to speak of ordinary people; tvat-śāsana-atigān — who transgress your rulings; daityān — such demons; cakram — disc; me — My; sūdayiṣyati — will kill.

Translation
On the planet Sutala, not even the predominating deities of other planets, what to speak of ordinary people, will be able to conquer you. As far as the demons are concerned, if they transgress your rule, My disc will kill them.

Text 35
रक्षिष्ये सर्वतोऽहं त्वां सानुगं सपरिच्छदम् ।
सदा सन्निहितं वीर तत्र मां द्रक्ष्यते भवान् ॥ ३५ ॥
rakṣiṣye sarvato ’haṁ tvāṁ
sānugaṁ saparicchadam
sadā sannihitaṁ vīra
tatra māṁ drakṣyate bhavān
Synonyms
rakṣiṣye — shall protect; sarvataḥ — in all respects; aham — I; tvām — you; sa-anugam — with your associates; sa-paricchadam — with your paraphernalia; sadā — always; sannihitam — situated nearby; vīra — O great hero; tatra — there, in your place; mām — Me; drakṣyate — will be able to see; bhavān — you.

Translation
O great hero, I shall always be with you and give you protection in all respects along with your associates and paraphernalia. Moreover, you will always be able to see Me there.

Text 36
तत्र दानवदैत्यानां सङ्गात्ते भाव आसुर: ।
द‍ृष्ट्वा मदनुभावं वै सद्य: कुण्ठो विनङ्‌क्ष्यति ॥ ३६ ॥
tatra dānava-daityānāṁ
saṅgāt te bhāva āsuraḥ
dṛṣṭvā mad-anubhāvaṁ vai
sadyaḥ kuṇṭho vinaṅkṣyati
Synonyms
tatra — in that place; dānava-daityānām — of the demons and the Dānavas; saṅgāt — because of the association; te — your; bhāvaḥ — mentality; āsuraḥ — demoniac; dṛṣṭvā — by observing; mat-anubhāvam — My superexcellent power; vai — indeed; sadyaḥ — immediately; kuṇṭhaḥ — anxiety; vinaṅkṣyati — will be destroyed.

Translation
Because there you will see My supreme prowess, your materialistic ideas and anxieties that have arisen from your association with the demons and Dānavas will immediately be vanquished.