Text 1
श्रीराजोवाच
भगवञ्छ्रोतुमिच्छामि हरेरद्भ‍ुतकर्मण: ।
अवतारकथामाद्यां मायामत्स्यविडम्बनम् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-rājovāca
bhagavañ chrotum icchāmi
harer adbhuta-karmaṇaḥ
avatāra-kathām ādyāṁ
māyā-matsya-viḍambanam
Synonyms
śrī-rājā uvāca — King Parīkṣit said; bhagavan — O most powerful; śrotum — to hear; icchāmi — I desire; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari; adbhuta-karmaṇaḥ — whose activities are wonderful; avatāra-kathām — pastimes of the incarnation; ādyām — first; māyā-matsya-viḍambanam — which is simply an imitation of a fish.

Translation
Mahārāja Parīkṣit said: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, is eternally situated in His transcendental position, yet He descends to this material world and manifests Himself in various incarnations. His first incarnation was that of a great fish. O most powerful Śukadeva Gosvāmī, I wish to hear from you the pastimes of that fish incarnation.

Texts 2-3
यदर्थमदधाद् रूपं मात्स्यं लोकजुगुप्सितम् ।
तम:प्रकृति दुर्मर्षं कर्मग्रस्त इवेश्वर: ॥ २ ॥
एतन्नो भगवन् सर्वं यथावद् वक्तुमर्हसि ।
उत्तमश्लोकचरितं सर्वलोकसुखावहम् ॥ ३ ॥
yad-artham adadhād rūpaṁ
mātsyaṁ loka-jugupsitam
tamaḥ-prakṛti-durmarṣaṁ
karma-grasta iveśvaraḥ
etan no bhagavan sarvaṁ
yathāvad vaktum arhasi
uttamaśloka-caritaṁ
sarva-loka-sukhāvaham
Synonyms
yat-artham — for what purpose; adadhāt — accepted; rūpam — form; mātsyam — of a fish; loka-jugupsitam — which is certainly not very favorable in this world; tamaḥ — in the mode of ignorance; prakṛti — such behavior; durmarṣam — which is certainly very painful and condemned; karma-grastaḥ — one who is under the laws of karma; iva — like; īśvaraḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; etat — all these facts; naḥ — unto us; bhagavan — O most powerful sage; sarvam — everything; yathāvat — properly; vaktum arhasi — kindly describe; uttamaśloka-caritam — the pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarva-loka-sukha-āvaham — by hearing of which everyone becomes happy.

Translation
What was the purpose for which the Supreme Personality of Godhead accepted the abominable form of a fish, exactly as an ordinary living being accepts different forms under the laws of karma? The form of a fish is certainly condemned and full of terrible pain. O my lord, what was the purpose of this incarnation? Kindly explain this to us, for hearing about the pastimes of the Lord is auspicious for everyone.

Text 4
श्रीसूत उवाच
इत्युक्तो विष्णुरातेन भगवान् बादरायणि: ।
उवाच चरितं विष्णोर्मत्स्यरूपेण यत् कृतम् ॥ ४ ॥
śrī-sūta uvāca
ity ukto viṣṇu-rātena
bhagavān bādarāyaṇiḥ
uvāca caritaṁ viṣṇor
matsya-rūpeṇa yat kṛtam
Synonyms
śrī-sūtaḥ uvāca — Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said; iti uktaḥ — thus being questioned; viṣṇu-rātena — by Mahārāja Parīkṣit, known as Viṣṇurāta; bhagavān — the most powerful; bādarāyaṇiḥ — the son of Vyāsadeva, Śukadeva Gosvāmī; uvāca — said; caritam — the pastimes; viṣṇoḥ — of Lord Viṣṇu; matsya-rūpeṇa — by Him in the form of a fish; yat — whatever; kṛtam — was done.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī said: When Parīkṣit Mahārāja thus inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī, that most powerful saintly person began describing the pastimes of the Lord’s incarnation as a fish.

Text 5
श्रीशुक उवाच
गोविप्रसुरसाधूनां छन्दसामपि चेश्वर: ।
रक्षामिच्छंस्तनूर्धत्ते धर्मस्यार्थस्य चैव हि ॥ ५ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
go-vipra-sura-sādhūnāṁ
chandasām api ceśvaraḥ
rakṣām icchaṁs tanūr dhatte
dharmasyārthasya caiva hi
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; go — of the cows; vipra — of the brāhmaṇas; sura — of the demigods; sādhūnām — and of the devotees; chandasām api — even of the Vedic literature; ca — and; īśvaraḥ — the supreme controller; rakṣām — the protection; icchan — desiring; tanūḥ dhatte — accepts the forms of incarnations; dharmasya — of the principles of religion; arthasya — of the principles of the purpose of life; ca — and; eva — indeed; hi — certainly.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, for the sake of protecting the cows, brāhmaṇas, demigods, devotees, the Vedic literature, religious principles, and principles to fulfill the purpose of life, the Supreme Personality of Godhead accepts the forms of incarnations.

Text 6
उच्चावचेषु भूतेषु चरन् वायुरिवेश्वर: ।
नोच्चावचत्वं भजते निर्गुणत्वाद्धियो गुणै: ॥ ६ ॥
uccāvaceṣu bhūteṣu
caran vāyur iveśvaraḥ
noccāvacatvaṁ bhajate
nirguṇatvād dhiyo guṇaiḥ
Synonyms
ucca-avaceṣu — having higher or lower bodily forms; bhūteṣu — among the living entities; caran — behaving; vāyuḥ iva — exactly like the air; īśvaraḥ — the Supreme Lord; na — not; ucca-avacatvam — the quality of higher or lower grades of life; bhajate — accepts; nirguṇatvāt — because of being transcendental, above all material qualities; dhiyaḥ — generally; guṇaiḥ — by the modes of material nature.

Translation
Like the air passing through different types of atmosphere, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, although appearing sometimes as a human being and sometimes as a lower animal, is always transcendental. Because He is above the material modes of nature, He is unaffected by higher and lower forms.

Text 7
आसीदतीतकल्पान्ते ब्राह्मो नैमित्तिको लय: ।
समुद्रोपप्लुतास्तत्र लोका भूरादयो नृप ॥ ७ ॥
āsīd atīta-kalpānte
brāhmo naimittiko layaḥ
samudropaplutās tatra
lokā bhūr-ādayo nṛpa
Synonyms
āsīt — there was; atīta — past; kalpa-ante — at the end of the kalpa; brāhmaḥ — of Lord Brahmā’s day; naimittikaḥ — because of that; layaḥ — inundation; samudra — in the ocean; upaplutāḥ — were inundated; tatra — there; lokāḥ — all the planets; bhūḥ-ādayaḥ — Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ and Svaḥ, the three lokas; nṛpa — O King.

Translation
O King Parīkṣit, at the end of the past millennium, at the end of Brahmā’s day, because Lord Brahmā sleeps during the night, annihilation took place, and the three worlds were covered by the water of the ocean.

Text 8
कालेनागतनिद्रस्य धातु: शिशयिषोर्बली ।
मुखतो नि:सृतान् वेदान् हयग्रीवोऽन्तिकेऽहरत् ॥ ८ ॥
kālenāgata-nidrasya
dhātuḥ śiśayiṣor balī
mukhato niḥsṛtān vedān
hayagrīvo ’ntike ’harat
Synonyms
kālena — because of time (the end of Brahmā’s day); āgata-nidrasya — when he felt sleepy; dhātuḥ — of Brahmā; śiśayiṣoḥ — desiring to lie down to sleep; balī — very powerful; mukhataḥ — from the mouth; niḥsṛtān — emanating; vedān — the Vedic knowledge; hayagrīvaḥ — the great demon named Hayagrīva; antike — nearby; aharat — stole.

Translation
At the end of Brahmā’s day, when Brahmā felt sleepy and desired to lie down, the Vedas were emanating from his mouth, and the great demon named Hayagrīva stole the Vedic knowledge.

Text 9
ज्ञात्वा तद् दानवेन्द्रस्य हयग्रीवस्य चेष्टितम् ।
दधार शफरीरूपं भगवान् हरिरीश्वर: ॥ ९ ॥
jñātvā tad dānavendrasya
hayagrīvasya ceṣṭitam
dadhāra śapharī-rūpaṁ
bhagavān harir īśvaraḥ
Synonyms
jñātvā — after understanding; tat — that; dānava-indrasya — of the great demon; hayagrīvasya — of Hayagrīva; ceṣṭitam — activity; dadhāra — accepted; śapharī-rūpam — the form of a fish; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hariḥ — the Lord; īśvaraḥ — the supreme controller.

Translation
Understanding the acts of the great demon Hayagrīva, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, who is full of all opulences, assumed the form of a fish and saved the Vedas by killing the demon.

Text 10
तत्र राजऋषि: कश्चिन्नाम्ना सत्यव्रतो महान् ।
नारायणपरोऽतपत् तप: स सलिलाशन: ॥ १० ॥
tatra rāja-ṛṣiḥ kaścin
nāmnā satyavrato mahān
nārāyaṇa-paro ’tapat
tapaḥ sa salilāśanaḥ
Synonyms
tatra — in that connection; rāja-ṛṣiḥ — a king equally qualified as a great saintly person; kaścit — someone; nāmnā — by the name; satyavrataḥ — Satyavrata; mahān — a great personality; nārāyaṇa-paraḥ — a great devotee of Lord Nārāyaṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; atapat — performed austerities; tapaḥ — penances; saḥ — he; salila-āśanaḥ — only drinking water.

Translation
During the Cākṣuṣa-manvantara there was a great king named Satyavrata who was a great devotee of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Satyavrata performed austerities by subsisting only on water.

Text 11
योऽसावस्मिन् महाकल्पे तनय: स विवस्वत: ।
श्राद्धदेव इति ख्यातो मनुत्वे हरिणार्पित: ॥ ११ ॥
yo ’sāv asmin mahā-kalpe
tanayaḥ sa vivasvataḥ
śrāddhadeva iti khyāto
manutve hariṇārpitaḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — one who; asau — he (King Satyavrata); asmin — in this; mahā-kalpe — great millennium; tanayaḥ — son; saḥ — he; vivasvataḥ — of the sun-god; śrāddhadevaḥ — by the name Śrāddhadeva; iti — thus; khyātaḥ — celebrated; manutve — in the position of Manu; hariṇā — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; arpitaḥ — was situated.

Translation
In this [the present] millennium King Satyavrata later became the son of Vivasvān, the king of the sun planet, and was known as Śrāddhadeva. By the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he was given the post of Manu.

Text 12
एकदा कृतमालायां कुर्वतो जलतर्पणम् ।
तस्याञ्जल्युदके काचिच्छफर्येकाभ्यपद्यत ॥ १२ ॥
ekadā kṛtamālāyāṁ
kurvato jala-tarpaṇam
tasyāñjaly-udake kācic
chaphary ekābhyapadyata
Synonyms
ekadā — one day; kṛtamālāyām — on the bank of the Kṛtamālā River; kurvataḥ — executing; jala-tarpaṇam — the offering of oblations of water; tasya — his; añjali — palmful; udake — in the water; kācit — some; śapharī — a small fish; ekā — one; abhyapadyata — was generated.

Translation
One day while King Satyavrata was performing austerities by offering water on the bank of the river Kṛtamālā, a small fish appeared in the water in his palms.

Text 13
सत्यव्रतोऽञ्जलिगतां सह तोयेन भारत ।
उत्ससर्ज नदीतोये शफरीं द्रविडेश्वर: ॥ १३ ॥
satyavrato ’ñjali-gatāṁ
saha toyena bhārata
utsasarja nadī-toye
śapharīṁ draviḍeśvaraḥ
Synonyms
satyavrataḥ — King Satyavrata; añjali-gatām — in the water held in the palms of the King; saha — with; toyena — water; bhārata — O King Parīkṣit; utsasarja — threw; nadī-toye — in the water of the river; śapharīm — that small fish; draviḍa-īśvaraḥ — Satyavrata, the King of Draviḍa.

Translation
Satyavrata, the King of Draviḍadeśa, threw the fish into the water of the river along with the water in his palm, O King Parīkṣit, descendant of Bharata.

Text 14
तमाह सातिकरुणं महाकारुणिकं नृपम् ।
यादोभ्यो ज्ञातिघातिभ्यो दीनां मां दीनवत्सल ।
कथं विसृजसे राजन् भीतामस्मिन् सरिज्जले ॥ १४ ॥
tam āha sātikaruṇaṁ
mahā-kāruṇikaṁ nṛpam
yādobhyo jñāti-ghātibhyo
dīnāṁ māṁ dīna-vatsala
kathaṁ visṛjase rājan
bhītām asmin sarij-jale
Synonyms
tam — unto him (Satyavrata); āha — said; sā — that small fish; ati-karuṇam — extremely compassionate; mahā-kāruṇikam — extremely merciful; nṛpam — unto King Satyavrata; yādobhyaḥ — to the aquatics; jñāti-ghātibhyaḥ — who are always eager to kill the smaller fish; dīnām — very poor; mām — me; dīna-vatsala — O protector of the poor; katham — why; visṛjase — you are throwing; rājan — O King; bhītām — very much afraid; asmin — within this; sarit-jale — in the water of the river.

Translation
With an appealing voice, the poor small fish said to King Satyavrata, who was very merciful: My dear King, protector of the poor, why are you throwing Me in the water of the river, where there are other aquatics who can kill Me? I am very much afraid of them.

Text 15
तमात्मनोऽनुग्रहार्थं प्रीत्या मत्स्यवपुर्धरम् ।
अजानन् रक्षणार्थाय शफर्या: स मनो दधे ॥ १५ ॥
tam ātmano ’nugrahārthaṁ
prītyā matsya-vapur-dharam
ajānan rakṣaṇārthāya
śapharyāḥ sa mano dadhe
Synonyms
tam — unto the fish; ātmanaḥ — personal; anugraha-artham — to show favor; prītyā — very much pleased; matsya-vapuḥ-dharam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who had assumed the form of a fish; ajānan — without knowledge of this; rakṣaṇa-arthāya — just to give protection; śapharyāḥ — of the fish; saḥ — the King; manaḥ — mind; dadhe — decided.

Translation
To please himself, King Satyavrata, not knowing that the fish was the Supreme Personality of Godhead, decided with great pleasure to give the fish protection.

Text 16
तस्या दीनतरं वाक्यमाश्रुत्य स महीपति: ।
कलशाप्सु निधायैनां दयालुर्निन्य आश्रमम् ॥ १६ ॥
tasyā dīnataraṁ vākyam
āśrutya sa mahīpatiḥ
kalaśāpsu nidhāyaināṁ
dayālur ninya āśramam
Synonyms
tasyāḥ — of the fish; dīna-taram — pitiable; vākyam — words; āśrutya — hearing; saḥ — that; mahī-patiḥ — the King; kalaśa-apsu — in the water contained in the water jug; nidhāya — taking; enām — the fish; dayāluḥ — merciful; ninye — brought; āśramam — to his residence.

Translation
The merciful King, being moved by the pitiable words of the fish, placed the fish in a water jug and brought Him to his own residence.

Text 17
सा तु तत्रैकरात्रेण वर्धमाना कमण्डलौ ।
अलब्ध्वात्मावकाशं वा इदमाह महीपतिम् ॥ १७ ॥
sā tu tatraika-rātreṇa
vardhamānā kamaṇḍalau
alabdhvātmāvakāśaṁ vā
idam āha mahīpatim
Synonyms
sā — that fish; tu — but; tatra — therein; eka-rātreṇa — in one night; vardhamānā — expanding; kamaṇḍalau — in the waterpot; alabdhvā — without attaining; ātma-avakāśam — a comfortable position for His body; vā — either; idam — this; āha — said; mahī-patim — unto the King.

Translation
But in one night that fish grew so much that He could not move His body comfortably in the water of the pot. He then spoke to the King as follows.

Text 18
नाहं कमण्डलावस्मिन् कृच्छ्रं वस्तुमिहोत्सहे ।
कल्पयौक: सुविपुलं यत्राहं निवसे सुखम् ॥ १८ ॥
nāhaṁ kamaṇḍalāv asmin
kṛcchraṁ vastum ihotsahe
kalpayaukaḥ suvipulaṁ
yatrāhaṁ nivase sukham
Synonyms
na — not; aham — I; kamaṇḍalau — in this waterpot; asmin — in this; kṛcchram — with great difficulty; vastum — to live; iha — here; utsahe — like; kalpaya — just consider; okaḥ — residential place; su-vipulam — more expanded; yatra — wherein; aham — I; nivase — can live; sukham — in pleasure.

Translation
O My dear King, I do not like living in this waterpot with such great difficulty. Therefore, please find some better reservoir of water where I can live comfortably.

Text 19
स एनां तत आदाय न्यधादौदञ्चनोदके ।
तत्र क्षिप्ता मुहूर्तेन हस्तत्रयमवर्धत ॥ १९ ॥
sa enāṁ tata ādāya
nyadhād audañcanodake
tatra kṣiptā muhūrtena
hasta-trayam avardhata
Synonyms
saḥ — the King; enām — unto the fish; tataḥ — thereafter; ādāya — taking out; nyadhāt — placed; audañcana-udake — in a well of water; tatra — therein; kṣiptā — being thrown; muhūrtena — within a moment; hasta-trayam — three cubits; avardhata — immediately developed.

Translation
Then, taking the fish out of the waterpot, the King threw Him in a large well. But within a moment the fish developed to the length of three cubits.

Text 20
न म एतदलं राजन् सुखं वस्तुमुदञ्चनम् ।
पृथु देहि पदं मह्यं यत् त्वाहं शरणं गता ॥ २० ॥
na ma etad alaṁ rājan
sukhaṁ vastum udañcanam
pṛthu dehi padaṁ mahyaṁ
yat tvāhaṁ śaraṇaṁ gatā
Synonyms
na — not; me — unto Me; etat — this; alam — fit; rājan — O King; sukham — in happiness; vastum — to live; udañcanam — reservoir of water; pṛthu — very great; dehi — give; padam — a place; mahyam — unto Me; yat — which; tvā — unto you; aham — I; śaraṇam — shelter; gatā — have taken.

Translation
The fish then said: My dear King, this reservoir of water is not fit for My happy residence. Please give Me a more extensive pool of water, for I have taken shelter of you.

Text 21
तत आदाय सा राज्ञा क्षिप्ता राजन् सरोवरे ।
तदावृत्यात्मना सोऽयं महामीनोऽन्ववर्धत ॥ २१ ॥
tata ādāya sā rājñā
kṣiptā rājan sarovare
tad āvṛtyātmanā so ’yaṁ
mahā-mīno ’nvavardhata
Synonyms
tataḥ — from there; ādāya — taking away; sā — the fish; rājñā — by the King; kṣiptā — being thrown; rājan — O King (Mahārāja Parīkṣit); sarovare — in a lake; tat — that; āvṛtya — covering; ātmanā — by the body; saḥ — the fish; ayam — this; mahā-mīnaḥ — gigantic fish; anvavardhata — immediately developed.

Translation
O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the King took the fish from the well and threw Him in a lake, but the fish then assumed a gigantic form exceeding the extent of the water.

Text 22
नैतन्मे स्वस्तये राजन्नुदकं सलिलौकस: ।
निधेहि रक्षायोगेन ह्रदे मामविदासिनि ॥ २२ ॥
naitan me svastaye rājann
udakaṁ salilaukasaḥ
nidhehi rakṣā-yogena
hrade mām avidāsini
Synonyms
na — not; etat — this; me — unto Me; svastaye — comfortable; rājan — O King; udakam — water; salila-okasaḥ — because I am a big aquatic; nidhehi — put; rakṣā-yogena — by some means; hrade — in a lake; mām — Me; avidāsini — perpetual.

Translation
The fish then said: O King, I am a large aquatic, and this water is not at all suitable for Me. Now kindly find some way to save Me. It would be better to put Me in the water of a lake that will never reduce.

Text 23
इत्युक्त: सोऽनयन्मत्स्यं तत्र तत्राविदासिनि ।
जलाशयेऽसम्मितं तं समुद्रे प्राक्षिपज्झषम् ॥ २३ ॥
ity uktaḥ so ’nayan matsyaṁ
tatra tatrāvidāsini
jalāśaye ’sammitaṁ taṁ
samudre prākṣipaj jhaṣam
Synonyms
iti uktaḥ — thus being requested; saḥ — the King; anayat — brought; matsyam — the fish; tatra — therein; tatra — therein; avidāsini — where the water never diminishes; jala-āśaye — in the reservoir of water; asammitam — unlimited; tam — unto the fish; samudre — in the ocean; prākṣipat — threw; jhaṣam — the gigantic fish.

Translation
When thus requested, King Satyavrata took the fish to the largest reservoir of water. But when that also proved insufficient, the King at last threw the gigantic fish into the ocean.

Text 24
क्षिप्यमाणस्तमाहेदमिह मां मकरादय: ।
अदन्त्यतिबला वीर मां नेहोत्स्रष्टुमर्हसि ॥ २४ ॥
kṣipyamāṇas tam āhedam
iha māṁ makarādayaḥ
adanty atibalā vīra
māṁ nehotsraṣṭum arhasi
Synonyms
kṣipyamāṇaḥ — being thrown in the ocean; tam — unto the King; āha — the fish said; idam — this; iha — in this place; mām — Me; makara-ādayaḥ — dangerous aquatics like sharks; adanti — will eat; ati-balāḥ — because of being too powerful; vīra — O heroic King; mām — Me; na — not; iha — in this water; utsraṣṭum — to throw; arhasi — you deserve.

Translation
While being thrown in the ocean, the fish said to King Satyavrata: O hero, in this water there are very powerful and dangerous sharks that will eat Me. Therefore you should not throw Me in this place.

Text 25
एवं विमोहितस्तेन वदता वल्गुभारतीम् ।
तमाह को भवानस्मान् मत्स्यरूपेण मोहयन् ॥ २५ ॥
evaṁ vimohitas tena
vadatā valgu-bhāratīm
tam āha ko bhavān asmān
matsya-rūpeṇa mohayan
Synonyms
evam — thus; vimohitaḥ — bewildered; tena — by the fish; vadatā — speaking; valgu-bhāratīm — sweet words; tam — unto him; āha — said; kaḥ — who; bhavān — You; asmān — us; matsya-rūpeṇa — in the form of a fish; mohayan — bewildering.

Translation
After hearing these sweet words from the Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of a fish, the King, being bewildered, asked Him: Who are You, sir? You simply bewilder us.

Text 26
नैवंवीर्यो जलचरो द‍ृष्टोऽस्माभि: श्रुतोऽपि वा ।
यो भवान् योजनशतमह्नाभिव्यानशे सर: ॥ २६ ॥
naivaṁ vīryo jalacaro
dṛṣṭo ’smābhiḥ śruto ’pi vā
yo bhavān yojana-śatam
ahnābhivyānaśe saraḥ
Synonyms
na — not; evam — thus; vīryaḥ — powerful; jala-caraḥ — aquatic; dṛṣṭaḥ — seen; asmābhiḥ — by us; śrutaḥ api — nor heard of; vā — either; yaḥ — who; bhavān — Your Lordship; yojana-śatam — hundreds of miles; ahnā — in one day; abhivyānaśe — expanding; saraḥ — water.

Translation
My Lord, in one day You have expanded Yourself for hundreds of miles, covering the water of the river and the ocean. Before this I had never seen or heard of such an aquatic animal.

Text 27
नूनं त्वं भगवान् साक्षाद्धरिर्नारायणोऽव्यय: ।
अनुग्रहाय भूतानां धत्से रूपं जलौकसाम् ॥ २७ ॥
nūnaṁ tvaṁ bhagavān sākṣād
dharir nārāyaṇo ’vyayaḥ
anugrahāya bhūtānāṁ
dhatse rūpaṁ jalaukasām
Synonyms
nūnam — certainly; tvam — You (are); bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sākṣāt — directly; hariḥ — the Lord; nārāyaṇaḥ — the Personality of Godhead; avyayaḥ — inexhaustible; anugrahāya — to show mercy; bhūtānām — to all living entities; dhatse — You have assumed; rūpam — a form; jala-okasām — like an aquatic.

Translation
My Lord, You are certainly the inexhaustible Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, Śrī Hari. It is to show Your mercy to the living entities that You have now assumed the form of an aquatic.

Text 28
नमस्ते पुरुषश्रेष्ठ स्थित्युत्पत्त्यप्ययेश्वर ।
भक्तानां न: प्रपन्नानां मुख्यो ह्यात्मगतिर्विभो ॥ २८ ॥
namas te puruṣa-śreṣṭha
sthity-utpatty-apyayeśvara
bhaktānāṁ naḥ prapannānāṁ
mukhyo hy ātma-gatir vibho
Synonyms
namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances; te — unto You; puruṣa-śreṣṭha — the best of all living entities, the best of all enjoyers; sthiti — of maintenance; utpatti — creation; apyaya — and destruction; īśvara — the Supreme Lord; bhaktānām — of Your devotees; naḥ — like us; prapannānām — those who are surrendered; mukhyaḥ — the supreme; hi — indeed; ātma-gatiḥ — the supreme destination; vibho — Lord Viṣṇu.

Translation
O my Lord, master of creation, maintenance and annihilation, O best of enjoyers, Lord Viṣṇu, You are the leader and destination of surrendered devotees like us. Therefore let me offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

Text 29
सर्वे लीलावतारास्ते भूतानां भूतिहेतव: ।
ज्ञातुमिच्छाम्यदो रूपं यदर्थं भवता धृतम् ॥ २९ ॥
sarve līlāvatārās te
bhūtānāṁ bhūti-hetavaḥ
jñātum icchāmy ado rūpaṁ
yad-arthaṁ bhavatā dhṛtam
Synonyms
sarve — everything; līlā — pastimes; avatārāḥ — incarnations; te — of Your Lordship; bhūtānām — of all living entities; bhūti — of a flourishing condition; hetavaḥ — the causes; jñātum — to know; icchāmi — I wish; adaḥ — this; rūpam — form; yat-artham — for what purpose; bhavatā — by Your Lordship; dhṛtam — assumed.

Translation
All Your pastimes and incarnations certainly appear for the welfare of all living entities. Therefore, my Lord, I wish to know the purpose for which You have assumed this form of a fish.

Text 30
न तेऽरविन्दाक्ष पदोपसर्पणं
मृषा भवेत् सर्वसुहृत्प्रियात्मन: ।
यथेतरेषां पृथगात्मनां सता-
मदीद‍ृशो यद् वपुरद्भ‍ुतं हि न: ॥ ३० ॥
na te ’ravindākṣa padopasarpaṇaṁ
mṛṣā bhavet sarva-suhṛt-priyātmanaḥ
yathetareṣāṁ pṛthag-ātmanāṁ satām
adīdṛśo yad vapur adbhutaṁ hi naḥ
Synonyms
na — never; te — of Your Lordship; aravinda-akṣa — My Lord, whose eyes are like the petals of a lotus; pada-upasarpaṇam — worship of the lotus feet; mṛṣā — useless; bhavet — can become; sarva-suhṛt — the friend of everyone; priya — dear to everyone; ātmanaḥ — the Supersoul of everyone; yathā — as; itareṣām — of others (the demigods); pṛthak-ātmanām — living entities who have material bodies different from the soul; satām — of those who are spiritually fixed; adīdṛśaḥ — You have manifested; yat — that; vapuḥ — body; adbhutam — wonderful; hi — indeed; naḥ — unto us.

Translation
O my Lord, possessing eyes like the petals of a lotus, the worship of the demigods, who are in the bodily concept of life, is fruitless in all respects. But because You are the supreme friend and dearmost Supersoul of everyone, worship of Your lotus feet is never useless. You have therefore manifested Your form as a fish.

Text 31
श्रीशुक उवाच
इति ब्रुवाणं नृपतिं जगत्पति:
सत्यव्रतं मत्स्यवपुर्युगक्षये ।
विहर्तुकाम: प्रलयार्णवेऽब्रवी-
च्चिकीर्षुरेकान्तजनप्रिय: प्रियम् ॥ ३१ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
iti bruvāṇaṁ nṛpatiṁ jagat-patiḥ
satyavrataṁ matsya-vapur yuga-kṣaye
vihartu-kāmaḥ pralayārṇave ’bravīc
cikīrṣur ekānta-jana-priyaḥ priyam
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti — thus; bruvāṇam — speaking like that; nṛpatim — unto the King; jagat-patiḥ — the master of the entire universe; satyavratam — unto Satyavrata; matsya-vapuḥ — the Lord, who had assumed the form of a fish; yuga-kṣaye — at the end of a yuga; vihartu-kāmaḥ — to enjoy His own pastimes; pralaya-arṇave — in the water of inundation; abravīt — said; cikīrṣuḥ — desiring to do; ekānta-jana-priyaḥ — most beloved by the devotees; priyam — something very beneficial.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: When King Satyavrata spoke in this way, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who at the end of the yuga had assumed the form of a fish to benefit His devotee and enjoy His pastimes in the water of inundation, responded as follows.

Text 32
श्रीभगवानुवाच
सप्तमे ह्यद्यतनादूर्ध्वमहन्येतदरिंदम ।
निमङ्‌क्ष्यत्यप्ययाम्भोधौ त्रैलोक्यं भूर्भुवादिकम् ॥ ३२ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
saptame hy adyatanād ūrdhvam
ahany etad arindama
nimaṅkṣyaty apyayāmbhodhau
trailokyaṁ bhūr-bhuvādikam
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; saptame — on the seventh; hi — indeed; adyatanāt — from today; ūrdhvam — forward; ahani — on the day; etat — this creation; arimdama — O King who can subdue your enemies; nimaṅkṣyati — shall be inundated; apyaya-ambhodhau — in the ocean of destruction; trailokyam — the three lokas; bhūḥ-bhuva-ādikam — namely Bhūrloka, Bhuvarloka and Svarloka.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O King, who can subdue your enemies, on the seventh day from today the three worlds — Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ and Svaḥ — will all merge into the water of inundation.

Text 33
त्रिलोक्यां लीयमानायां संवर्ताम्भसि वै तदा ।
उपस्थास्यति नौ: काचिद् विशाला त्वां मयेरिता ॥ ३३ ॥
tri-lokyāṁ līyamānāyāṁ
saṁvartāmbhasi vai tadā
upasthāsyati nauḥ kācid
viśālā tvāṁ mayeritā
Synonyms
tri-lokyām — the three lokas; līyamānāyām — upon being merged; saṁvarta-ambhasi — in the water of destruction; vai — indeed; tadā — at that time; upasthāsyati — will appear; nauḥ — boat; kācit — one; viśālā — very big; tvām — unto you; mayā — by Me; īritā — sent.

Translation
When all the three worlds merge into the water, a large boat sent by Me will appear before you.

Texts 34-35
त्वं तावदोषधी: सर्वा बीजान्युच्चावचानि च ।
सप्तर्षिभि: परिवृत: सर्वसत्त्वोपबृंहित: ॥ ३४ ॥
आरुह्य बृहतीं नावं विचरिष्यस्यविक्लव: ।
एकार्णवे निरालोके ऋषीणामेव वर्चसा ॥ ३५ ॥
tvaṁ tāvad oṣadhīḥ sarvā
bījāny uccāvacāni ca
saptarṣibhiḥ parivṛtaḥ
sarva-sattvopabṛṁhitaḥ
āruhya bṛhatīṁ nāvaṁ
vicariṣyasy aviklavaḥ
ekārṇave nirāloke
ṛṣīṇām eva varcasā
Synonyms
tvam — you; tāvat — until that time; oṣadhīḥ — herbs; sarvāḥ — all kinds of; bījāni — seeds; ucca-avacāni — lower and higher; ca — and; sapta-ṛṣibhiḥ — by the seven ṛṣis; parivṛtaḥ — surrounded; sarva-sattva — all kinds of living entities; upabṛṁhitaḥ — surrounded by; āruhya — getting on; bṛhatīm — very large; nāvam — boat; vicariṣyasi — shall travel; aviklavaḥ — without moroseness; eka-arṇave — in the ocean of inundation; nirāloke — without being illuminated; ṛṣīṇām — of the great ṛṣis; eva — indeed; varcasā — by the effulgence.

Translation
Thereafter, O King, you shall collect all types of herbs and seeds and load them on that great boat. Then, accompanied by the seven ṛṣis and surrounded by all kinds of living entities, you shall get aboard that boat, and without moroseness you shall easily travel with your companions on the ocean of inundation, the only illumination being the effulgence of the great ṛṣis.

Text 36
दोधूयमानां तां नावं समीरेण बलीयसा ।
उपस्थितस्य मे श‍ृङ्गे निबध्नीहि महाहिना ॥ ३६ ॥
dodhūyamānāṁ tāṁ nāvaṁ
samīreṇa balīyasā
upasthitasya me śṛṅge
nibadhnīhi mahāhinā
Synonyms
dodhūyamānām — being tossed about; tām — that; nāvam — boat; samīreṇa — by the wind; balīyasā — very powerful; upasthitasya — situated nearby; me — of Me; śṛṅge — to the horn; nibadhnīhi — bind; mahā-ahinā — by the large serpent (Vāsuki).

Translation
Then, as the boat is tossed about by the powerful winds, attach the vessel to My horn by means of the great serpent Vāsuki, for I shall be present by your side.

Text 37
अहं त्वामृषिभि: सार्धं सहनावमुदन्वति ।
विकर्षन् विचरिष्यामि यावद् ब्राह्मी निशा प्रभो ॥ ३७ ॥
ahaṁ tvām ṛṣibhiḥ sārdhaṁ
saha-nāvam udanvati
vikarṣan vicariṣyāmi
yāvad brāhmī niśā prabho
Synonyms
aham — I; tvām — unto you; ṛṣibhiḥ — with all the saintly persons; sārdham — all together; saha — with; nāvam — the boat; udanvati — in the water of devastation; vikarṣan — contacting; vicariṣyāmi — I shall travel; yāvat — as long as; brāhmī — pertaining to Lord Brahmā; niśā — night; prabho — O King.

Translation
Pulling the boat, with you and all the ṛṣis in it, O King, I shall travel in the water of devastation until the night of Lord Brahmā’s slumber is over.

Text 38
मदीयं महिमानं च परं ब्रह्मेति शब्दितम् ।
वेत्स्यस्यनुगृहीतं मे सम्प्रश्नैर्विवृतं हृदि ॥ ३८ ॥
madīyaṁ mahimānaṁ ca
paraṁ brahmeti śabditam
vetsyasy anugṛhītaṁ me
sampraśnair vivṛtaṁ hṛdi
Synonyms
madīyam — pertaining to Me; mahimānam — glories; ca — and; param brahma — the Supreme Brahman, the Absolute Truth; iti — thus; śabditam — celebrated; vetsyasi — you shall understand; anugṛhītam — being favored; me — by Me; sampraśnaiḥ — by inquiries; vivṛtam — thoroughly explained; hṛdi — within the heart.

Translation
You will be thoroughly advised and favored by Me, and because of your inquiries, everything about My glories, which are known as paraṁ brahma, will be manifest within your heart. Thus you will know everything about Me.

Text 39
इत्थमादिश्य राजानं हरिरन्तरधीयत ।
सोऽन्ववैक्षत तं कालं यं हृषीकेश आदिशत् ॥ ३९ ॥
ittham ādiśya rājānaṁ
harir antaradhīyata
so ’nvavaikṣata taṁ kālaṁ
yaṁ hṛṣīkeśa ādiśat
Synonyms
ittham — as aforementioned; ādiśya — instructing; rājānam — the King (Satyavrata); hariḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; antaradhīyata — disappeared from that place; saḥ — he (the King); anvavaikṣata — began to wait for; tam kālam — that time; yam — which; hṛṣīka-īśaḥ — Lord Hṛṣīkeśa, the master of all the senses; ādiśat — instructed.

Translation
After thus instructing the King, the Supreme Personality of Godhead immediately disappeared. Then King Satyavrata began to wait for that time of which the Lord had instructed.

Text 40
आस्तीर्य दर्भान् प्राक्कूलान् राजर्षि: प्रागुदङ्‌मुख: ।
निषसाद हरे: पादौ चिन्तयन् मत्स्यरूपिण: ॥ ४० ॥
āstīrya darbhān prāk-kūlān
rājarṣiḥ prāg-udaṅ-mukhaḥ
niṣasāda hareḥ pādau
cintayan matsya-rūpiṇaḥ
Synonyms
āstīrya — spreading; darbhān — kuśa grass; prāk-kūlān — the upper portion facing east; rāja-ṛṣiḥ — Satyavrata, the saintly King; prāk-udak-mukhaḥ — looking toward the northeast (īśāna); niṣasāda — sat down; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; pādau — upon the lotus feet; cintayan — meditating; matsya-rūpiṇaḥ — who had assumed the form of a fish.

Translation
After spreading kuśa with its tips pointing east, the saintly King, himself facing the northeast, sat down on the grass and began to meditate upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, who had assumed the form of a fish.

Text 41
तत: समुद्र उद्वेल: सर्वत: प्लावयन् महीम् ।
वर्धमानो महामेघैर्वर्षद्भ‍ि: समद‍ृश्यत ॥ ४१ ॥
tataḥ samudra udvelaḥ
sarvataḥ plāvayan mahīm
vardhamāno mahā-meghair
varṣadbhiḥ samadṛśyata
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; samudraḥ — the ocean; udvelaḥ — overflowing; sarvataḥ — everywhere; plāvayan — inundating; mahīm — the earth; vardhamānaḥ — increasing more and more; mahā-meghaiḥ — by gigantic clouds; varṣadbhiḥ — incessantly pouring rain; samadṛśyata — King Satyavrata saw it.

Translation
Thereafter, gigantic clouds pouring incessant water swelled the ocean more and more. Thus the ocean began to overflow onto the land and inundate the entire world.

Text 42
ध्यायन् भगवदादेशं दद‍ृशे नावमागताम् ।
तामारुरोह विप्रेन्द्रैरादायौषधिवीरुध: ॥ ४२ ॥
dhyāyan bhagavad-ādeśaṁ
dadṛśe nāvam āgatām
tām āruroha viprendrair
ādāyauṣadhi-vīrudhaḥ
Synonyms
dhyāyan — remembering; bhagavat-ādeśam — the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; dadṛśe — he saw; nāvam — a boat; āgatām — coming near; tām — aboard the boat; āruroha — got up; vipra-indraiḥ — with the saintly brāhmaṇas; ādāya — taking; auṣadhi — herbs; vīrudhaḥ — and creepers.

Translation
As Satyavrata remembered the order of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, he saw a boat coming near him. Thus he collected herbs and creepers, and, accompanied by saintly brāhmaṇas, he got aboard the boat.

Text 43
तमूचुर्मुनय: प्रीता राजन् ध्यायस्व केशवम् ।
स वै न: सङ्कटादस्मादविता शं विधास्यति ॥ ४३ ॥
tam ūcur munayaḥ prītā
rājan dhyāyasva keśavam
sa vai naḥ saṅkaṭād asmād
avitā śaṁ vidhāsyati
Synonyms
tam — unto the King; ūcuḥ — said; munayaḥ — all the saintly brāhmaṇas; prītāḥ — being pleased; rājan — O King; dhyāyasva — meditate; keśavam — upon the Supreme Lord, Keśava; saḥ — His Lordship; vai — indeed; naḥ — us; saṅkaṭāt — from the great danger; asmāt — as now visible; avitā — will save; śam — auspiciousness; vidhāsyati — He will arrange.

Translation
The saintly brāhmaṇas, being pleased with the King, said to him: O King, please meditate upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Keśava. He will save us from this impending danger and arrange for our well-being.

Text 44
सोऽनुध्यातस्ततो राज्ञा प्रादुरासीन्महार्णवे ।
एकश‍ृङ्गधरो मत्स्यो हैमो नियुतयोजन: ॥ ४४ ॥
so ’nudhyātas tato rājñā
prādurāsīn mahārṇave
eka-śṛṅga-dharo matsyo
haimo niyuta-yojanaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — the Lord; anudhyātaḥ — being meditated upon; tataḥ — thereafter (hearing the words of the saintly brāhmaṇas); rājñā — by the King; prādurāsīt — appeared (before him); mahā-arṇave — in the great ocean of inundation; eka-śṛṅga-dharaḥ — with one horn; matsyaḥ — a big fish; haimaḥ — made of gold; niyuta-yojanaḥ — eight million miles long.

Translation
Then, while the King constantly meditated upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, a large golden fish appeared in the ocean of inundation. The fish had one horn and was eight million miles long.

Text 45
निबध्य नावं तच्छृङ्गे यथोक्तो हरिणा पुरा ।
वरत्रेणाहिना तुष्टस्तुष्टाव मधुसूदनम् ॥ ४५ ॥
nibadhya nāvaṁ tac-chṛṅge
yathokto hariṇā purā
varatreṇāhinā tuṣṭas
tuṣṭāva madhusūdanam
Synonyms
nibadhya — anchoring; nāvam — the boat; tat-śṛṅge — onto the horn of the big fish; yathā-uktaḥ — as advised; hariṇā — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; purā — before; varatreṇa — used as a rope; ahinā — by the great serpent (of the name Vāsuki); tuṣṭaḥ — being pleased; tuṣṭāva — he satisfied; madhusūdanam — the Supreme Lord, the killer of Madhu.

Translation
Following the instructions formerly given by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the King anchored the boat to the fish’s horn, using the serpent Vāsuki as a rope. Thus being satisfied, he began offering prayers to the Lord.

Text 46
श्रीराजोवाच
अनाद्यविद्योपहतात्मसंविद-
स्तन्मूलसंसारपरिश्रमातुरा: ।
यद‍ृच्छयोपसृता यमाप्नुयु-
र्विमुक्तिदो न: परमो गुरुर्भवान् ॥ ४६ ॥
śrī-rājovāca
anādy-avidyopahatātma-saṁvidas
tan-mūla-saṁsāra-pariśramāturāḥ
yadṛcchayopasṛtā yam āpnuyur
vimuktido naḥ paramo gurur bhavān
Synonyms
śrī-rājā uvāca — the King offered prayers as follows; anādi — from time immemorial; avidyā — by ignorance; upahata — has been lost; ātma-saṁvidaḥ — knowledge about the self; tat — that is; mūla — the root; saṁsāra — material bondage; pariśrama — full of miserable conditions and hard work; āturāḥ — suffering; yadṛcchayā — by the supreme will; upasṛtāḥ — being favored by the ācārya; yam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; āpnuyuḥ — can achieve; vimukti-daḥ — the process of liberation; naḥ — our; paramaḥ — the supreme; guruḥ — spiritual master; bhavān — Your Lordship.

Translation
The King said: By the grace of the Lord, those who have lost their self-knowledge since time immemorial, and who because of this ignorance are involved in a material, conditional life full of miseries, obtain the chance to meet the Lord’s devotee. I accept that Supreme Personality of Godhead as the supreme spiritual master.

Text 47
जनोऽबुधोऽयं निजकर्मबन्धन:
सुखेच्छया कर्म समीहतेऽसुखम् ।
यत्सेवया तां विधुनोत्यसन्मतिं
ग्रन्थिं स भिन्द्याद् धृदयं स नो गुरु: ॥ ४७ ॥
jano ’budho ’yaṁ nija-karma-bandhanaḥ
sukhecchayā karma samīhate ’sukham
yat-sevayā tāṁ vidhunoty asan-matiṁ
granthiṁ sa bhindyād dhṛdayaṁ sa no guruḥ
Synonyms
janaḥ — the conditioned soul subjected to birth and death; abudhaḥ — most foolish because of accepting the body as the self; ayam — he; nija-karma-bandhanaḥ — accepting different bodily forms as a result of his sinful activities; sukha-icchayā — desiring to be happy within this material world; karma — fruitive activities; samīhate — plans; asukham — but it is for distress only; yat-sevayā — by rendering service unto whom; tām — the entanglement of karma; vidhunoti — clears up; asat-matim — the unclean mentality (accepting the body as the self); granthim — hard knot; saḥ — His Lordship the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhindyāt — being cut off; hṛdayam — in the core of the heart; saḥ — He (the Lord); naḥ — our; guruḥ — the supreme spiritual master.

Translation
In hopes of becoming happy in this material world, the foolish conditioned soul performs fruitive activities that result only in suffering. But by rendering service to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one becomes free from such false desires for happiness. May my supreme spiritual master cut the knot of false desires from the core of my heart.

Text 48
यत्सेवयाग्नेरिव रुद्ररोदनं
पुमान् विजह्यान्मलमात्मनस्तम: ।
भजेत वर्णं निजमेष सोऽव्ययो
भूयात् स ईश: परमो गुरोर्गुरु: ॥ ४८ ॥
yat-sevayāgner iva rudra-rodanaṁ
pumān vijahyān malam ātmanas tamaḥ
bhajeta varṇaṁ nijam eṣa so ’vyayo
bhūyāt sa īśaḥ paramo guror guruḥ
Synonyms
yat-sevayā — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by serving whom; agneḥ — in touch with fire; iva — as it is; rudra-rodanam — a block of silver or gold becomes purified; pumān — a person; vijahyāt — can give up; malam — all the dirty things of material existence; ātmanaḥ — of one’s self; tamaḥ — the mode of ignorance, by which one performs pious and impious activities; bhajeta — may revive; varṇam — his original identity; nijam — one’s own; eṣaḥ — such; saḥ — He; avyayaḥ — inexhaustible; bhūyāt — let Him become; saḥ — He; īśaḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; paramaḥ — the supreme; guroḥ guruḥ — the spiritual master of all other spiritual masters.

Translation
One who wants to be free of material entanglement should take to the service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead and give up the contamination of ignorance, involving pious and impious activities. Thus one regains his original identity, just as a block of gold or silver sheds all dirt and becomes purified when treated with fire. May that inexhaustible Supreme Personality of Godhead become our spiritual master, for He is the original spiritual master of all other spiritual masters.

Text 49
न यत्प्रसादायुतभागलेश-
मन्ये च देवा गुरवो जना: स्वयम् ।
कर्तुं समेता: प्रभवन्ति पुंस-
स्तमीश्वरं त्वां शरणं प्रपद्ये ॥ ४९ ॥
na yat-prasādāyuta-bhāga-leśam
anye ca devā guravo janāḥ svayam
kartuṁ sametāḥ prabhavanti puṁsas
tam īśvaraṁ tvāṁ śaraṇaṁ prapadye
Synonyms
na — not; yat-prasāda — of the mercy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ayuta-bhāga-leśam — only one ten-thousandth; anye — others; ca — also; devāḥ — even the demigods; guravaḥ — the so-called gurus; janāḥ — the total population; svayam — personally; kartum — to execute; sametāḥ — all together; prabhavanti — can become equally able; puṁsaḥ — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tam — unto Him; īśvaram — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tvām — unto You; śaraṇam — shelter; prapadye — let me surrender.

Translation
Neither all the demigods, nor the so-called gurus nor all other people, either independently or together, can offer mercy that equals even one ten-thousandth of Yours. Therefore I wish to take shelter of Your lotus feet.

Text 50
अचक्षुरन्धस्य यथाग्रणी: कृत-
स्तथा जनस्याविदुषोऽबुधो गुरु: ।
त्वमर्कद‍ृक् सर्वद‍ृशां समीक्षणो
वृतो गुरुर्न: स्वगतिं बुभुत्सताम् ॥ ५० ॥
acakṣur andhasya yathāgraṇīḥ kṛtas
tathā janasyāviduṣo ’budho guruḥ
tvam arka-dṛk sarva-dṛśāṁ samīkṣaṇo
vṛto gurur naḥ sva-gatiṁ bubhutsatām
Synonyms
acakṣuḥ — one who does not have his power of sight; andhasya — for such a blind person; yathā — as; agraṇīḥ — the leader, who goes first; kṛtaḥ — accepted; tathā — similarly; janasya — such a person; aviduṣaḥ — who has no knowledge of the goal of life; abudhaḥ — a foolish rascal; guruḥ — the spiritual master; tvam — Your Lordship; arka-dṛk — appear like the sun; sarva-dṛśām — of all sources of knowledge; samīkṣaṇaḥ — the complete seer; vṛtaḥ — accepted; guruḥ — the spiritual master; naḥ — our; sva-gatim — one who knows his real self-interest; bubhutsatām — such an enlightened person.

Translation
As a blind man, being unable to see, accepts another blind man as his leader, people who do not know the goal of life accept someone as a guru who is a rascal and a fool. But we are interested in self-realization. Therefore we accept You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, as our spiritual master, for You are able to see in all directions and are omniscient like the sun.

Text 51
जनो जनस्यादिशतेऽसतीं गतिं
यया प्रपद्येत दुरत्ययं तम: ।
त्वं त्वव्ययं ज्ञानममोघमञ्जसा
प्रपद्यते येन जनो निजं पदम् ॥ ५१ ॥
jano janasyādiśate ’satīṁ gatiṁ
yayā prapadyeta duratyayaṁ tamaḥ
tvaṁ tv avyayaṁ jñānam amogham añjasā
prapadyate yena jano nijaṁ padam
Synonyms
janaḥ — a person who is not a bona fide guru (an ordinary person); janasya — of an ordinary person who does not know the goal of life; ādiśate — instructs; asatīm — impermanent, material; gatim — the goal of life; yayā — by such knowledge; prapadyeta — he surrenders; duratyayam — insurmountable; tamaḥ — to ignorance; tvam — Your Lordship; tu — but; avyayam — indestructible; jñānam — knowledge; amogham — without material contamination; añjasā — very soon; prapadyate — achieves; yena — by such knowledge; janaḥ — a person; nijam — his own; padam — original position.

Translation
A materialistic so-called guru instructs his materialistic disciples about economic development and sense gratification, and because of such instructions the foolish disciples continue in the materialistic existence of ignorance. But Your Lordship gives knowledge that is eternal, and the intelligent person receiving such knowledge is quickly situated in his original constitutional position.

Text 52
त्वं सर्वलोकस्य सुहृत् प्रियेश्वरो
ह्यात्मा गुरुर्ज्ञानमभीष्टसिद्धि: ।
तथापि लोको न भवन्तमन्धधी-
र्जानाति सन्तं हृदि बद्धकाम: ॥ ५२ ॥
tvaṁ sarva-lokasya suhṛt priyeśvaro
hy ātmā gurur jñānam abhīṣṭa-siddhiḥ
tathāpi loko na bhavantam andha-dhīr
jānāti santaṁ hṛdi baddha-kāmaḥ
Synonyms
tvam — You, my dear Lord; sarva-lokasya — of all planets and their inhabitants; suhṛt — the most well-wishing friend; priya — the most dear; īśvaraḥ — the supreme controller; hi — also; ātmā — the supreme soul; guruḥ — the supreme teacher; jñānam — the supreme knowledge; abhīṣṭa-siddhiḥ — the fulfillment of all desires; tathā api — still; lokaḥ — persons; na — not; bhavantam — unto You; andha-dhīḥ — because of blind intelligence; jānāti — can know; santam — situated; hṛdi — in his heart; baddha-kāmaḥ — because of being bewildered by material lusty desires.

Translation
My Lord, You are the supreme well-wishing friend of everyone, the dearmost friend, the controller, the Supersoul, the supreme instructor and the giver of supreme knowledge and the fulfillment of all desires. But although You are within the heart, the foolish, because of lusty desires in the heart, cannot understand You.

Text 53
त्वं त्वामहं देववरं वरेण्यं
प्रपद्य ईशं प्रतिबोधनाय ।
छिन्ध्यर्थदीपैर्भगवन् वचोभि-
र्ग्रन्थीन् हृदय्यान् विवृणु स्वमोक: ॥ ५३ ॥
tvaṁ tvām ahaṁ deva-varaṁ vareṇyaṁ
prapadya īśaṁ pratibodhanāya
chindhy artha-dīpair bhagavan vacobhir
granthīn hṛdayyān vivṛṇu svam okaḥ
Synonyms
tvam — how exalted You are; tvām — unto You; aham — myself; deva-varam — worshiped by the demigods; vareṇyam — the greatest of all; prapadye — fully surrendering; īśam — unto the supreme controller; pratibodhanāya — for understanding the real purpose of life; chindhi — cut off; artha-dīpaiḥ — by the light of purposeful instruction; bhagavan — O Supreme Lord; vacobhiḥ — by Your words; granthīn — knots; hṛdayyān — fixed within the core of the heart; vivṛṇu — kindly explain; svam okaḥ — my destination in life.

Translation
O Supreme Lord, for self-realization I surrender unto You, who are worshiped by the demigods as the supreme controller of everything. By Your instructions, exposing life’s purpose, kindly cut the knot from the core of my heart and let me know the destination of my life.

Text 54
श्रीशुक उवाच
इत्युक्तवन्तं नृपतिं भगवानादिपूरुष: ।
मत्स्यरूपी महाम्भोधौ विहरंस्तत्त्वमब्रवीत् ॥ ५४ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
ity uktavantaṁ nṛpatiṁ
bhagavān ādi-pūruṣaḥ
matsya-rūpī mahāmbhodhau
viharaṁs tattvam abravīt
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti — thus; uktavantam — being addressed by Mahārāja Satyavrata; nṛpatim — unto the King; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ādi-pūruṣaḥ — the original person; matsya-rūpī — who had assumed the form of a fish; mahā-ambhodhau — in that water of inundation; viharan — while moving; tattvam abravīt — explained the Absolute Truth.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: When Satyavrata had thus prayed to the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who had assumed the form of a fish, the Lord, while moving in the water of inundation, explained to him the Absolute Truth.

Text 55
पुराणसंहितां दिव्यां साङ्ख्ययोगक्रियावतीम् ।
सत्यव्रतस्य राजर्षेरात्मगुह्यमशेषत: ॥ ५५ ॥
purāṇa-saṁhitāṁ divyāṁ
sāṅkhya-yoga-kriyāvatīm
satyavratasya rājarṣer
ātma-guhyam aśeṣataḥ
Synonyms
purāṇa — the subject matter explained in the Purāṇas, the old histories, especially the Matsya Purāṇa; saṁhitām — the Vedic instructions contained in Brahma-saṁhitā and other saṁhitās; divyām — all transcendental literatures; sāṅkhya — the philosophical way of sāṅkhya-yoga; yoga — the science of self-realization or bhakti-yoga; kriyāvatīm — practically applied in life; satyavratasya — of King Satyavrata; rāja-ṛṣeḥ — the great king and saint; ātma-guhyam — all the mysteries of self-realization; aśeṣataḥ — including all branches.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead thus explained to King Satyavrata the spiritual science known as sāṅkhya-yoga, the science by which one distinguishes between matter and spirit [in other words, bhakti-yoga], along with the instructions contained in the Purāṇas [the old histories] and the saṁhitās. The Lord explained Himself in all these literatures.

Text 56
अश्रौषीद‍ृषिभि: साकमात्मतत्त्वमसंशयम् ।
नाव्यासीनो भगवता प्रोक्तं ब्रह्म सनातनम् ॥ ५६ ॥
aśrauṣīd ṛṣibhiḥ sākam
ātma-tattvam asaṁśayam
nāvy āsīno bhagavatā
proktaṁ brahma sanātanam
Synonyms
aśrauṣīt — he heard; ṛṣibhiḥ — the great saintly persons; sākam — with; ātma-tattvam — the science of self-realization; asaṁśayam — without any doubt (because it was spoken by the Supreme Lord); nāvi āsīnaḥ — sitting in the boat; bhagavatā — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; proktam — explained; brahma — all transcendental literatures; sanātanam — eternally existing.

Translation
While sitting in the boat, King Satyavrata, accompanied by the great saintly persons, listened to the instructions of the Supreme Personality of Godhead in regard to self-realization. These instructions were all from the eternal Vedic literature [brahma]. Thus the King and sages had no doubt about the Absolute Truth.

Text 57
अतीतप्रलयापाय उत्थिताय स वेधसे ।
हत्वासुरं हयग्रीवं वेदान् प्रत्याहरद्धरि: ॥ ५७ ॥
atīta-pralayāpāya
utthitāya sa vedhase
hatvāsuraṁ hayagrīvaṁ
vedān pratyāharad dhariḥ
Synonyms
atīta — passed; pralaya-apāye — at the end of the inundation; utthitāya — to bring him to his senses after sleeping; saḥ — the Supreme Lord; vedhase — unto Lord Brahmā; hatvā — after killing; asuram — the demon; hayagrīvam — by the name Hayagrīva; vedān — all the Vedic records; pratyāharat — delivered; hariḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
At the end of the last inundation [during the period of Svāyambhuva Manu] the Supreme Personality of Godhead killed the demon named Hayagrīva and delivered all the Vedic literatures to Lord Brahmā when Lord Brahmā awakened from sleeping.

Text 58
स तु सत्यव्रतो राजा ज्ञानविज्ञानसंयुत: ।
विष्णो: प्रसादात् कल्पेऽस्मिन्नासीद् वैवस्वतो मनु: ॥ ५८ ॥
sa tu satyavrato rājā
jñāna-vijñāna-saṁyutaḥ
viṣṇoḥ prasādāt kalpe ’sminn
āsīd vaivasvato manuḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he; tu — indeed; satyavrataḥ — Satyavrata; rājā — the King; jñāna-vijñāna-saṁyutaḥ — enlightened in full knowledge and its practical use; viṣṇoḥ — of Lord Viṣṇu; prasādāt — by the mercy; kalpe asmin — in this period (ruled by Vaivasvata Manu); āsīt — became; vaivasvataḥ manuḥ — Vaivasvata Manu.

Translation
King Satyavrata was illuminated with all Vedic knowledge by the mercy of Lord Viṣṇu, and in this period he has now taken birth as Vaivasvata Manu, the son of the sun-god.

Text 59
सत्यव्रतस्य राजर्षेर्मायामत्स्यस्य शार्ङ्गिण: ।
संवादं महदाख्यानं श्रुत्वा मुच्येत किल्बिषात् ॥ ५९ ॥
satyavratasya rājarṣer
māyā-matsyasya śārṅgiṇaḥ
saṁvādaṁ mahad-ākhyānaṁ
śrutvā mucyeta kilbiṣāt
Synonyms
satyavratasya — of King Satyavrata; rāja-ṛṣeḥ — of the great king; māyā-matsyasya — and the fish incarnation; śārṅgiṇaḥ — who had one horn on His head; saṁvādam — the description or dealings; mahat-ākhyānam — the great story; śrutvā — by hearing; mucyeta — is delivered; kilbiṣāt — from all sinful reactions.

Translation
This story concerning the great King Satyavrata and the fish incarnation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, is a great transcendental narration. Anyone who hears it is delivered from the reactions of sinful life.

Text 60
अवतारं हरेर्योऽयं कीर्तयेदन्वहं नर: ।
सङ्कल्पास्तस्य सिध्यन्ति स याति परमां गतिम् ॥ ६० ॥
avatāraṁ harer yo ’yaṁ
kīrtayed anvahaṁ naraḥ
saṅkalpās tasya sidhyanti
sa yāti paramāṁ gatim
Synonyms
avatāram — incarnation; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yaḥ — whoever; ayam — he; kīrtayet — narrates and chants; anvaham — daily; naraḥ — such a person; saṅkalpāḥ — all ambitions; tasya — of him; sidhyanti — become successful; saḥ — such a person; yāti — goes back; paramām gatim — back home to Godhead, the supreme place.

Translation
One who narrates this description of the Matsya incarnation and King Satyavrata will certainly have all his ambitions fulfilled, and he will undoubtedly return home, back to Godhead.

Text 61
प्रलयपयसि धातु: सुप्तशक्तेर्मुखेभ्य:
श्रुतिगणमपनीतं प्रत्युपादत्त हत्वा ।
दितिजमकथयद् यो ब्रह्म सत्यव्रतानां
तमहमखिलहेतुं जिह्ममीनं नतोऽस्मि ॥ ६१ ॥
स वै मन: कृष्णपदारविन्दयो-
र्वचांसि वैकुण्ठगुणानुवर्णने ।
करौ हरेर्मन्दिरमार्जनादिषु
श्रुतिं चकाराच्युतसत्कथोदये ॥
pralaya-payasi dhātuḥ supta-śakter mukhebhyaḥ
śruti-gaṇam apanītaṁ pratyupādatta hatvā
ditijam akathayad yo brahma satyavratānāṁ
tam aham akhila-hetuṁ jihma-mīnaṁ nato ’smi
Synonyms
pralaya-payasi — in the water of inundation; dhātuḥ — from Lord Brahmā; supta-śakteḥ — who was inert because of sleeping; mukhebhyaḥ — from the mouths; śruti-gaṇam — Vedic records; apanītam — stolen; pratyupādatta — gave back to him; hatvā — by killing; ditijam — the great demon; akathayat — explained; yaḥ — one who; brahma — Vedic knowledge; satyavratānām — for the enlightenment of Satyavrata and the great saintly persons; tam — unto Him; aham — I; akhila-hetum — unto the cause of all causes; jihma-mīnam — appearing as and pretending to be a great fish; nataḥ asmi — I offer my respectful obeisances.

Translation
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who pretended to be a gigantic fish, who restored the Vedic literature to Lord Brahmā when Lord Brahmā awakened from sleep, and who explained the essence of Vedic literature to King Satyavrata and the great saintly persons.