Text 1
श्रीबादरायणिरुवाच
एवं व्यवसितो बुद्ध्या समाधाय मनो हृदि ।
जजाप परमं जाप्यं प्राग्जन्मन्यनुशिक्षितम् ॥ १ ॥
śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca
evaṁ vyavasito buddhyā
samādhāya mano hṛdi
jajāpa paramaṁ jāpyaṁ
prāg-janmany anuśikṣitam
Synonyms
śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — thus; vyavasitaḥ — fixed; buddhyā — by intelligence; samādhāya — for concentration; manaḥ — the mind; hṛdi — in consciousness or in the heart; jajāpa — he chanted; paramam — a supreme; jāpyam — mantra he had learned from great devotees; prāk-janmani — in his previous birth; anuśikṣitam — practiced.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Thereafter, the King of the elephants, Gajendra, fixed his mind in his heart with perfect intelligence and chanted a mantra which he had learned in his previous birth as Indradyumna and which he remembered by the grace of Kṛṣṇa.

Text 2
श्रीगजेन्द्र उवाच
ॐ नमो भगवते तस्मै यत एतच्चिदात्मकम् ।
पुरुषायादिबीजाय परेशायाभिधीमहि ॥ २ ॥
śrī-gajendra uvāca
oṁ namo bhagavate tasmai
yata etac cid-ātmakam
puruṣāyādi-bījāya
pareśāyābhidhīmahi
Synonyms
śrī-gajendraḥ uvāca — Gajendra, the King of elephants, said; om — O my Lord; namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances unto You; bhagavate — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tasmai — unto Him; yataḥ — from whom; etat — this body and the material manifestation; cit-ātmakam — is moving due to consciousness (the spirit soul); puruṣāya — unto the Supreme Person; ādi-bījāya — who is the origin or root cause of everything; para-īśāya — who is supreme, transcendental and worshipable for such exalted persons as Brahmā and Śiva; abhidhīmahi — let me meditate upon Him.

Translation
The King of the elephants, Gajendra, said: I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Person, Vāsudeva [oṁ namo bhagavate vāsudevāya]. Because of Him this material body acts due to the presence of spirit, and He is therefore the root cause of everyone. He is worshipable for such exalted persons as Brahmā and Śiva, and He has entered the heart of every living being. Let me meditate upon Him.

Text 3
यस्मिन्निदं यतश्चेदं येनेदं य इदं स्वयम् ।
योऽस्मात् परस्माच्च परस्तं प्रपद्ये स्वयम्भुवम् ॥ ३ ॥
yasminn idaṁ yataś cedaṁ
yenedaṁ ya idaṁ svayam
yo ’smāt parasmāc ca paras
taṁ prapadye svayambhuvam
Synonyms
yasmin — the basic platform on which; idam — the universe rests; yataḥ — the ingredients from which; ca — and; idam — the cosmic manifestation is produced; yena — by whom; idam — this cosmic manifestation is created and maintained; yaḥ — He who; idam — this material world; svayam — is Himself; yaḥ — He who; asmāt — from the effect (this material world); parasmāt — from the cause; ca — and; paraḥ — transcendental or different; tam — unto Him; prapadye — I surrender; svayambhuvam — unto the supreme self-sufficient.

Translation
The Supreme Godhead is the supreme platform on which everything rests, the ingredient by which everything has been produced, and the person who has created and is the only cause of this cosmic manifestation. Nonetheless, He is different from the cause and the result. I surrender unto Him, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is self-sufficient in everything.

Text 4
य: स्वात्मनीदं निजमाययार्पितं
क्‍वचिद् विभातं क्‍व च तत् तिरोहितम् ।
अविद्धद‍ृक् साक्ष्युभयं तदीक्षते
स आत्ममूलोऽवतु मां परात्पर: ॥ ४ ॥
yaḥ svātmanīdaṁ nija-māyayārpitaṁ
kvacid vibhātaṁ kva ca tat tirohitam
aviddha-dṛk sākṣy ubhayaṁ tad īkṣate
sa ātma-mūlo ’vatu māṁ parāt-paraḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead who; sva-ātmani — in Him; idam — this cosmic manifestation; nija-māyayā — by His own potency; arpitam — invested; kvacit — sometimes, at the beginning of a kalpa; vibhātam — it is manifested; kva ca — sometimes, during dissolution; tat — that (manifestation); tirohitam — not visible; aviddha-dṛk — He sees everything (in all these circumstances); sākṣī — the witness; ubhayam — both (manifestation and annihilation); tat īkṣate — sees everything, without loss of sight; saḥ — that Supreme Personality of Godhead; ātma-mūlaḥ — self-sufficient, having no other cause; avatu — please give protection; mām — unto me; parāt-paraḥ — He is transcendental to transcendental, or above all transcendence.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, by expanding His own energy, keeps this cosmic manifestation visible and again sometimes renders it invisible. He is both the supreme cause and the supreme result, the observer and the witness, in all circumstances. Thus He is transcendental to everything. May that Supreme Personality of Godhead give me protection.

Text 5
कालेन पञ्चत्वमितेषु कृत्स्‍नशो
लोकेषु पालेषु च सर्वहेतुषु ।
तमस्तदासीद् गहनं गभीरं
यस्तस्य पारेऽभिविराजते विभु: ॥ ५ ॥
kālena pañcatvam iteṣu kṛtsnaśo
lokeṣu pāleṣu ca sarva-hetuṣu
tamas tadāsīd gahanaṁ gabhīraṁ
yas tasya pāre ’bhivirājate vibhuḥ
Synonyms
kālena — in due course of time (after millions and millions of years); pañcatvam — when everything illusory is annihilated; iteṣu — all transformations; kṛtsnaśaḥ — with everything within this cosmic manifestation; lokeṣu — all the planets, or everything that exists; pāleṣu — maintainers like Lord Brahmā; ca — also; sarva-hetuṣu — all causative existences; tamaḥ — great darkness; tadā — then; āsīt — was; gahanam — very dense; gabhīram — very deep; yaḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead who; tasya — this dark situation; pāre — over and above; abhivirājate — exists or shines; vibhuḥ — the Supreme.

Translation
In due course of time, when all the causative and effective manifestations of the universe, including the planets and their directors and maintainers, are annihilated, there is a situation of dense darkness. Above this darkness, however, is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. I take shelter of His lotus feet.

Text 6
न यस्य देवा ऋषय: पदं विदु-
र्जन्तु: पुन: कोऽर्हति गन्तुमीरितुम् ।
यथा नटस्याकृतिभिर्विचेष्टतो
दुरत्ययानुक्रमण: स मावतु ॥ ६ ॥
na yasya devā ṛṣayaḥ padaṁ vidur
jantuḥ punaḥ ko ’rhati gantum īritum
yathā naṭasyākṛtibhir viceṣṭato
duratyayānukramaṇaḥ sa māvatu
Synonyms
na — neither; yasya — He of whom; devāḥ — the demigods; ṛṣayaḥ — great sages; padam — position; viduḥ — can understand; jantuḥ — unintelligent living beings like animals; punaḥ — again; kaḥ — who; arhati — is able; gantum — to enter into the knowledge; īritum — or to express by words; yathā — as; naṭasya — of the artist; ākṛtibhiḥ — by bodily features; viceṣṭataḥ — dancing in different ways; duratyaya — very difficult; anukramaṇaḥ — His movements; saḥ — that Supreme Personality of Godhead; mā — unto me; avatu — may give His protection.

Translation
An artist onstage, being covered by attractive dresses and dancing with different movements, is not understood by his audience; similarly, the activities and features of the supreme artist cannot be understood even by the demigods or great sages, and certainly not by those who are unintelligent like animals. Neither the demigods and sages nor the unintelligent can understand the features of the Lord, nor can they express in words His actual position. May that Supreme Personality of Godhead give me protection.

Text 7
दिद‍ृक्षवो यस्य पदं सुमङ्गलं
विमुक्तसङ्गा मुनय: सुसाधव: ।
चरन्त्यलोकव्रतमव्रणं वने
भूतात्मभूता: सुहृद: स मे गति: ॥ ७ ॥
didṛkṣavo yasya padaṁ sumaṅgalaṁ
vimukta-saṅgā munayaḥ susādhavaḥ
caranty aloka-vratam avraṇaṁ vane
bhūtātma-bhūtāḥ suhṛdaḥ sa me gatiḥ
Synonyms
didṛkṣavaḥ — those who desire to see (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); yasya — of Him; padam — the lotus feet; su-maṅgalam — all-auspicious; vimukta-saṅgāḥ — persons who are completely disinfected of material conditions; munayaḥ — great sages; su-sādhavaḥ — those who are highly elevated in spiritual consciousness; caranti — practice; aloka-vratam — vows of brahmacarya, vānaprastha or sannyāsa; avraṇam — without any fault; vane — in the forest; bhūta-ātma-bhūtāḥ — those who are equal to all living entities; suhṛdaḥ — those who are friends to everyone; saḥ — that same Supreme Personality of Godhead; me — my; gatiḥ — destination.

Translation
Renunciants and great sages who see all living beings equally, who are friendly to everyone and who flawlessly practice in the forest the vows of brahmacarya, vānaprastha and sannyāsa desire to see the all-auspicious lotus feet of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. May that same Supreme Personality of Godhead be my destination.

Texts 8-9
न विद्यते यस्य च जन्म कर्म वा
न नामरूपे गुणदोष एव वा ।
तथापि लोकाप्ययसम्भवाय य:
स्वमायया तान्यनुकालमृच्छति ॥ ८ ॥
तस्मै नम: परेशाय ब्रह्मणेऽनन्तशक्तये ।
अरूपायोरुरूपाय नम आश्चर्यकर्मणे ॥ ९ ॥
na vidyate yasya ca janma karma vā
na nāma-rūpe guṇa-doṣa eva vā
tathāpi lokāpyaya-sambhavāya yaḥ
sva-māyayā tāny anukālam ṛcchati
tasmai namaḥ pareśāya
brahmaṇe ’nanta-śaktaye
arūpāyoru-rūpāya
nama āścarya-karmaṇe
Synonyms
na — not; vidyate — there is; yasya — of whom (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); ca — also; janma — birth; karma — activities; vā — or; na — nor; nāma-rūpe — any material name or material form; guṇa — qualities; doṣaḥ — fault; eva — certainly; vā — either; tathāpi — still; loka — of this cosmic manifestation; apyaya — who is the destruction; sambhavāya — and creation; yaḥ — He who; sva-māyayā — by His own potency; tāni — activities; anukālam — eternally; ṛcchati — accepts; tasmai — unto Him; namaḥ — I offer my obeisances; para — transcendental; īśāya — who is the supreme controller; brahmaṇe — who is the Supreme Brahman (Parabrahman); ananta-śaktaye — with unlimited potency; arūpāya — possessing no material form; uru-rūpāya — possessing various forms as incarnations; namaḥ — I offer my obeisances; āścarya-karmaṇe — whose activities are wonderful.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has no material birth, activities, name, form, qualities or faults. To fulfill the purpose for which this material world is created and destroyed, He comes in the form of a human being like Lord Rāma or Lord Kṛṣṇa by His original internal potency. He has immense potency, and in various forms, all free from material contamination, He acts wonderfully. He is therefore the Supreme Brahman. I offer my respects to Him.

Text 10
नम आत्मप्रदीपाय साक्षिणे परमात्मने ।
नमो गिरां विदूराय मनसश्चेतसामपि ॥ १० ॥
nama ātma-pradīpāya
sākṣiṇe paramātmane
namo girāṁ vidūrāya
manasaś cetasām api
Synonyms
namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances; ātma-pradīpāya — unto Him who is self-effulgent or who gives enlightenment to the living entities; sākṣiṇe — who is situated in everyone’s heart as a witness; parama-ātmane — unto the Supreme Soul, the Supersoul; namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances; girām — by words; vidūrāya — who is impossible to reach; manasaḥ — by the mind; cetasām — or by consciousness; api — even.

Translation
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the self-effulgent Supersoul, who is the witness in everyone’s heart, who enlightens the individual soul and who cannot be reached by exercises of the mind, words or consciousness.

Text 11
सत्त्वेन प्रतिलभ्याय नैष्कर्म्येण विपश्चिता ।
नम: कैवल्यनाथाय निर्वाणसुखसंविदे ॥ ११ ॥
sattvena pratilabhyāya
naiṣkarmyeṇa vipaścitā
namaḥ kaivalya-nāthāya
nirvāṇa-sukha-saṁvide
Synonyms
sattvena — by pure devotional service; prati-labhyāya — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is achieved by such devotional activities; naiṣkarmyeṇa — by transcendental activities; vipaścitā — by persons who are sufficiently learned; namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances; kaivalya-nāthāya — unto the master of the transcendental world; nirvāṇa — for one completely freed from material activities; sukha — of happiness; saṁvide — who is the bestower.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is realized by pure devotees who act in the transcendental existence of bhakti-yoga. He is the bestower of uncontaminated happiness and is the master of the transcendental world. Therefore I offer my respect unto Him.

Text 12
नम: शान्ताय घोराय मूढाय गुणधर्मिणे ।
निर्विशेषाय साम्याय नमो ज्ञानघनाय च ॥ १२ ॥
namaḥ śāntāya ghorāya
mūḍhāya guṇa-dharmiṇe
nirviśeṣāya sāmyāya
namo jñāna-ghanāya ca
Synonyms
namaḥ — all obeisances; śāntāya — unto Him who is above all material qualities and completely peaceful, or unto Vāsudeva, the Supersoul in every living entity; ghorāya — unto the fierce forms of the Lord like Jāmadagnya and Nṛsiṁhadeva; mūḍhāya — the form of the Lord as an animal, such as the boar; guṇa-dharmiṇe — who accepts different qualities within the material world; nirviśeṣāya — who is without material qualities, being fully spiritual; sāmyāya — Lord Buddha, the form of nirvāṇa, wherein the material qualities stop; namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances; jñāna-ghanāya — who is knowledge or the impersonal Brahman; ca — also.

Translation
I offer my respectful obeisances to Lord Vāsudeva, who is all-pervading, to the Lord’s fierce form as Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva, to the Lord’s form as an animal [Lord Varāhadeva], to Lord Dattātreya, who preached impersonalism, to Lord Buddha, and to all the other incarnations. I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Lord, who has no material qualities but who accepts the three qualities goodness, passion and ignorance within this material world. I also offer my respectful obeisances unto the impersonal Brahman effulgence.

Text 13
क्षेत्रज्ञाय नमस्तुभ्यं सर्वाध्यक्षाय साक्षिणे ।
पुरुषायात्ममूलाय मूलप्रकृतये नम: ॥ १३ ॥
kṣetra-jñāya namas tubhyaṁ
sarvādhyakṣāya sākṣiṇe
puruṣāyātma-mūlāya
mūla-prakṛtaye namaḥ
Synonyms
kṣetra-jñāya — unto the one who knows everything of the external body; namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances; tubhyam — unto You; sarva — everything; adhyakṣāya — who are superintending, managing; sākṣiṇe — who are the witness, Paramātmā, or antaryāmī; puruṣāya — the Supreme Person; ātma-mūlāya — who are the original source of everything; mūla-prakṛtaye — unto the puruṣa-avatāra, the origin of prakṛti and pradhāna; namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances.

Translation
I beg to offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who are the Supersoul, the superintendent of everything, and the witness of all that occurs. You are the Supreme Person, the origin of material nature and of the total material energy. You are also the owner of the material body. Therefore, You are the supreme complete. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

Text 14
सर्वेन्द्रियगुणद्रष्ट्रे सर्वप्रत्ययहेतवे ।
असताच्छाययोक्ताय सदाभासाय ते नम: ॥ १४ ॥
sarvendriya-guṇa-draṣṭre
sarva-pratyaya-hetave
asatā cchāyayoktāya
sad-ābhāsāya te namaḥ
Synonyms
sarva-indriya-guṇa-draṣṭre — unto the seer of all objectives pursued by the senses; sarva-pratyaya-hetave — who is the solution to all doubts (and without whose help one cannot solve all doubts and inabilities); asatā — with the manifestation of unreality or illusion; chāyayā — because of the resemblance; uktāya — called; sat — of reality; ābhāsāya — unto the reflection; te — unto You; namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances.

Translation
My Lord, You are the observer of all the objectives of the senses. Without Your mercy, there is no possibility of solving the problem of doubts. The material world is just like a shadow resembling You. Indeed, one accepts this material world as real because it gives a glimpse of Your existence.

Text 15
नमो नमस्तेऽखिलकारणाय
निष्कारणायाद्भ‍ुतकारणाय ।
सर्वागमाम्नायमहार्णवाय
नमोऽपवर्गाय परायणाय ॥ १५ ॥
namo namas te ’khila-kāraṇāya
niṣkāraṇāyādbhuta-kāraṇāya
sarvāgamāmnāya-mahārṇavāya
namo ’pavargāya parāyaṇāya
Synonyms
namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances; namaḥ — again I offer my respectful obeisances; te — unto You; akhila-kāraṇāya — unto the supreme cause of everything; niṣkāraṇāya — unto You who are causeless; adbhuta-kāraṇāya — the wonderful cause of everything; sarva — all; āgama-āmnāya — unto the source of the paramparā system of all Vedic knowledge; mahā-arṇavāya — the great ocean of knowledge, or the great ocean wherein all the rivers of knowledge merge; namaḥ — I offer my obeisances; apavargāya — unto You who can give deliverance or liberation; para-ayaṇāya — the shelter of all transcendentalists.

Translation
My Lord, You are the cause of all causes, but You Yourself have no cause. Therefore You are the wonderful cause of everything. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, who are the shelter of the Vedic knowledge contained in the śāstras like the Pañcarātras and Vedānta-sūtra, which are Your representations, and who are the source of the paramparā system. Because it is You who can give liberation, You are the only shelter for all transcendentalists. Let me offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

Text 16
गुणारणिच्छन्नचिदुष्मपाय
तत्क्षोभविस्फूर्जितमानसाय ।
नैष्कर्म्यभावेन विवर्जितागम-
स्वयंप्रकाशाय नमस्करोमि ॥ १६ ॥
guṇāraṇi-cchanna-cid-uṣmapāya
tat-kṣobha-visphūrjita-mānasāya
naiṣkarmya-bhāvena vivarjitāgama-
svayaṁ-prakāśāya namas karomi
Synonyms
guṇa — by the three guṇas, the modes of material nature (sattva, rajas and tamas); araṇi — by araṇi wood; channa — covered; cit — of knowledge; uṣmapāya — unto Him whose fire; tat-kṣobha — of the agitation of the modes of material nature; visphūrjita — outside; mānasāya — unto Him whose mind; naiṣkarmya-bhāvena — because of the stage of spiritual understanding; vivarjita — in those who give up; āgama — Vedic principles; svayam — personally; prakāśāya — unto Him who is manifest; namaḥ karomi — I offer my respectful obeisances.

Translation
My Lord, as the fire in araṇi wood is covered, You and Your unlimited knowledge are covered by the material modes of nature. Your mind, however, is not attentive to the activities of the modes of nature. Those who are advanced in spiritual knowledge are not subject to the regulative principles directed in the Vedic literatures. Because such advanced souls are transcendental, You personally appear in their pure minds. Therefore I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

Text 17
माद‍ृक्प्रपन्नपशुपाशविमोक्षणाय
मुक्ताय भूरिकरुणाय नमोऽलयाय ।
स्वांशेन सर्वतनुभृन्मनसि प्रतीत-
प्रत्यग्द‍ृशे भगवते बृहते नमस्ते ॥ १७ ॥
mādṛk prapanna-paśu-pāśa-vimokṣaṇāya
muktāya bhūri-karuṇāya namo ’layāya
svāṁśena sarva-tanu-bhṛn-manasi pratīta-
pratyag-dṛśe bhagavate bṛhate namas te
Synonyms
mādṛk — like me; prapanna — surrendered; paśu — an animal; pāśa — from entanglement; vimokṣaṇāya — unto Him who releases; muktāya — unto the Supreme, who is untouched by the contamination of material nature; bhūri-karuṇāya — who are unlimitedly merciful; namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances; alayāya — who are never inattentive or idle (for the purpose of my deliverance); sva-aṁśena — by Your partial feature as Paramātmā; sarva — of all; tanu-bhṛt — the living entities embodied in material nature; manasi — in the mind; pratīta — who are acknowledged; pratyak-dṛśe — as the direct observer (of all activities); bhagavate — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bṛhate — who are unlimited; namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances; te — unto You.

Translation
Since an animal such as me has surrendered unto You, who are supremely liberated, certainly You will release me from this dangerous position. Indeed, being extremely merciful, You incessantly try to deliver me. By your partial feature as Paramātmā, You are situated in the hearts of all embodied beings. You are celebrated as direct transcendental knowledge, and You are unlimited. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 18
आत्मात्मजाप्तगृहवित्तजनेषु सक्तै-
र्दुष्प्रापणाय गुणसङ्गविवर्जिताय ।
मुक्तात्मभि: स्वहृदये परिभाविताय
ज्ञानात्मने भगवते नम ईश्वराय ॥ १८ ॥
ātmātma-jāpta-gṛha-vitta-janeṣu saktair
duṣprāpaṇāya guṇa-saṅga-vivarjitāya
muktātmabhiḥ sva-hṛdaye paribhāvitāya
jñānātmane bhagavate nama īśvarāya
Synonyms
ātma — the mind and body; ātma-ja — sons and daughters; āpta — friends and relatives; gṛha — home, community, society and nation; vitta — wealth; janeṣu — to various servants and assistants; saktaiḥ — by those who are too attached; duṣprāpaṇāya — unto You, who are very difficult to achieve; guṇa-saṅga — by the three modes of material nature; vivarjitāya — who are not contaminated; mukta-ātmabhiḥ — by persons who are already liberated; sva-hṛdaye — within the core of the heart; paribhāvitāya — unto You, who are always meditated upon; jñāna-ātmane — the reservoir of all enlightenment; bhagavate — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances; īśvarāya — unto the supreme controller.

Translation
My Lord, those who are completely freed from material contamination always meditate upon You within the cores of their hearts. You are extremely difficult to attain for those like me who are too attached to mental concoction, home, relatives, friends, money, servants and assistants. You are the Supreme Personality of Godhead, uncontaminated by the modes of nature. You are the reservoir of all enlightenment, the supreme controller. I therefore offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

Text 19
यं धर्मकामार्थविमुक्तिकामा
भजन्त इष्टां गतिमाप्नुवन्ति ।
किं चाशिषो रात्यपि देहमव्ययं
करोतु मेऽदभ्रदयो विमोक्षणम् ॥ १९ ॥
yaṁ dharma-kāmārtha-vimukti-kāmā
bhajanta iṣṭāṁ gatim āpnuvanti
kiṁ cāśiṣo rāty api deham avyayaṁ
karotu me ’dabhra-dayo vimokṣaṇam
Synonyms
yam — the Supreme Personality of Godhead who; dharma-kāma-artha-vimukti-kāmāḥ — persons who desire the four principles of religion, economic development, sense gratification and salvation; bhajantaḥ — by worshiping; iṣṭām — the objective; gatim — destination; āpnuvanti — can achieve; kim — what to speak of; ca — also; āśiṣaḥ — other benedictions; rāti — He bestows; api — even; deham — a body; avyayam — spiritual; karotu — may He bestow benediction; me — unto me; adabhra-dayaḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is unlimitedly merciful; vimokṣaṇam — liberation from the present danger and from the material world.

Translation
After worshiping the Supreme Personality of Godhead, those who are interested in the four principles of religion, economic development, sense gratification and liberation obtain from Him what they desire. What then is to be said of other benedictions? Indeed, sometimes the Lord gives a spiritual body to such ambitious worshipers. May that Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is unlimitedly merciful, bestow upon me the benediction of liberation from this present danger and from the materialistic way of life.

Texts 20-21
एकान्तिनो यस्य न कञ्चनार्थं
वाञ्छन्ति ये वै भगवत्प्रपन्ना: ।
अत्यद्भ‍ुतं तच्चरितं सुमङ्गलं
गायन्त आनन्दसमुद्रमग्ना: ॥ २० ॥
तमक्षरं ब्रह्म परं परेश-
मव्यक्तमाध्यात्मिकयोगगम्यम् ।
अतीन्द्रियं सूक्ष्ममिवातिदूर-
मनन्तमाद्यं परिपूर्णमीडे ॥ २१ ॥
ekāntino yasya na kañcanārthaṁ
vāñchanti ye vai bhagavat-prapannāḥ
aty-adbhutaṁ tac-caritaṁ sumaṅgalaṁ
gāyanta ānanda-samudra-magnāḥ
tam akṣaraṁ brahma paraṁ pareśam
avyaktam ādhyātmika-yoga-gamyam
atīndriyaṁ sūkṣmam ivātidūram
anantam ādyaṁ paripūrṇam īḍe
Synonyms
ekāntinaḥ — unalloyed devotees (who have no desire other than Kṛṣṇa consciousness); yasya — the Lord, of whom; na — not; kañcana — some; artham — benediction; vāñchanti — desire; ye — those devotees who; vai — indeed; bhagavat-prapannāḥ — fully surrendered unto the lotus feet of the Lord; ati-adbhutam — which are wonderful; tat-caritam — the activities of the Lord; su-maṅgalam — and very auspicious (to hear); gāyantaḥ — by chanting and hearing; ānanda — of transcendental bliss; samudra — in the ocean; magnāḥ — who are immersed; tam — unto Him; akṣaram — eternally existing; brahma — the Supreme; param — transcendental; para-īśam — the Lord of the supreme personalities; avyaktam — invisible or not able to be realized by the mind and senses; ādhyātmika — transcendental; yoga — by bhakti-yoga, devotional service; gamyam — obtainable (bhaktyā mām abhijānāti); ati-indriyam — beyond the perception of material senses; sūkṣmam — minute; iva — like; ati-dūram — very far away; anantam — unlimited; ādyam — the original cause of everything; paripūrṇam — completely full; īḍe — I offer my obeisances.

Translation
Unalloyed devotees, who have no desire other than to serve the Lord, worship Him in full surrender and always hear and chant about His activities, which are most wonderful and auspicious. Thus they always merge in an ocean of transcendental bliss. Such devotees never ask the Lord for any benediction. I, however, am in danger. Thus I pray to that Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is eternally existing, who is invisible, who is the Lord of all great personalities, such as Brahmā, and who is available only by transcendental bhakti-yoga. Being extremely subtle, He is beyond the reach of my senses and transcendental to all external realization. He is unlimited, He is the original cause, and He is completely full in everything. I offer my obeisances unto Him.

Texts 22-24
यस्य ब्रह्मादयो देवा वेदा लोकाश्चराचरा: ।
नामरूपविभेदेन फल्ग्व्या च कलया कृता: ॥ २२ ॥
यथार्चिषोऽग्ने: सवितुर्गभस्तयो
निर्यान्ति संयान्त्यसकृत् स्वरोचिष: ।
तथा यतोऽयं गुणसम्प्रवाहो
बुद्धिर्मन: खानि शरीरसर्गा: ॥ २३ ॥
स वै न देवासुरमर्त्यतिर्यङ्
न स्त्री न षण्ढो न पुमान् न जन्तु: ।
नायं गुण: कर्म न सन्न चासन्
निषेधशेषो जयतादशेष: ॥ २४ ॥
yasya brahmādayo devā
vedā lokāś carācarāḥ
nāma-rūpa-vibhedena
phalgvyā ca kalayā kṛtāḥ
yathārciṣo ’gneḥ savitur gabhastayo
niryānti saṁyānty asakṛt sva-rociṣaḥ
tathā yato ’yaṁ guṇa-sampravāho
buddhir manaḥ khāni śarīra-sargāḥ
sa vai na devāsura-martya-tiryaṅ
na strī na ṣaṇḍho na pumān na jantuḥ
nāyaṁ guṇaḥ karma na san na cāsan
niṣedha-śeṣo jayatād aśeṣaḥ
Synonyms
yasya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead who; brahma-ādayaḥ — the great demigods, headed by Lord Brahmā; devāḥ — and other demigods; vedāḥ — the Vedic knowledge; lokāḥ — different personalities; cara-acarāḥ — the moving and the nonmoving (like trees and plants); nāma-rūpa — of different names and different forms; vibhedena — by such divisions; phalgvyā — who are less important; ca — also; kalayā — by the parts; kṛtāḥ — created; yathā — as; arciṣaḥ — the sparks; agneḥ — of fire; savituḥ — from the sun; gabhastayaḥ — the shining particles; niryānti — emanate from; saṁyānti — and enter into; asakṛt — again and again; sva-rociṣaḥ — as parts and parcels; tathā — similarly; yataḥ — the Personality of Godhead from whom; ayam — this; guṇa-sampravāhaḥ — continuous manifestation of the different modes of nature; buddhiḥ manaḥ — the intelligence and mind; khāni — the senses; śarīra — of the body (gross and subtle); sargāḥ — the divisions; saḥ — that Supreme Personality of Godhead; vai — indeed; na — is not; deva — demigod; asura — demon; martya — human being; tiryak — bird or beast; na — neither; strī — woman; na — nor; ṣaṇḍhaḥ — neuter; na — neither; pumān — man; na — nor; jantuḥ — living being or animal; na ayam — nor is He; guṇaḥ — material quality; karma — fruitive activity; na — is not; sat — manifestation; na — nor; ca — also; asat — nonmanifestation; niṣedha — of the discrimination of neti neti (“not this, not this”); śeṣaḥ — He is the end; jayatāt — all glories unto Him; aśeṣaḥ — who is unlimited.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead creates His minor parts and parcels, the jīva-tattva, beginning with Lord Brahmā, the demigods and the expansions of Vedic knowledge [Sāma, Ṛg, Yajur and Atharva] and including all other living entities, moving and nonmoving, with their different names and characteristics. As the sparks of a fire or the shining rays of the sun emanate from their source and merge into it again and again, the mind, the intelligence, the senses, the gross and subtle material bodies, and the continuous transformations of the different modes of nature all emanate from the Lord and again merge into Him. He is neither demigod nor demon, neither human nor bird or beast. He is not woman, man, or neuter, nor is He an animal. He is not a material quality, a fruitive activity, a manifestation or nonmanifestation. He is the last word in the discrimination of “not this, not this,” and He is unlimited. All glories to the Supreme Personality of Godhead!

Text 25
जिजीविषे नाहमिहामुया कि-
मन्तर्बहिश्चावृतयेभयोन्या ।
इच्छामि कालेन न यस्य विप्लव-
स्तस्यात्मलोकावरणस्य मोक्षम् ॥ २५ ॥
jijīviṣe nāham ihāmuyā kim
antar bahiś cāvṛtayebha-yonyā
icchāmi kālena na yasya viplavas
tasyātma-lokāvaraṇasya mokṣam
Synonyms
jijīviṣe — wish to live long; na — not; aham — I; iha — in this life; amuyā — or in the next life (I do not wish to live upon being saved from this dangerous position); kim — what is the value; antaḥ — internally; bahiḥ — externally; ca — and; āvṛtayā — covered by ignorance; ibha-yonyā — in this birth as an elephant; icchāmi — I desire; kālena — because of the influence of time; na — there is not; yasya — of which; viplavaḥ — annihilation; tasya — that; ātma-loka-āvaraṇasya — from the covering of self-realization; mokṣam — liberation.

Translation
I do not wish to live anymore after I am released from the attack of the crocodile. What is the use of an elephant’s body covered externally and internally by ignorance? I simply desire eternal liberation from the covering of ignorance. That covering is not destroyed by the influence of time.

Text 26
सोऽहं विश्वसृजं विश्वमविश्वं विश्ववेदसम् ।
विश्वात्मानमजं ब्रह्म प्रणतोऽस्मि परं पदम् ॥ २६ ॥
so ’haṁ viśva-sṛjaṁ viśvam
aviśvaṁ viśva-vedasam
viśvātmānam ajaṁ brahma
praṇato ’smi paraṁ padam
Synonyms
saḥ — that; aham — I (the person desiring release from material life); viśva-sṛjam — unto Him who has created this cosmic manifestation; viśvam — who is Himself the whole cosmic presentation; aviśvam — although He is transcendental to the cosmic manifestation; viśva-vedasam — who is the knower or ingredient of this universal manifestation; viśva-ātmānam — the soul of the universe; ajam — who is never born, eternally existing; brahma — the Supreme; praṇataḥ asmi — I offer my respectful obeisances; param — who is transcendental; padam — the shelter.

Translation
Now, fully desiring release from material life, I offer my respectful obeisances unto that Supreme Person who is the creator of the universe, who is Himself the form of the universe and who is nonetheless transcendental to this cosmic manifestation. He is the supreme knower of everything in this world, the Supersoul of the universe. He is the unborn, supremely situated Lord. I offer my respectful obeisances unto Him.

Text 27
योगरन्धितकर्माणो हृदि योगविभाविते ।
योगिनो यं प्रपश्यन्ति योगेशं तं नतोऽस्म्यहम् ॥ २७ ॥
yoga-randhita-karmāṇo
hṛdi yoga-vibhāvite
yogino yaṁ prapaśyanti
yogeśaṁ taṁ nato ’smy aham
Synonyms
yoga-randhita-karmāṇaḥ — persons whose reactions to fruitive activities have been burnt up by bhakti-yoga; hṛdi — within the core of the heart; yoga-vibhāvite — completely purified and clean; yoginaḥ — mystics who are competent; yam — unto the Personality of Godhead who; prapaśyanti — directly see; yoga-īśam — unto that Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of all mystic yoga; tam — unto Him; nataḥ asmi — offering obeisances; aham — I.

Translation
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme, the Supersoul, the master of all mystic yoga, who is seen in the core of the heart by perfect mystics when they are completely purified and freed from the reactions of fruitive activity by practicing bhakti-yoga.

Text 28
नमो नमस्तुभ्यमसह्यवेग-
शक्तित्रयायाखिलधीगुणाय ।
प्रपन्नपालाय दुरन्तशक्तये
कदिन्द्रियाणामनवाप्यवर्त्मने ॥ २८ ॥
namo namas tubhyam asahya-vega-
śakti-trayāyākhila-dhī-guṇāya
prapanna-pālāya duranta-śaktaye
kad-indriyāṇām anavāpya-vartmane
Synonyms
namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances; namaḥ — again I offer my respectful obeisances; tubhyam — unto You; asahya — formidable; vega — forces; śakti-trayāya — unto the Supreme Person, who has threefold potencies; akhila — of the universe; dhī — for the intelligence; guṇāya — who appears as the sense objects; prapanna-pālāya — unto the Supreme, who gives shelter to the surrendered; duranta-śaktaye — who possesses energies very difficult to overcome; kat-indriyāṇām — by persons unable to control their senses; anavāpya — who is unattainable; vartmane — on the path.

Translation
My Lord, You are the controller of formidable strength in three kinds of energy. You appear as the reservoir of all sense pleasure and the protector of the surrendered souls. You possess unlimited energy, but You are unapproachable by those who are unable to control their senses. I offer my respectful obeisances unto You again and again.

Text 29
नायं वेद स्वमात्मानं यच्छक्त्याहंधिया हतम् ।
तं दुरत्ययमाहात्म्यं भगवन्तमितोऽस्म्यहम् ॥ २९ ॥
nāyaṁ veda svam ātmānaṁ
yac-chaktyāhaṁ-dhiyā hatam
taṁ duratyaya-māhātmyaṁ
bhagavantam ito ’smy aham
Synonyms
na — not; ayam — people in general; veda — know; svam — own; ātmānam — identity; yat-śaktyā — by whose influence; aham — I am independent; dhiyā — by this intelligence; hatam — defeated or covered; tam — unto Him; duratyaya — difficult to understand; māhātmyam — whose glories; bhagavantam — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; itaḥ — taking shelter; asmi aham — I am.

Translation
I offer my respectful obeisances unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, by whose illusory energy the jīva, who is part and parcel of God, forgets his real identity because of the bodily concept of life. I take shelter of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose glories are difficult to understand.

Text 30
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं गजेन्द्रमुपवर्णितनिर्विशेषं
ब्रह्मादयो विविधलिङ्गभिदाभिमाना: ।
नैते यदोपससृपुर्निखिलात्मकत्वात्
तत्राखिलामरमयो हरिराविरासीत् ॥ ३० ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ gajendram upavarṇita-nirviśeṣaṁ
brahmādayo vividha-liṅga-bhidābhimānāḥ
naite yadopasasṛpur nikhilātmakatvāt
tatrākhilāmara-mayo harir āvirāsīt
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — in this way; gajendram — unto the King of the elephants, Gajendra; upavarṇita — whose description; nirviśeṣam — not directed to any particular person (but to the Supreme, although he did not know who the Supreme is); brahmā-ādayaḥ — the demigods, beginning with Brahmā, Śiva, Indra and Candra; vividha — varieties; liṅga-bhidā — with separate forms; abhimānāḥ — considering themselves separate authorities; na — not; ete — all of them; yadā — when; upasasṛpuḥ — approached; nikhila-ātmakatvāt — because the Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Supersoul of everyone; tatra — there; akhila — of the universe; amara-mayaḥ — consisting of the demigods (who are only external parts of the body); hariḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can take away everything; āvirāsīt — appeared (before the elephant).

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: When the King of the elephants was describing the supreme authority, without mentioning any particular person, he did not invoke the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, Indra and Candra. Thus none of them approached him. However, because Lord Hari is the Supersoul, Puruṣottama, the Personality of Godhead, He appeared before Gajendra.

Text 31
तं तद्वदार्तमुपलभ्य जगन्निवास:
स्तोत्रं निशम्य दिविजै: सह संस्तुवद्भ‍ि: ।
छन्दोमयेन गरुडेन समुह्यमान-
श्चक्रायुधोऽभ्यगमदाशु यतो गजेन्द्र: ॥ ३१ ॥
taṁ tadvad ārtam upalabhya jagan-nivāsaḥ
stotraṁ niśamya divijaiḥ saha saṁstuvadbhiḥ
chandomayena garuḍena samuhyamānaś
cakrāyudho ’bhyagamad āśu yato gajendraḥ
Synonyms
tam — unto him (Gajendra); tadvat — in that way; ārtam — who was very depressed (because of being attacked by the crocodile); upalabhya — understanding; jagat-nivāsaḥ — the Lord, who exists everywhere; stotram — the prayer; niśamya — hearing; divijaiḥ — the denizens of the heavenly planets; saha — with; saṁstuvadbhiḥ — who were offering their prayers also; chandomayena — with the speed He desired; garuḍena — by Garuḍa; samuhyamānaḥ — being carried; cakra — carrying His disc; āyudhaḥ — and other weapons, like the club; abhyagamat — arrived; āśu — immediately; yataḥ — where; gajendraḥ — the King of the elephants, Gajendra, was situated.

Translation
After understanding the awkward condition of Gajendra, who had offered his prayers, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, who lives everywhere, appeared with the demigods, who were offering prayers to Him. Carrying His disc and other weapons, He appeared there on the back of His carrier, Garuḍa, with great speed, according to His desire. Thus He appeared before Gajendra.

Text 32
सोऽन्त:सरस्युरुबलेन गृहीत आर्तो
द‍ृष्ट्वा गरुत्मति हरिं ख उपात्तचक्रम् ।
उत्क्षिप्य साम्बुजकरं गिरमाह कृच्छ्रा-
न्नारायणाखिलगुरो भगवन् नमस्ते ॥ ३२ ॥
so ’ntaḥ-sarasy urubalena gṛhīta ārto
dṛṣṭvā garutmati hariṁ kha upātta-cakram
utkṣipya sāmbuja-karaṁ giramāha kṛcchrān
nārāyaṇākhila-guro bhagavan namas te
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Gajendra); antaḥ-sarasi — in the water; uru-balena — with great force; gṛhītaḥ — who had been captured by the crocodile; ārtaḥ — and severely suffering; dṛṣṭvā — upon seeing; garutmati — on the back of Garuḍa; harim — the Lord; khe — in the sky; upātta-cakram — wielding His disc; utkṣipya — raising; sa-ambuja-karam — his trunk, along with a lotus flower; giramāha — uttered the words; kṛcchrāt — with great difficulty (because of his precarious position); nārāyaṇa — O my Lord Nārāyaṇa; akhila-guro — O universal Lord; bhagavan — O Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaḥ te — I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

Translation
Gajendra had been forcefully captured by the crocodile in the water and was feeling acute pain, but when he saw that Nārāyaṇa, wielding His disc, was coming in the sky on the back of Garuḍa, he immediately took a lotus flower in his trunk, and with great difficulty due to his painful condition, he uttered the following words: “O my Lord, Nārāyaṇa, master of the universe, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances unto You.”

Text 33
तं वीक्ष्य पीडितमज: सहसावतीर्य
सग्राहमाशु सरस: कृपयोज्जहार ।
ग्राहाद् विपाटितमुखादरिणा गजेन्द्रं
संपश्यतां हरिरमूमुचदुच्छ्रियाणाम् ॥ ३३ ॥
taṁ vīkṣya pīḍitam ajaḥ sahasāvatīrya
sa-grāham āśu sarasaḥ kṛpayojjahāra
grāhād vipāṭita-mukhād ariṇā gajendraṁ
saṁpaśyatāṁ harir amūmucad ucchriyāṇām
Synonyms
tam — him (Gajendra); vīkṣya — after seeing (in that condition); pīḍitam — who was very aggrieved; ajaḥ — the unborn, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sahasā — all of a sudden; avatīrya — getting down (from the back of Garuḍa); sa-grāham — with the crocodile; āśu — immediately; sarasaḥ — from the water; kṛpayā — out of great mercy; ujjahāra — took out; grāhāt — from the crocodile; vipāṭita — separated; mukhāt — from the mouth; ariṇā — with the disc; gajendram — Gajendra; sampaśyatām — who were looking on; hariḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; amūm — him (Gajendra); ucat — saved; ucchriyāṇām — in the presence of all the demigods.

Translation
Thereafter, seeing Gajendra in such an aggrieved position, the unborn Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, immediately got down from the back of Garuḍa by His causeless mercy and pulled the King of the elephants, along with the crocodile, out of the water. Then, in the presence of all the demigods, who were looking on, the Lord severed the crocodile’s mouth from its body with His disc. In this way He saved Gajendra, the King of the elephants.