Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं स्तुत: सुरगणैर्भगवान् हरिरीश्वर: ।
तेषामाविरभूद् राजन्सहस्रार्कोदयद्युति: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ stutaḥ sura-gaṇair
bhagavān harir īśvaraḥ
teṣām āvirabhūd rājan
sahasrārkodaya-dyutiḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — in this way; stutaḥ — being worshiped by prayers; sura-gaṇaiḥ — by the demigods; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; hariḥ — the vanquisher of all inauspiciousness; īśvaraḥ — the supreme controller; teṣām — in front of Lord Brahmā and all the demigods; āvirabhūt — appeared there; rājan — O King (Parīkṣit); sahasra — of thousands; arka — of suns; udaya — like the rising; dyutiḥ — His effulgence.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King Parīkṣit, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, being thus worshiped with prayers by the demigods and Lord Brahmā, appeared before them. His bodily effulgence resembled the simultaneous rising of thousands of suns.

Text 2
tenaiva sahasā sarve
devāḥ pratihatekṣaṇāḥ
nāpaśyan khaṁ diśaḥ kṣauṇīm
ātmānaṁ ca kuto vibhum
Synonyms
tena eva — because of this; sahasā — all of a sudden; sarve — all; devāḥ — the demigods; pratihata-īkṣaṇāḥ — their vision being blocked; na — not; apaśyan — could see; kham — the sky; diśaḥ — the directions; kṣauṇīm — land; ātmānam ca — also themselves; kutaḥ — and where is the question of seeing; vibhum — the Supreme Lord.

Translation
The vision of all the demigods was blocked by the Lord’s effulgence. Thus they could see neither the sky, the directions, the land, nor even themselves, what to speak of seeing the Lord, who was present before them.

Texts 3-7
विरिञ्चो भगवान्‍द‍ृष्ट्वा सह शर्वेण तां तनुम् ।
स्वच्छां मरकतश्यामां कञ्जगर्भारुणेक्षणाम् ॥ ३ ॥
तप्तहेमावदातेन लसत्कौशेयवाससा ।
प्रसन्नचारुसर्वाङ्गीं सुमुखीं सुन्दरभ्रुवम् ॥ ४ ॥
महामणिकिरीटेन केयूराभ्यां च भूषिताम् ।
कर्णाभरणनिर्भातकपोलश्रीमुखाम्बुजाम् ॥ ५ ॥
काञ्चीकलापवलयहारनूपुरशोभिताम् ।
कौस्तुभाभरणां लक्ष्मीं बिभ्रतीं वनमालिनीम् ॥ ६ ॥
सुदर्शनादिभि: स्वास्त्रैर्मूर्तिमद्भ‍िरुपासिताम् ।
तुष्टाव देवप्रवर: सशर्व: पुरुषं परम् ।
सर्वामरगणै: साकं सर्वाङ्गैरवनिं गतै: ॥ ७ ॥
viriñco bhagavān dṛṣṭvā
saha śarveṇa tāṁ tanum
svacchāṁ marakata-śyāmāṁ
kañja-garbhāruṇekṣaṇām
tapta-hemāvadātena
lasat-kauśeya-vāsasā
prasanna-cāru-sarvāṅgīṁ
sumukhīṁ sundara-bhruvam
mahā-maṇi-kirīṭena
keyūrābhyāṁ ca bhūṣitām
karṇābharaṇa-nirbhāta-
kapola-śrī-mukhāmbujām
kāñcīkalāpa-valaya-
hāra-nūpura-śobhitām
kaustubhābharaṇāṁ lakṣmīṁ
bibhratīṁ vana-mālinīm
sudarśanādibhiḥ svāstrair
mūrtimadbhir upāsitām
tuṣṭāva deva-pravaraḥ
saśarvaḥ puruṣaṁ param
sarvāmara-gaṇaiḥ sākaṁ
sarvāṅgair avaniṁ gataiḥ
Synonyms
viriñcaḥ — Lord Brahmā; bhagavān — who is also addressed as bhagavān because of his powerful position; dṛṣṭvā — by seeing; saha — with; śarveṇa — Lord Śiva; tām — unto the Supreme Lord; tanum — His transcendental form; svacchām — without material contamination; marakata-śyāmām — with a bodily luster like the light of a blue gem; kañja-garbha-aruṇa-īkṣaṇām — with pinkish eyes like the womb of a lotus flower; tapta-hema-avadātena — with a luster like that of molten gold; lasat — shining; kauśeya-vāsasā — dressed in yellow silk garments; prasanna-cāru-sarva-aṅgīm — all the parts of whose body were graceful and very beautiful; su-mukhīm — with a smiling face; sundara-bhruvam — whose eyebrows were very beautifully situated; mahā-maṇi-kirīṭena — with a helmet bedecked with valuable jewels; keyūrābhyām ca bhūṣitām — decorated with all kinds of ornaments; karṇa-ābharaṇa-nirbhāta — illuminated by the rays of the jewels on His ears; kapola — with cheeks; śrī-mukha-ambujām — whose beautiful lotuslike face; kāñcī-kalāpa-valaya — ornaments like the belt on the waist and bangles on the hands; hāra-nūpura — with a necklace on the chest and ankle bells on the legs; śobhitām — all beautifully set; kaustubha-ābharaṇām — whose chest was decorated with the Kaustubha gem; lakṣmīm — the goddess of fortune; bibhratīm — moving; vana-mālinīm — with flower garlands; sudarśana-ādibhiḥ — bearing the Sudarśana cakra and others; sva-astraiḥ — with His weapons; mūrtimadbhiḥ — in His original form; upāsitām — being worshiped; tuṣṭāva — satisfied; deva-pravaraḥ — the chief of the demigods; sa-śarvaḥ — with Lord Śiva; puruṣam param — the Supreme Personality; sarva-amara-gaṇaiḥ — accompanied by all the demigods; sākam — with; sarva-aṅgaiḥ — with all the parts of the body; avanim — on the ground; gataiḥ — prostrated.

Translation
Lord Brahmā, along with Lord Śiva, saw the crystal-clear personal beauty of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, whose blackish body resembles a marakata gem, whose eyes are reddish like the depths of a lotus, who is dressed with garments that are yellow like molten gold, and whose entire body is attractively decorated. They saw His beautiful, smiling, lotuslike face, crowned by a helmet bedecked with valuable jewels. The Lord has attractive eyebrows, and His cheeks are adorned with earrings. Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva saw the belt on the Lord’s waist, the bangles on His arms, the necklace on His chest, and the ankle bells on His legs. The Lord is bedecked with flower garlands, His neck is decorated with the Kaustubha gem, and He carries with Him the goddess of fortune and His personal weapons, like His disc and club. When Lord Brahmā, along with Lord Śiva and the other demigods, thus saw the form of the Lord, they all immediately fell to the ground, offering their obeisances.

Text 8
श्रीब्रह्मोवाच
अजातजन्मस्थितिसंयमाया-
गुणाय निर्वाणसुखार्णवाय ।
अणोरणिम्नेऽपरिगण्यधाम्ने
śrī-brahmovāca
ajāta-janma-sthiti-saṁyamāyā-
guṇāya nirvāṇa-sukhārṇavāya
aṇor aṇimne ’parigaṇya-dhāmne
mahānubhāvāya namo namas te
Synonyms
śrī-brahmā uvāca — Lord Brahmā said; ajāta-janma-sthiti-saṁyamāya — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is never born but whose appearance in different incarnations never ceases; aguṇāya — never affected by the material modes of nature (sattva-guṇa, rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa); nirvāṇa-sukha-arṇavāya — unto the ocean of eternal bliss, beyond material existence; aṇoḥ aṇimne — smaller than the atom; aparigaṇya-dhāmne — whose bodily features are never to be conceived by material speculation; mahā-anubhāvāya — whose existence is inconceivable; namaḥ — offering our obeisances; namaḥ — again offering our obeisances; te — unto You.

Translation
Lord Brahmā said: Although You are never born, Your appearance and disappearance as an incarnation never cease. You are always free from the material qualities, and You are the shelter of transcendental bliss resembling an ocean. Eternally existing in Your transcendental form, You are the supreme subtle of the most extremely subtle. We therefore offer our respectful obeisances unto You, the Supreme, whose existence is inconceivable.

Text 9
रूपं तवैतत् पुरुषर्षभेज्यं
श्रेयोऽर्थिभिर्वैदिकतान्त्रिकेण ।
योगेन धात: सह नस्त्रिलोकान्
पश्याम्यमुष्मिन्नु ह विश्वमूर्तौ ॥ ९ ॥
rūpaṁ tavaitat puruṣarṣabhejyaṁ
śreyo ’rthibhir vaidika-tāntrikeṇa
yogena dhātaḥ saha nas tri-lokān
paśyāmy amuṣminn u ha viśva-mūrtau
Synonyms
rūpam — form; tava — Your; etat — this; puruṣa-ṛṣabha — O best of all personalities; ijyam — worshipable; śreyaḥ — ultimate auspiciousness; arthibhiḥ — by persons who desire; vaidika — under the direction of Vedic instructions; tāntrikeṇa — realized by followers of Tantras, like Nārada-pañcarātra; yogena — by practice of mystic yoga; dhātaḥ — O supreme director; saha — with; naḥ — us (the demigods); tri-lokān — controlling the three worlds; paśyāmi — we see directly; amuṣmin — in You; u — oh; ha — completely manifested; viśva-mūrtau — in You, who have the universal form.

Translation
O best of persons, O supreme director, those who actually aspire for supreme good fortune worship this form of Your Lordship according to the Vedic Tantras. My Lord, we can see all the three worlds in You.

Text 10
त्वय्यग्र आसीत् त्वयि मध्य आसीत्
त्वय्यन्त आसीदिदमात्मतन्त्रे ।
त्वमादिरन्तो जगतोऽस्य मध्यं
घटस्य मृत्स्‍नेव पर: परस्मात् ॥ १० ॥
tvayy agra āsīt tvayi madhya āsīt
tvayy anta āsīd idam ātma-tantre
tvam ādir anto jagato ’sya madhyaṁ
ghaṭasya mṛtsneva paraḥ parasmāt
Synonyms
tvayi — unto You, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; agre — in the beginning; āsīt — there was; tvayi — unto You; madhye — in the middle; āsīt — there was; tvayi — unto You; ante — in the end; āsīt — there was; idam — all of this cosmic manifestation; ātma-tantre — fully under Your control; tvam — Your Lordship; ādiḥ — beginning; antaḥ — end; jagataḥ — of the cosmic manifestation; asya — of this; madhyam — middle; ghaṭasya — of an earthen pot; mṛtsnā iva — like the earth; paraḥ — transcendental; parasmāt — because of being the chief.

Translation
My dear Lord, who are always fully independent, this entire cosmic manifestation arises from You, rests upon You and ends in You. Your Lordship is the beginning, sustenance and end of everything, like the earth, which is the cause of an earthen pot, which supports the pot, and to which the pot, when broken, finally returns.

Text 11
त्वं माययात्माश्रयया स्वयेदं
निर्माय विश्वं तदनुप्रविष्ट: ।
पश्यन्ति युक्ता मनसा मनीषिणो
गुणव्यवायेऽप्यगुणं विपश्चित: ॥ ११ ॥
tvaṁ māyayātmāśrayayā svayedaṁ
nirmāya viśvaṁ tad-anupraviṣṭaḥ
paśyanti yuktā manasā manīṣiṇo
guṇa-vyavāye ’py aguṇaṁ vipaścitaḥ
Synonyms
tvam — Your Lordship; māyayā — by Your eternal energy; ātma-āśrayayā — whose existence is under Your shelter; svayā — emanated from Yourself; idam — this; nirmāya — for the sake of creating; viśvam — the entire universe; tat — into it; anupraviṣṭaḥ — You enter; paśyanti — they see; yuktāḥ — persons in touch with You; manasā — by an elevated mind; manīṣiṇaḥ — people with advanced consciousness; guṇa — of material qualities; vyavāye — in the transformation; api — although; aguṇam — still untouched by the material qualities; vipaścitaḥ — those who are fully aware of the truth of śāstra.

Translation
O Supreme, You are independent in Your self and do not take help from others. Through Your own potency, You create this cosmic manifestation and enter into it. Those who are advanced in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, who are fully in knowledge of the authoritative śāstra, and who, through the practice of bhakti-yoga, are cleansed of all material contamination, can see with clear minds that although You exist within the transformations of the material qualities, Your presence is untouched by these qualities.

Text 12
यथाग्निमेधस्यमृतं च गोषु
भुव्यन्नमम्बूद्यमने च वृत्तिम् ।
योगैर्मनुष्या अधियन्ति हि त्वां
गुणेषु बुद्ध्या कवयो वदन्ति ॥ १२ ॥
yathāgnim edhasy amṛtaṁ ca goṣu
bhuvy annam ambūdyamane ca vṛttim
yogair manuṣyā adhiyanti hi tvāṁ
guṇeṣu buddhyā kavayo vadanti
Synonyms
yathā — as; agnim — fire; edhasi — in wood; amṛtam — milk, which is like nectar; ca — and; goṣu — from cows; bhuvi — on the ground; annam — food grains; ambu — water; udyamane — in enterprise; ca — also; vṛttim — livelihood; yogaiḥ — by practice of bhakti-yoga; manuṣyāḥ — human beings; adhiyanti — achieve; hi — indeed; tvām — You; guṇeṣu — in the material modes of nature; buddhyā — by intelligence; kavayaḥ — great personalities; vadanti — say.

Translation
As one can derive fire from wood, milk from the milk bag of the cow, food grains and water from the land, and prosperity in one’s livelihood from industrial enterprises, so, by the practice of bhakti-yoga, even within this material world, one can achieve Your favor or intelligently approach You. Those who are pious all affirm this.

Text 13
तं त्वां वयं नाथ समुज्जिहानं
सरोजनाभातिचिरेप्सितार्थम् ।
द‍ृष्ट्वा गता निर्वृतमद्य सर्वे
गजा दवार्ता इव गाङ्गमम्भ: ॥ १३ ॥
taṁ tvāṁ vayaṁ nātha samujjihānaṁ
saroja-nābhāticirepsitārtham
dṛṣṭvā gatā nirvṛtam adya sarve
gajā davārtā iva gāṅgam ambhaḥ
Synonyms
tam — O Lord; tvām — Your Lordship; vayam — all of us; nātha — O master; samujjihānam — now appearing before us with all glories; saroja-nābha — O Lord, whose navel resembles a lotus flower, or from whose navel grows a lotus flower; ati-cira — for an extremely long time; īpsita — desiring; artham — for the ultimate goal of life; dṛṣṭvā — seeing; gatāḥ — in our vision; nirvṛtam — transcendental happiness; adya — today; sarve — all of us; gajāḥ — elephants; dava-artāḥ — being afflicted in a forest fire; iva — like; gāṅgam ambhaḥ — with water from the Ganges.

Translation
Elephants afflicted by a forest fire become very happy when they get water from the Ganges. Similarly, O my Lord, from whose navel grows a lotus flower, since You have now appeared before us, we have become transcendentally happy. By seeing Your Lordship, whom we have desired to see for a very long time, we have achieved our ultimate goal in life.

Text 14
स त्वं विधत्स्वाखिललोकपाला
वयं यदर्थास्तव पादमूलम् ।
समागतास्ते बहिरन्तरात्मन्
किं वान्यविज्ञाप्यमशेषसाक्षिण: ॥ १४ ॥
sa tvaṁ vidhatsvākhila-loka-pālā
vayaṁ yad arthās tava pāda-mūlam
samāgatās te bahir-antar-ātman
kiṁ vānya-vijñāpyam aśeṣa-sākṣiṇaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — that; tvam — Your Lordship; vidhatsva — kindly do the needful; akhila-loka-pālāḥ — the demigods, directors of different departments of this universe; vayam — all of us; yat — that which; arthāḥ — purpose; tava — at Your Lordship’s; pāda-mūlam — lotus feet; samāgatāḥ — we have arrived; te — unto You; bahiḥ-antaḥ-ātman — O Supersoul of everyone, O constant internal and external witness; kim — what; vā — either; anya-vijñāpyam — we have to inform You; aśeṣa-sākṣiṇaḥ — the witness and knower of everything.

Translation
My Lord, we, the various demigods, the directors of this universe, have come to Your lotus feet. Please fulfill the purpose for which we have come. You are the witness of everything, from within and without. Nothing is unknown to You, and therefore it is unnecessary to inform You again of anything.

Text 15
अहं गिरित्रश्च सुरादयो ये
दक्षादयोऽग्नेरिव केतवस्ते ।
किं वा विदामेश पृथग्विभाता
विधत्स्व शं नो द्विजदेवमन्त्रम् ॥ १५ ॥
ahaṁ giritraś ca surādayo ye
dakṣādayo ’gner iva ketavas te
kiṁ vā vidāmeśa pṛthag-vibhātā
vidhatsva śaṁ no dvija-deva-mantram
Synonyms
aham — I (Lord Brahmā); giritraḥ — Lord Śiva; ca — also; sura-ādayaḥ — all the demigods; ye — as we are; dakṣa-ādayaḥ — headed by Mahārāja Dakṣa; agneḥ — of fire; iva — like; ketavaḥ — sparks; te — of You; kim — what; vā — either; vidāma — can we understand; īśa — O my Lord; pṛthak-vibhātāḥ — independently of You; vidhatsva — kindly bestow upon us; śam — good fortune; naḥ — our; dvija-deva-mantram — the means of deliverance suitable for the brāhmaṇas and demigods.

Translation
I [Lord Brahmā], Lord Śiva and all the demigods, accompanied by the prajāpatis like Dakṣa, are nothing but sparks illuminated by You, who are the original fire. Since we are particles of You, what can we understand about our welfare? O Supreme Lord, please give us the means of deliverance that is suitable for the brāhmaṇas and demigods.

Text 16
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं विरिञ्चादिभिरीडितस्तद्
विज्ञाय तेषां हृदयं यथैव ।
जगाद जीमूतगभीरया गिरा
बद्धाञ्जलीन्संवृतसर्वकारकान् ॥ १६ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ viriñcādibhir īḍitas tad
vijñāya teṣāṁ hṛdayaṁ yathaiva
jagāda jīmūta-gabhīrayā girā
baddhāñjalīn saṁvṛta-sarva-kārakān
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — thus; viriñca-ādibhiḥ — by all the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmā; īḍitaḥ — being worshiped; tat vijñāya — understanding the expectation; teṣām — of all of them; hṛdayam — the core of the heart; yathā — as; eva — indeed; jagāda — replied; jīmūta-gabhīrayā — like the sound of clouds; girā — by words; baddha-añjalīn — unto the demigods, who stood with folded hands; saṁvṛta — restrained; sarva — all; kārakān — senses.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: When the Lord was thus offered prayers by the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmā, He understood the purpose for which they had approached Him. Therefore, in a deep voice that resembled the rumbling of clouds, the Lord replied to the demigods, who all stood there attentively with folded hands.

Text 17
एक एवेश्वरस्तस्मिन्सुरकार्ये सुरेश्वर: ।
विहर्तुकामस्तानाह समुद्रोन्मथनादिभि: ॥ १७ ॥
eka eveśvaras tasmin
sura-kārye sureśvaraḥ
vihartu-kāmas tān āha
samudronmathanādibhiḥ
Synonyms
ekaḥ — alone; eva — indeed; īśvaraḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tasmin — in that; sura-kārye — the activities of the demigods; sura-īśvaraḥ — the Lord of the demigods, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vihartu — to enjoy pastimes; kāmaḥ — desiring; tān — unto the demigods; āha — said; samudra-unmathana-ādibhiḥ — by activities of churning the ocean.

Translation
Although the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the master of the demigods, was capable of performing the activities of the demigods by Himself, He wanted to enjoy pastimes in churning the ocean. Therefore He spoke as follows.

Text 18
श्रीभगवानुवाच
हन्त ब्रह्मन्नहो शम्भो हे देवा मम भाषितम् ।
श‍ृणुतावहिता: सर्वे श्रेयो व: स्याद् यथा सुरा: ॥ १८ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
hanta brahmann aho śambho
he devā mama bhāṣitam
śṛṇutāvahitāḥ sarve
śreyo vaḥ syād yathā surāḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; hanta — addressing them; brahman aho — O Lord Brahmā; śambho — O Lord Śiva; he — O; devāḥ — demigods; mama — My; bhāṣitam — statement; śṛṇuta — hear; avahitāḥ — with great attention; sarve — all of you; śreyaḥ — good fortune; vaḥ — for all of you; syāt — shall be; yathā — as; surāḥ — for the demigods.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: O Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva and other demigods, please hear Me with great attention, for what I say will bring good fortune for all of you.

Text 19
यात दानवदैतेयैस्तावत् सन्धिर्विधीयताम् ।
कालेनानुगृहीतैस्तैर्यावद् वो भव आत्मन: ॥ १९ ॥
yāta dānava-daiteyais
tāvat sandhir vidhīyatām
kālenānugṛhītais tair
yāvad vo bhava ātmanaḥ
Synonyms
yāta — just execute; dānava — with the demons; daiteyaiḥ — and the asuras; tāvat — so long; sandhiḥ — a truce; vidhīyatām — execute; kālena — by a favorable time (or kāvyena – by Śukrācārya); anugṛhītaiḥ — receiving benedictions; taiḥ — with them; yāvat — as long as; vaḥ — of you; bhavaḥ — good fortune; ātmanaḥ — of yourselves.

Translation
As long as you are not flourishing, you should make a truce with the demons and asuras, who are now being favored by time.

Text 20
अरयोऽपि हि सन्धेया: सति कार्यार्थगौरवे ।
अहिमूषिकवद् देवा ह्यर्थस्य पदवीं गतै: ॥ २० ॥
arayo ’pi hi sandheyāḥ
sati kāryārtha-gaurave
ahi-mūṣikavad devā
hy arthasya padavīṁ gataiḥ
Synonyms
arayaḥ — enemies; api — although; hi — indeed; sandheyāḥ — eligible for a truce; sati — being so; kārya-artha-gaurave — in the matter of an important duty; ahi — snake; mūṣika — mouse; vat — like; devāḥ — O demigods; hi — indeed; arthasya — of interest; padavīm — position; gataiḥ — so being.

Translation
O demigods, fulfilling one’s own interests is so important that one may even have to make a truce with one’s enemies. For the sake of one’s self-interest, one has to act according to the logic of the snake and the mouse.

Text 21
अमृतोत्पादने यत्न: क्रियतामविलम्बितम् ।
यस्य पीतस्य वै जन्तुर्मृत्युग्रस्तोऽमरो भवेत् ॥ २१ ॥
amṛtotpādane yatnaḥ
kriyatām avilambitam
yasya pītasya vai jantur
mṛtyu-grasto ’maro bhavet
Synonyms
amṛta-utpādane — in generating nectar; yatnaḥ — endeavor; kriyatām — do; avilambitam — without delay; yasya — of which nectar; pītasya — anyone who drinks; vai — indeed; jantuḥ — living entity; mṛtyu-grastaḥ — although in imminent danger of death; amaraḥ — immortal; bhavet — can become.

Translation
Immediately endeavor to produce nectar, which a person who is about to die may drink to become immortal.

Texts 22-23
क्षिप्‍त्वा क्षीरोदधौ सर्वा वीरुत्तृणलतौषधी: ।
मन्थानं मन्दरं कृत्वा नेत्रं कृत्वा तु वासुकिम् ॥ २२ ॥
सहायेन मया देवा निर्मन्थध्वमतन्द्रिता: ।
क्लेशभाजो भविष्यन्ति दैत्या यूयं फलग्रहा: ॥ २३ ॥
kṣiptvā kṣīrodadhau sarvā
vīrut-tṛṇa-latauṣadhīḥ
manthānaṁ mandaraṁ kṛtvā
netraṁ kṛtvā tu vāsukim
sahāyena mayā devā
nirmanthadhvam atandritāḥ
kleśa-bhājo bhaviṣyanti
daityā yūyaṁ phala-grahāḥ
Synonyms
kṣiptvā — putting; kṣīra-udadhau — in the Ocean of Milk; sarvāḥ — all kinds of; vīrut — creepers; tṛṇa — grass; latā — vegetables; auṣadhīḥ — and drugs; manthānam — the churning rod; mandaram — Mandara Mountain; kṛtvā — making; netram — the churning rope; kṛtvā — making; tu — but; vāsukim — the snake Vāsuki; sahāyena — with a helper; mayā — by Me; devāḥ — all the demigods; nirmanthadhvam — go on churning; atandritāḥ — very carefully, without diversion; kleśa-bhājaḥ — sharetakers of sufferings; bhaviṣyanti — will be; daityāḥ — the demons; yūyam — but all of you; phala-grahāḥ — gainers of the actual result.

Translation
O demigods, cast into the Ocean of Milk all kinds of vegetables, grass, creepers and drugs. Then, with My help, making Mandara Mountain the churning rod and Vāsuki the rope for churning, churn the Ocean of Milk with undiverted attention. Thus the demons will be engaged in labor, but you, the demigods, will gain the actual result, the nectar produced from the ocean.

Text 24
यूयं तदनुमोदध्वं यदिच्छन्त्यसुरा: सुरा: ।
न संरम्भेण सिध्यन्ति सर्वार्था: सान्‍त्वया यथा ॥ २४ ॥
yūyaṁ tad anumodadhvaṁ
yad icchanty asurāḥ surāḥ
na saṁrambheṇa sidhyanti
sarvārthāḥ sāntvayā yathā
Synonyms
yūyam — all of you; tat — that; anumodadhvam — should accept; yat — whatever; icchanti — they desire; asurāḥ — the demons; surāḥ — O demigods; na — not; saṁrambheṇa — by being agitated in anger; sidhyanti — are very successful; sarva-arthāḥ — all desired ends; sāntvayā — by peaceful execution; yathā — as.

Translation
My dear demigods, with patience and peace everything can be done, but if one is agitated by anger, the goal is not achieved. Therefore, whatever the demons ask, agree to their proposal.

Text 25
न भेतव्यं कालकूटाद् विषाज्जलधिसम्भवात् ।
लोभ: कार्यो न वो जातु रोष: कामस्तु वस्तुषु ॥ २५ ॥
na bhetavyaṁ kālakūṭād
viṣāj jaladhi-sambhavāt
lobhaḥ kāryo na vo jātu
roṣaḥ kāmas tu vastuṣu
Synonyms
na — not; bhetavyam — should be afraid; kālakūṭāt — of kālakūṭa; viṣāt — from the poison; jaladhi — from the Ocean of Milk; sambhavāt — which will appear; lobhaḥ — greed; kāryaḥ — execution; na — not; vaḥ — unto you; jātu — at any time; roṣaḥ — anger; kāmaḥ — lust; tu — and; vastuṣu — in the products.

Translation
A poison known as kālakūṭa will be generated from the Ocean of Milk, but you should not fear it. And when various products are churned from the ocean, you should not be greedy for them or anxious to obtain them, nor should you be angry.

Text 26
श्रीशुक उवाच
इति देवान्समादिश्य भगवान् पुरुषोत्तम: ।
तेषामन्तर्दधे राजन्स्वच्छन्दगतिरीश्वर: ॥ २६ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
iti devān samādiśya
bhagavān puruṣottamaḥ
teṣām antardadhe rājan
svacchanda-gatir īśvaraḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti — thus; devān — all the demigods; samādiśya — advising; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; puruṣa-uttamaḥ — the best of all persons; teṣām — from them; antardadhe — disappeared; rājan — O King; svacchanda — free; gatiḥ — whose movements; īśvaraḥ — the Personality of Godhead.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O King Parīkṣit, after advising the demigods in this way, the independent Supreme Personality of Godhead, the best of all living entities, disappeared from their presence.

Text 27
अथ तस्मै भगवते नमस्कृत्य पितामह: ।
भवश्च जग्मतु: स्वं स्वं धामोपेयुर्बलिं सुरा: ॥ २७ ॥
atha tasmai bhagavate
namaskṛtya pitāmahaḥ
bhavaś ca jagmatuḥ svaṁ svaṁ
dhāmopeyur baliṁ surāḥ
Synonyms
atha — after this; tasmai — unto Him; bhagavate — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaskṛtya — offering obeisances; pitā-mahaḥ — Lord Brahmā; bhavaḥ ca — as well as Lord Śiva; jagmatuḥ — returned; svam svam — to their own; dhāma — abodes; upeyuḥ — approached; balim — King Bali; surāḥ — all the other demigods.

Translation
Then Lord Brahmā and Lord Śiva, after offering their respectful obeisances to the Lord, returned to their abodes. All the demigods then approached Mahārāja Bali.

Text 28
द‍ृष्ट्वारीनप्यसंयत्ताञ्जातक्षोभान्स्वनायकान् ।
न्यषेधद् दैत्यराट् श्लोक्य: सन्धिविग्रहकालवित् ॥ २८ ॥
dṛṣṭvārīn apy asaṁyattāñ
jāta-kṣobhān sva-nāyakān
nyaṣedhad daitya-rāṭ ślokyaḥ
sandhi-vigraha-kālavit
Synonyms
dṛṣṭvā — observing; arīn — the enemies; api — although; asaṁyattān — without any endeavor to fight; jāta-kṣobhān — who became agitated; sva-nāyakān — his own captains and commanders; nyaṣedhat — prevented; daitya-rāṭ — the Emperor of the Daityas, Mahārāja Bali; ślokyaḥ — very respectable and prominent; sandhi — for making negotiations; vigraha — as well as for fighting; kāla — the time; vit — completely aware of.

Translation
Mahārāja Bali, a most celebrated king of the demons, knew very well when to make peace and when to fight. Thus although his commanders and captains were agitated and were about to kill the demigods, Mahārāja Bali, seeing that the demigods were coming to him without a militant attitude, forbade his commanders to kill them.

Text 29
ते वैरोचनिमासीनं गुप्तं चासुरयूथपै: ।
श्रिया परमया जुष्टं जिताशेषमुपागमन् ॥ २९ ॥
te vairocanim āsīnaṁ
guptaṁ cāsura-yūtha-paiḥ
śriyā paramayā juṣṭaṁ
jitāśeṣam upāgaman
Synonyms
te — all the demigods; vairocanim — unto Balirāja, the son of Virocana; āsīnam — sitting down; guptam — well protected; ca — and; asura-yūtha-paiḥ — by the commanders of the asuras; śriyā — by opulence; paramayā — supreme; juṣṭam — blessed; jita-aśeṣam — who became the proprietor of all the worlds; upāgaman — approached.

Translation
The demigods approached Bali Mahārāja, the son of Virocana, and sat down near him. Bali Mahārāja was protected by the commanders of the demons and was most opulent, having conquered the entire universe.

Text 30
महेन्द्र: श्लक्ष्णया वाचा सान्‍त्वयित्वा महामति: ।
अभ्यभाषत तत् सर्वं शिक्षितं पुरुषोत्तमात् ॥ ३० ॥
mahendraḥ ślakṣṇayā vācā
sāntvayitvā mahā-matiḥ
abhyabhāṣata tat sarvaṁ
śikṣitaṁ puruṣottamāt
Synonyms
mahā-indraḥ — the King of heaven, Indra; ślakṣṇayā — very mild; vācā — by words; sāntvayitvā — pleasing Bali Mahārāja very much; mahā-matiḥ — the most intelligent person; abhyabhāṣata — addressed; tat — that; sarvam — everything; śikṣitam — that was learned; puruṣa-uttamāt — from Lord Viṣṇu.

Translation
After pleasing Bali Mahārāja with mild words, Lord Indra, the King of the demigods, who was most intelligent, very politely submitted all the proposals he had learned from the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu.

Text 31
तत्त्वरोचत दैत्यस्य तत्रान्ये येऽसुराधिपा: ।
शम्बरोऽरिष्टनेमिश्च ये च त्रिपुरवासिन: ॥ ३१ ॥
tat tv arocata daityasya
tatrānye ye ’surādhipāḥ
śambaro ’riṣṭanemiś ca
ye ca tripura-vāsinaḥ
Synonyms
tat — all those words; tu — but; arocata — were very pleasing; daityasya — to Bali Mahārāja; tatra — as well as; anye — others; ye — who were; asura-adhipāḥ — the chiefs of the asuras; śambaraḥ — Śambara; ariṣṭanemiḥ — Ariṣṭanemi; ca — also; ye — others who; ca — and; tripura-vāsinaḥ — all the residents of Tripura.

Translation
The proposals submitted by King Indra were immediately accepted by Bali Mahārāja and his assistants, headed by Śambara and Ariṣṭanemi, and by all the other residents of Tripura.

Text 32
ततो देवासुरा: कृत्वा संविदं कृतसौहृदा: ।
उद्यमं परमं चक्रुरमृतार्थे परन्तप ॥ ३२ ॥
tato devāsurāḥ kṛtvā
saṁvidaṁ kṛta-sauhṛdāḥ
udyamaṁ paramaṁ cakrur
amṛtārthe parantapa
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; deva-asurāḥ — both the demons and the demigods; kṛtvā — executing; saṁvidam — indicating; kṛta-sauhṛdāḥ — an armistice between them; udyamam — enterprise; paramam — supreme; cakruḥ — they did; amṛta-arthe — for the sake of nectar; parantapa — O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, chastiser of enemies.

Translation
O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, chastiser of enemies, the demigods and the demons thereafter made an armistice between them. Then, with great enterprise, they arranged to produce nectar, as proposed by Lord Indra.

Text 33
ततस्ते मन्दरगिरिमोजसोत्पाट्य दुर्मदा: ।
नदन्त उदधिं निन्यु: शक्ता: परिघबाहव: ॥ ३३ ॥
tatas te mandara-girim
ojasotpāṭya durmadāḥ
nadanta udadhiṁ ninyuḥ
śaktāḥ parigha-bāhavaḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; te — all the demigods and demons; mandara-girim — Mandara Mountain; ojasā — with great strength; utpāṭya — extracting; durmadāḥ — very powerful and competent; nadanta — cried very loudly; udadhim — toward the ocean; ninyuḥ — brought; śaktāḥ — very strong; parigha-bāhavaḥ — having long, strong arms.

Translation
Thereafter, with great strength, the demons and demigods, who were all very powerful and who had long, stout arms, uprooted Mandara Mountain. Crying very loudly, they brought it toward the Ocean of Milk.

Text 34
दूरभारोद्वहश्रान्ता: शक्रवैरोचनादय: ।
अपारयन्तस्तं वोढुं विवशा विजहु: पथि ॥ ३४ ॥
dūra-bhārodvaha-śrāntāḥ
śakra-vairocanādayaḥ
apārayantas taṁ voḍhuṁ
vivaśā vijahuḥ pathi
Synonyms
dūra — for a great distance; bhāra-udvaha — by carrying the great load; śrāntāḥ — being fatigued; śakra — King Indra; vairocana-ādayaḥ — and Mahārāja Bali (the son of Virocana) and others; apārayantaḥ — being unable; tam — the mountain; voḍhum — to bear; vivaśāḥ — being unable; vijahuḥ — gave up; pathi — on the way.

Translation
Because of conveying the great mountain for a long distance, King Indra, Mahārāja Bali and the other demigods and demons became fatigued. Being unable to carry the mountain, they left it on the way.

Text 35
निपतन्स गिरिस्तत्र बहूनमरदानवान् ।
चूर्णयामास महता भारेण कनकाचल: ॥ ३५ ॥
nipatan sa giris tatra
bahūn amara-dānavān
cūrṇayām āsa mahatā
bhāreṇa kanakācalaḥ
Synonyms
nipatan — falling down; saḥ — that; giriḥ — mountain; tatra — there; bahūn — many; amara-dānavān — demigods and demons; cūrṇayām āsa — were smashed; mahatā — by great; bhāreṇa — weight; kanaka-acalaḥ — the golden mountain known as Mandara.

Translation
The mountain known as Mandara, which was extremely heavy, being made of gold, fell and smashed many demigods and demons.

Text 36
तांस्तथा भग्नमनसो भग्नबाहूरुकन्धरान् ।
विज्ञाय भगवांस्तत्र बभूव गरुडध्वज: ॥ ३६ ॥
tāṁs tathā bhagna-manaso
bhagna-bāhūru-kandharān
vijñāya bhagavāṁs tatra
babhūva garuḍa-dhvajaḥ
Synonyms
tān — all the demigods and demons; tathā — thereafter; bhagna-manasaḥ — being brokenhearted; bhagna-bāhu — with broken arms; ūru — thighs; kandharān — and shoulders; vijñāya — knowing; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu; tatra — there; babhūva — appeared; garuḍa-dhvajaḥ — being carried on Garuḍa.

Translation
The demigods and demons were frustrated and disheartened, and their arms, thighs and shoulders were broken. Therefore the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who knows everything, appeared there on the back of His carrier, Garuḍa.

Text 37
गिरिपातविनिष्पिष्टान्विलोक्यामरदानवान् ।
ईक्षया जीवयामास निर्जरान् निर्व्रणान् यथा ॥ ३७ ॥
giri-pāta-viniṣpiṣṭān
vilokyāmara-dānavān
īkṣayā jīvayām āsa
nirjarān nirvraṇān yathā
Synonyms
giri-pāta — because of the falling of Mandara Mountain; viniṣpiṣṭān — crushed; vilokya — observing; amara — the demigods; dānavān — and the demons; īkṣayā — simply by His glance; jīvayām āsa — brought back to life; nirjarān — without aggrievement; nirvraṇān — without bruises; yathā — as.

Translation
Observing that most of the demons and the demigods had been crushed by the falling of the mountain, the Lord glanced over them and brought them back to life. Thus they became free from grief, and they even had no bruises on their bodies.

Text 38
गिरिं चारोप्य गरुडे हस्तेनैकेन लीलया ।
आरुह्य प्रययावब्धिं सुरासुरगणैर्वृत: ॥ ३८ ॥
giriṁ cāropya garuḍe
hastenaikena līlayā
āruhya prayayāv abdhiṁ
surāsura-gaṇair vṛtaḥ
Synonyms
girim — the mountain; ca — also; āropya — placing; garuḍe — on the back of Garuḍa; hastena — by the hand; ekena — one; līlayā — very easily as His pastime; āruhya — getting on; prayayau — He went; abdhim — to the Ocean of Milk; sura-asura-gaṇaiḥ — by the demigods and asuras; vṛtaḥ — surrounded.

Translation
The Lord very easily lifted the mountain with one hand and placed it on the back of Garuḍa. Then, He too got on the back of Garuḍa and went to the Ocean of Milk, surrounded by the demigods and demons.

Text 39
अवरोप्य गिरिं स्कन्धात् सुपर्ण: पततां वर: ।
ययौ जलान्त उत्सृज्य हरिणा स विसर्जित: ॥ ३९ ॥
avaropya giriṁ skandhāt
suparṇaḥ patatāṁ varaḥ
yayau jalānta utsṛjya
hariṇā sa visarjitaḥ
Synonyms
avaropya — unloading; girim — the mountain; skandhāt — from his shoulder; suparṇaḥ — Garuḍa; patatām — of all the birds; varaḥ — the biggest or most powerful; yayau — went; jala-ante — where the water is; utsṛjya — placing; hariṇā — by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; saḥ — he (Garuḍa); visarjitaḥ — discharged from that place.

Translation
Thereafter, Garuḍa, the chief of birds, unloaded Mandara Mountain from his shoulder and brought it near the water. Then he was asked by the Lord to leave that place, and he left.