Text 1
श्रीनारद उवाच
भक्तियोगस्य तत्सर्वमन्तरायतयार्भक: ।
मन्यमानो हृषीकेशं स्मयमान उवाच ह ॥ १ ॥
śrī-nārada uvāca
bhakti-yogasya tat sarvam
antarāyatayārbhakaḥ
manyamāno hṛṣīkeśaṁ
smayamāna uvāca ha
Synonyms
śrī-nāradaḥ uvāca — Nārada Muni said; bhakti-yogasya — of the principles of devotional service; tat — those (blessings or benedictions offered by Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva); sarvam — each and every one of them; antarāyatayā — because of being impediments (on the path of bhakti-yoga); arbhakaḥ — Prahlāda Mahārāja, although only a boy; manyamānaḥ — considering; hṛṣīkeśam — unto Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva; smayamānaḥ — smiling; uvāca — said; ha — in the past.

Translation
The saint Nārada Muni continued: Although Prahlāda Mahārāja was only a boy, when he heard the benedictions offered by Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva he considered them impediments on the path of devotional service. Thus he smiled very mildly and spoke as follows.

Text 2
श्रीप्रह्राद उवाच
मा मां प्रलोभयोत्पत्त्या सक्तं कामेषु तैर्वरै: ।
तत्सङ्गभीतो निर्विण्णो मुमुक्षुस्त्वामुपाश्रित: ॥ २ ॥
śrī-prahrāda uvāca
mā māṁ pralobhayotpattyā
saktaṁ kāmeṣu tair varaiḥ
tat-saṅga-bhīto nirviṇṇo
mumukṣus tvām upāśritaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-prahrādaḥ uvāca — Prahlāda Mahārāja said (to the Supreme Personality of Godhead); mā — please do not; mām — me; pralobhaya — allure; utpattyā — because of my birth (in a demoniac family); saktam — (I am already) attached; kāmeṣu — to material enjoyment; taiḥ — by all those; varaiḥ — benedictions of material possessions; tat-saṅga-bhītaḥ — being afraid of such material association; nirviṇṇaḥ — completely detached from material desires; mumukṣuḥ — desiring to be liberated from material conditions of life; tvām — unto Your lotus feet; upāśritaḥ — I have taken shelter.

Translation
Prahlāda Mahārāja said: My dear Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, because I was born in an atheistic family I am naturally attached to material enjoyment. Therefore, kindly do not tempt me with these illusions. I am very much afraid of material conditions, and I desire to be liberated from materialistic life. It is for this reason that I have taken shelter of Your lotus feet.

Text 3
भृत्यलक्षणजिज्ञासुर्भक्तं कामेष्वचोदयत् ।
भवान् संसारबीजेषु हृदयग्रन्थिषु प्रभो ॥ ३ ॥
bhṛtya-lakṣaṇa-jijñāsur
bhaktaṁ kāmeṣv acodayat
bhavān saṁsāra-bījeṣu
hṛdaya-granthiṣu prabho
Synonyms
bhṛtya-lakṣaṇa-jijñāsuḥ — desiring to exhibit the symptoms of a pure devotee; bhaktam — the devotee; kāmeṣu — in the material world, where lusty desires predominate; acodayat — has sent; bhavān — Your Lordship; saṁsāra-bījeṣu — the root cause of being present in this material world; hṛdaya-granthiṣu — which (desire for material enjoyment) is in the cores of the hearts of all conditioned souls; prabho — O my worshipable Lord.

Translation
O my worshipable Lord, because the seed of lusty desires, which is the root cause of material existence, is within the core of everyone’s heart, You have sent me to this material world to exhibit the symptoms of a pure devotee.

Text 4
नान्यथा तेऽखिलगुरो घटेत करुणात्मन: ।
यस्त आशिष आशास्ते न स भृत्य: स वै वणिक् ॥ ४ ॥
nānyathā te ’khila-guro
ghaṭeta karuṇātmanaḥ
yas ta āśiṣa āśāste
na sa bhṛtyaḥ sa vai vaṇik
Synonyms
na — not; anyathā — otherwise; te — of You; akhila-guro — O supreme instructor of the entire creation; ghaṭeta — such a thing can happen; karuṇā-ātmanaḥ — the Supreme Person, who is extremely kind to His devotees; yaḥ — any person who; te — from You; āśiṣaḥ — material benefits; āśāste — desires (in exchange for serving You); na — not; saḥ — such a person; bhṛtyaḥ — a servitor; saḥ — such a person; vai — indeed; vaṇik — a merchant (who wants to get material profit from his business).

Translation
Otherwise, O my Lord, O supreme instructor of the entire world, You are so kind to Your devotee that You could not induce him to do something unbeneficial for him. On the other hand, one who desires some material benefit in exchange for devotional service cannot be Your pure devotee. Indeed, he is no better than a merchant who wants profit in exchange for service.

Text 5
आशासानो न वै भृत्य: स्वामिन्याशिष आत्मन: ।
न स्वामी भृत्यत: स्वाम्यमिच्छन्यो राति चाशिष: ॥ ५ ॥
āśāsāno na vai bhṛtyaḥ
svāminy āśiṣa ātmanaḥ
na svāmī bhṛtyataḥ svāmyam
icchan yo rāti cāśiṣaḥ
Synonyms
āśāsānaḥ — a person who desires (in exchange for service); na — not; vai — indeed; bhṛtyaḥ — a qualified servant or pure devotee of the Lord; svāmini — from the master; āśiṣaḥ — material benefit; ātmanaḥ — for personal sense gratification; na — nor; svāmī — the master; bhṛtyataḥ — from the servant; svāmyam — the prestigious position of being the master; icchan — desiring; yaḥ — any such master who; rāti — bestows; ca — also; āśiṣaḥ — material profit.

Translation
A servant who desires material profits from his master is certainly not a qualified servant or pure devotee. Similarly, a master who bestows benedictions upon his servant because of a desire to maintain a prestigious position as master is also not a pure master.

Text 6
अहं त्वकामस्त्वद्भ‍क्तस्त्वं च स्वाम्यनपाश्रय: ।
नान्यथेहावयोरर्थो राजसेवकयोरिव ॥ ६ ॥
ahaṁ tv akāmas tvad-bhaktas
tvaṁ ca svāmy anapāśrayaḥ
nānyathehāvayor artho
rāja-sevakayor iva
Synonyms
aham — as far as I am concerned; tu — indeed; akāmaḥ — without material desire; tvat-bhaktaḥ — fully attached to You without motivation; tvam ca — Your Lordship also; svāmī — the real master; anapāśrayaḥ — without motivation (You do not become the master with motivation); na — not; anyathā — without being in such a relationship as master and servant; iha — here; āvayoḥ — our; arthaḥ — any motivation (the Lord is the pure master, and Prahlāda Mahārāja is the pure devotee with no materialistic motivation); rāja — of a king; sevakayoḥ — and the servitor; iva — like (just as a king exacts taxes for the benefit of the servant or the citizens pay taxes for the benefit of the king).

Translation
O my Lord, I am Your unmotivated servant, and You are my eternal master. There is no need of our being anything other than master and servant. You are naturally my master, and I am naturally Your servant. We have no other relationship.

Text 7
यदि दास्यसि मे कामान्वरांस्त्वं वरदर्षभ ।
कामानां हृद्यसंरोहं भवतस्तु वृणे वरम् ॥ ७ ॥
yadi dāsyasi me kāmān
varāṁs tvaṁ varadarṣabha
kāmānāṁ hṛdy asaṁrohaṁ
bhavatas tu vṛṇe varam
Synonyms
yadi — if; dāsyasi — want to give; me — me; kāmān — anything desirable; varān — as Your benediction; tvam — You; varada-ṛṣabha — O Supreme Personality of Godhead, who can give any benediction; kāmānām — of all desires for material happiness; hṛdi — within the core of my heart; asaṁroham — no growth; bhavataḥ — from You; tu — then; vṛṇe — I pray for; varam — such a benediction.

Translation
O my Lord, best of the givers of benediction, if You at all want to bestow a desirable benediction upon me, then I pray from Your Lordship that within the core of my heart there be no material desires.

Text 8
इन्द्रियाणि मन: प्राण आत्मा धर्मो धृतिर्मति: ।
ह्री: श्रीस्तेज: स्मृति: सत्यं यस्य नश्यन्ति जन्मना ॥ ८ ॥
indriyāṇi manaḥ prāṇa
ātmā dharmo dhṛtir matiḥ
hrīḥ śrīs tejaḥ smṛtiḥ satyaṁ
yasya naśyanti janmanā
Synonyms
indriyāṇi — the senses; manaḥ — the mind; prāṇaḥ — the life air; ātmā — the body; dharmaḥ — religion; dhṛtiḥ — patience; matiḥ — intelligence; hrīḥ — shyness; śrīḥ — opulence; tejaḥ — strength; smṛtiḥ — memory; satyam — truthfulness; yasya — of which lusty desires; naśyanti — are vanquished; janmanā — from the very beginning of birth.

Translation
O my Lord, because of lusty desires from the very beginning of one’s birth, the functions of one’s senses, mind, life, body, religion, patience, intelligence, shyness, opulence, strength, memory and truthfulness are vanquished.

Text 9
विमुञ्चति यदा कामान्मानवो मनसि स्थितान् ।
तर्ह्येव पुण्डरीकाक्ष भगवत्त्वाय कल्पते ॥ ९ ॥
vimuñcati yadā kāmān
mānavo manasi sthitān
tarhy eva puṇḍarīkākṣa
bhagavattvāya kalpate
Synonyms
vimuñcati — gives up; yadā — whenever; kāmān — all material desires; mānavaḥ — human society; manasi — within the mind; sthitān — situated; tarhi — at that time only; eva — indeed; puṇḍarīka-akṣa — O lotus-eyed Lord; bhagavattvāya — to be equally as opulent as the Lord; kalpate — becomes eligible.

Translation
O my Lord, when a human being is able to give up all the material desires in his mind, he becomes eligible to possess wealth and opulence like Yours.

Text 10
ॐ नमो भगवते तुभ्यं पुरुषाय महात्मने ।
हरयेऽद्भ‍ुतसिंहाय ब्रह्मणे परमात्मने ॥ १० ॥
oṁ namo bhagavate tubhyaṁ
puruṣāya mahātmane
haraye ’dbhuta-siṁhāya
brahmaṇe paramātmane
Synonyms
om — O my Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead; namaḥ — I offer my respectful obeisances; bhagavate — unto the Supreme Person; tubhyam — unto You; puruṣāya — unto the Supreme Person; mahā-ātmane — unto the Supreme Soul, or the Supersoul; haraye — unto the Lord, who vanquishes all the miseries of devotees; adbhuta-siṁhāya — unto Your wonderful lionlike form as Nṛsiṁhadeva; brahmaṇe — unto the Supreme Brahman; parama-ātmane — unto the Supreme Soul.

Translation
O my Lord, full of six opulences, O Supreme Person! O Supreme Soul, killer of all miseries! O Supreme Person in the form of a wonderful lion and man, let me offer my respectful obeisances unto You.

Text 11
श्रीभगवानुवाच
नैकान्तिनो मे मयि जात्विहाशिष
आशासतेऽमुत्र च ये भवद्विधा: ।
तथापि मन्वन्तरमेतदत्र
दैत्येश्वराणामनुभुङ्‌क्ष्व भोगान् ॥ ११ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
naikāntino me mayi jātv ihāśiṣa
āśāsate ’mutra ca ye bhavad-vidhāḥ
tathāpi manvantaram etad atra
daityeśvarāṇām anubhuṅkṣva bhogān
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; na — not; ekāntinaḥ — unalloyed, without desires except for the one desire for devotional service; me — from Me; mayi — unto Me; jātu — any time; iha — within this material world; āśiṣaḥ — benedictions; āśāsate — intent desire; amutra — in the next life; ca — and; ye — all such devotees who; bhavat-vidhāḥ — like you; tathāpi — still; manvantaram — the duration of time until the end of the life of one Manu; etat — this; atra — within this material world; daitya-īśvarāṇām — of the opulences of materialistic persons; anubhuṅkṣva — you can enjoy; bhogān — all material opulences.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Prahlāda, a devotee like you never desires any kind of material opulences, either in this life or in the next. Nonetheless, I order you to enjoy the opulences of the demons in this material world, acting as their king until the end of the duration of time occupied by Manu.

Text 12
कथा मदीया जुषमाण: प्रियास्त्व-
मावेश्य मामात्मनि सन्तमेकम् ।
सर्वेषु भूतेष्वधियज्ञमीशं
यजस्व योगेन च कर्म हिन्वन् ॥ १२ ॥
kathā madīyā juṣamāṇaḥ priyās tvam
āveśya mām ātmani santam ekam
sarveṣu bhūteṣv adhiyajñam īśaṁ
yajasva yogena ca karma hinvan
Synonyms
kathāḥ — messages or instructions; madīyāḥ — given by Me; juṣamāṇaḥ — always hearing or contemplating; priyāḥ — extremely pleasing; tvam — yourself; āveśya — being fully absorbed in; mām — Me; ātmani — within the core of your heart; santam — existing; ekam — one (the same Supreme Soul); sarveṣu — in all; bhūteṣu — living entities; adhiyajñam — the enjoyer of all ritualistic ceremonies; īśam — the Supreme Lord; yajasva — worship; yogena — by bhakti-yoga, devotional service; ca — also; karma — fruitive activities; hinvan — giving up.

Translation
It does not matter that you are in the material world. You should always, continuously, hear the instructions and messages given by Me and always be absorbed in thought of Me, for I am the Supersoul existing in the core of everyone’s heart. Therefore, give up fruitive activities and worship Me.

Text 13
भोगेन पुण्यं कुशलेन पापं
कलेवरं कालजवेन हित्वा ।
कीर्तिं विशुद्धां सुरलोकगीतां
विताय मामेष्यसि मुक्तबन्ध: ॥ १३ ॥
bhogena puṇyaṁ kuśalena pāpaṁ
kalevaraṁ kāla-javena hitvā
kīrtiṁ viśuddhāṁ sura-loka-gītāṁ
vitāya mām eṣyasi mukta-bandhaḥ
Synonyms
bhogena — by feelings of material happiness; puṇyam — pious activities or their results; kuśalena — by acting piously (devotional service is the best of all pious activities); pāpam — all kinds of reactions to impious activities; kalevaram — the material body; kāla-javena — by the most powerful time factor; hitvā — giving up; kīrtim — reputation; viśuddhām — transcendental or fully purified; sura-loka-gītām — praised even in the heavenly planets; vitāya — spreading all through the universe; mām — unto Me; eṣyasi — you will come back; mukta-bandhaḥ — being liberated from all bondage.

Translation
My dear Prahlāda, while you are in this material world you will exhaust all the reactions of pious activity by feeling happiness, and by acting piously you will neutralize impious activity. Because of the powerful time factor, you will give up your body, but the glories of your activities will be sung in the upper planetary systems, and being fully freed from all bondage, you will return home, back to Godhead.

Text 14
य एतत्कीर्तयेन्मह्यं त्वया गीतमिदं नर: ।
त्वां च मां च स्मरन्काले कर्मबन्धात्प्रमुच्यते ॥ १४ ॥
ya etat kīrtayen mahyaṁ
tvayā gītam idaṁ naraḥ
tvāṁ ca māṁ ca smaran kāle
karma-bandhāt pramucyate
Synonyms
yaḥ — anyone who; etat — this activity; kīrtayet — chants; mahyam — unto Me; tvayā — by you; gītam — prayers offered; idam — this; naraḥ — human being; tvām — you; ca — as well as; mām ca — Me also; smaran — remembering; kāle — in due course of time; karma-bandhāt — from the bondage of material activities; pramucyate — becomes free.

Translation
One who always remembers your activities and My activities also, and who chants the prayers you have offered, becomes free, in due course of time, from the reactions of material activities.

Texts 15-17
श्रीप्रह्राद उवाच
वरं वरय एतत्ते वरदेशान्महेश्वर ।
यदनिन्दत्पिता मे त्वामविद्वांस्तेज ऐश्वरम् ॥ १५ ॥
विद्धामर्षाशय: साक्षात्सर्वलोकगुरुं प्रभुम् ।
भ्रातृहेति मृषाद‍ृष्टिस्त्वद्भ‍क्ते मयि चाघवान् ॥ १६ ॥
तस्मात्पिता मे पूयेत दुरन्ताद् दुस्तरादघात् ।
पूतस्तेऽपाङ्गसंद‍ृष्टस्तदा कृपणवत्सल ॥ १७ ॥
śrī-prahrāda uvāca
varaṁ varaya etat te
varadeśān maheśvara
yad anindat pitā me
tvām avidvāṁs teja aiśvaram
viddhāmarṣāśayaḥ sākṣāt
sarva-loka-guruṁ prabhum
bhrātṛ-heti mṛṣā-dṛṣṭis
tvad-bhakte mayi cāghavān
tasmāt pitā me pūyeta
durantād dustarād aghāt
pūtas te ’pāṅga-saṁdṛṣṭas
tadā kṛpaṇa-vatsala
Synonyms
śrī-prahrādaḥ uvāca — Prahlāda Mahārāja said; varam — benediction; varaye — I pray; etat — this; te — from You; varada-īśāt — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who offers benedictions even to such exalted demigods as Brahmā and Śiva; mahā-īśvara — O my Supreme Lord; yat — that; anindat — vilified; pitā — father; me — my; tvām — You; avidvān — without knowledge of; tejaḥ — strength; aiśvaram — supremacy; viddha — being polluted; amarṣa — with anger; āśayaḥ — within the heart; sākṣāt — directly; sarva-loka-gurum — unto the supreme spiritual master of all living beings; prabhum — unto the supreme master; bhrātṛ-hā — the killer of his brother; iti — thus; mṛṣā-dṛṣṭiḥ — falsely envious because of a false conception; tvat-bhakte — unto Your devotee; mayi — unto me; ca — and; agha-vān — who committed heavily sinful activities; tasmāt — from that; pitā — father; me — my; pūyeta — may be purified; durantāt — very great; dustarāt — difficult to pass over; aghāt — from all sinful activities; pūtaḥ — (although he was) purified; te — of You; apāṅga — by the glance over him; saṁdṛṣṭaḥ — being looked at; tadā — at that time; kṛpaṇa-vatsala — O You who are merciful to the materialistic.

Translation
Prahlāda Mahārāja said: O Supreme Lord, because You are so merciful to the fallen souls, I ask You for only one benediction. I know that my father, at the time of his death, had already been purified by Your glance upon him, but because of his ignorance of Your beautiful power and supremacy, he was unnecessarily angry at You, falsely thinking that You were the killer of his brother. Thus he directly blasphemed Your Lordship, the spiritual master of all living beings, and committed heavily sinful activities directed against me, Your devotee. I wish that he be excused for these sinful activities.

Text 18
श्रीभगवानुवाच
त्रि:सप्तभि: पिता पूत: पितृभि: सह तेऽनघ ।
यत्साधोऽस्य कुले जातो भवान्वै कुलपावन: ॥ १८ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
triḥ-saptabhiḥ pitā pūtaḥ
pitṛbhiḥ saha te ’nagha
yat sādho ’sya kule jāto
bhavān vai kula-pāvanaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead said; triḥ-saptabhiḥ — seven multiplied by three (that is to say, twenty-one); pitā — father; pūtaḥ — purified; pitṛbhiḥ — with your forefathers; saha — all together; te — your; anagha — O most sinless personality (Prahlāda Mahārāja); yat — because; sādho — O great saintly person; asya — of this person; kule — in the dynasty; jātaḥ — took birth; bhavān — you; vai — indeed; kula-pāvanaḥ — the purifier of the whole dynasty.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: My dear Prahlāda, O most pure, O great saintly person, your father has been purified, along with twenty-one forefathers in your family. Because you were born in this family, the entire dynasty has been purified.

Text 19
यत्र यत्र च मद्भ‍क्ता: प्रशान्ता: समदर्शिन: ।
साधव: समुदाचारास्ते पूयन्तेऽपि कीकटा: ॥ १९ ॥
yatra yatra ca mad-bhaktāḥ
praśāntāḥ sama-darśinaḥ
sādhavaḥ samudācārās
te pūyante ’pi kīkaṭāḥ
Synonyms
yatra yatra — wherever and whenever; ca — also; mat-bhaktāḥ — My devotees; praśāntāḥ — extremely peaceful; sama-darśinaḥ — equipoised; sādhavaḥ — decorated with all good qualities; samudācārāḥ — equally magnanimous; te — all of them; pūyante — are purified; api — even; kīkaṭāḥ — a degraded country or the inhabitants of such a place.

Translation
Whenever and wherever there are peaceful, equipoised devotees who are well-behaved and decorated with all good qualities, that place and the dynasties there, even if condemned, are purified.

Text 20
सर्वात्मना न हिंसन्ति भूतग्रामेषु किञ्चन ।
उच्चावचेषु दैत्येन्द्र मद्भ‍ावविगतस्पृहा: ॥ २० ॥
sarvātmanā na hiṁsanti
bhūta-grāmeṣu kiñcana
uccāvaceṣu daityendra
mad-bhāva-vigata-spṛhāḥ
Synonyms
sarva-ātmanā — in all respects, even in the modes of anger and jealousy; na — never; hiṁsanti — they are envious; bhūta-grāmeṣu — among all species of life; kiñcana — toward any one of them; ucca-avaceṣu — the lower and higher living entities; daitya-indra — O my dear Prahlāda, King of the Daityas; mat-bhāva — because of devotional service unto Me; vigata — given up; spṛhāḥ — all material modes of anger and greed.

Translation
My dear Prahlāda, King of the Daityas, because of being attached to devotional service to Me, My devotee does not distinguish between lower and higher living entities. In all respects, he is never jealous of anyone.

Text 21
भवन्ति पुरुषा लोके मद्भ‍क्तास्त्वामनुव्रता: ।
भवान्मे खलु भक्तानां सर्वेषां प्रतिरूपधृक् ॥ २१ ॥
bhavanti puruṣā loke
mad-bhaktās tvām anuvratāḥ
bhavān me khalu bhaktānāṁ
sarveṣāṁ pratirūpa-dhṛk
Synonyms
bhavanti — become; puruṣāḥ — persons; loke — in this world; mat-bhaktāḥ — My pure devotees; tvām — you; anuvratāḥ — following in your footsteps; bhavān — you; me — My; khalu — indeed; bhaktānām — of all devotees; sarveṣām — in different mellows; pratirūpa-dhṛk — tangible example.

Translation
Those who follow your example will naturally become My pure devotees. You are the best example of My devotee, and others should follow in your footsteps.

Text 22
कुरु त्वं प्रेतकृत्यानि पितु: पूतस्य सर्वश: ।
मदङ्गस्पर्शनेनाङ्ग लोकान्यास्यति सुप्रजा: ॥ २२ ॥
kuru tvaṁ preta-kṛtyāni
pituḥ pūtasya sarvaśaḥ
mad-aṅga-sparśanenāṅga
lokān yāsyati suprajāḥ
Synonyms
kuru — perform; tvam — you; preta-kṛtyāni — the ritualistic ceremony performed after death; pituḥ — of your father; pūtasya — already purified; sarvaśaḥ — in all respects; mat-aṅga — My body; sparśanena — by touching; aṅga — My dear child; lokān — to planets; yāsyati — he will be elevated; su-prajāḥ — to become a devotee-citizen.

Translation
My dear child, your father has already been purified just by the touch of My body at the time of his death. Nonetheless, the duty of a son is to perform the śrāddha ritualistic ceremony after his father’s death so that his father may be promoted to a planetary system where he may become a good citizen and devotee.

Text 23
पित्र्यं च स्थानमातिष्ठ यथोक्तं ब्रह्मवादिभि: ।
मय्यावेश्य मनस्तात कुरु कर्माणि मत्पर: ॥ २३ ॥
pitryaṁ ca sthānam ātiṣṭha
yathoktaṁ brahmavādibhiḥ
mayy āveśya manas tāta
kuru karmāṇi mat-paraḥ
Synonyms
pitryam — paternal; ca — also; sthānam — place, throne; ātiṣṭha — sit upon; yathā-uktam — as described; brahmavādibhiḥ — by the followers of Vedic civilization; mayi — unto Me; āveśya — being fully absorbed; manaḥ — the mind; tāta — My dear boy; kuru — just execute; karmāṇi — the regulative duties; mat-paraḥ — just for the sake of My work.

Translation
After performing the ritualistic ceremonies, take charge of your father’s kingdom. Sit upon the throne and do not be disturbed by materialistic activities. Please keep your mind fixed upon Me. Without transgressing the injunctions of the Vedas, as a matter of formality you may perform your particular duties.

Text 24
श्रीनारद उवाच
प्रह्रादोऽपि तथा चक्रे पितुर्यत्साम्परायिकम् ।
यथाह भगवान् राजन्नभिषिक्तो द्विजातिभि: ॥ २४ ॥
śrī-nārada uvāca
prahrādo ’pi tathā cakre
pitur yat sāmparāyikam
yathāha bhagavān rājann
abhiṣikto dvijātibhiḥ
Synonyms
śrī-nāradaḥ uvāca — Nārada Muni said; prahrādaḥ — Prahlāda Mahārāja; api — also; tathā — in that way; cakre — executed; pituḥ — of his father; yat — whatever; sāmparāyikam — ritualistic ceremonies performed after death; yathā — even as; āha — order; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rājan — O King Yudhiṣṭhira; abhiṣiktaḥ — he was enthroned in the kingdom; dvi-jātibhiḥ — by the brāhmaṇas present.

Translation
Śrī Nārada Muni continued: Thus, as the Supreme Personality of Godhead ordered, Prahlāda Mahārāja performed the ritualistic ceremonies for his father. O King Yudhiṣṭhira, he was then enthroned in the kingdom of Hiraṇyakaśipu, as directed by the brāhmaṇas.

Text 25
प्रसादसुमुखं द‍ृष्ट्वा ब्रह्मा नरहरिं हरिम् ।
स्तुत्वा वाग्भि: पवित्राभि: प्राह देवादिभिर्वृत: ॥ २५ ॥
prasāda-sumukhaṁ dṛṣṭvā
brahmā narahariṁ harim
stutvā vāgbhiḥ pavitrābhiḥ
prāha devādibhir vṛtaḥ
Synonyms
prasāda-sumukham — whose face was bright because the Supreme Lord was pleased; dṛṣṭvā — seeing this situation; brahmā — Lord Brahmā; nara-harim — unto Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva; harim — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; stutvā — offering prayers; vāgbhiḥ — by transcendental words; pavitrābhiḥ — without any material contamination; prāha — addressed (the Lord); deva-ādibhiḥ — by other demigods; vṛtaḥ — surrounded.

Translation
Lord Brahmā, surrounded by the other demigods, was bright-faced because the Lord was pleased. Thus he offered prayers to the Lord with transcendental words.

Text 26
श्रीब्रह्मोवाच
देवदेवाखिलाध्यक्ष भूतभावन पूर्वज ।
दिष्टय‍ा ते निहत: पापो लोकसन्तापनोऽसुर: ॥ २६ ॥
śrī-brahmovāca
deva-devākhilādhyakṣa
bhūta-bhāvana pūrvaja
diṣṭyā te nihataḥ pāpo
loka-santāpano ’suraḥ
Synonyms
śrī-brahmā uvāca — Lord Brahmā said; deva-deva — O my Lord, Lord of all the demigods; akhila-adhyakṣa — owner of the whole universe; bhūta-bhāvana — O cause of all living entities; pūrva-ja — O original Personality of Godhead; diṣṭyā — by Your example or because of our good fortune; te — by You; nihataḥ — killed; pāpaḥ — most sinful; loka-santāpanaḥ — giving trouble to the entire universe; asuraḥ — the demon Hiraṇyakaśipu.

Translation
Lord Brahmā said: O Supreme Lord of all lords, proprietor of the entire universe, O benedictor of all living entities, O original person [ādi-puruṣa], because of our good fortune You have now killed this sinful demon, who was giving trouble to the entire universe.

Text 27
योऽसौ लब्धवरो मत्तो न वध्यो मम सृष्टिभि: ।
तपोयोगबलोन्नद्ध: समस्तनिगमानहन् ॥ २७ ॥
yo ’sau labdha-varo matto
na vadhyo mama sṛṣṭibhiḥ
tapo-yoga-balonnaddhaḥ
samasta-nigamān ahan
Synonyms
yaḥ — the person who; asau — he (Hiraṇyakaśipu); labdha-varaḥ — being given the extraordinary benediction; mattaḥ — from me; na vadhyaḥ — not to be killed; mama sṛṣṭibhiḥ — by any living being created by me; tapaḥ-yoga-bala — by austerity, mystic power and strength; unnaddhaḥ — thus being very proud; samasta — all; nigamān — Vedic injunctions; ahan — disregarded, transgressed.

Translation
This demon, Hiraṇyakaśipu, received from me the benediction that he would not be killed by any living being within my creation. With this assurance and with strength derived from austerities and mystic power, he became excessively proud and transgressed all the Vedic injunctions.

Text 28
दिष्टय‍ा तत्तनय: साधुर्महाभागवतोऽर्भक: ।
त्वया विमोचितो मृत्योर्दिष्टय‍ा त्वां समितोऽधुना ॥ २८ ॥
diṣṭyā tat-tanayaḥ sādhur
mahā-bhāgavato ’rbhakaḥ
tvayā vimocito mṛtyor
diṣṭyā tvāṁ samito ’dhunā
Synonyms
diṣṭyā — by fortune; tat-tanayaḥ — his son; sādhuḥ — who is a great saintly person; mahā-bhāgavataḥ — a great and exalted devotee; arbhakaḥ — although a child; tvayā — by Your Lordship; vimocitaḥ — released; mṛtyoḥ — from the clutches of death; diṣṭyā — also by great fortune; tvām samitaḥ — perfectly under Your shelter; adhunā — now.

Translation
By great fortune, Hiraṇyakaśipu’s son Prahlāda Mahārāja has now been released from death, for although he is a child, he is an exalted devotee. Now he is fully under the protection of Your lotus feet.

Text 29
एतद् वपुस्ते भगवन्ध्यायत: परमात्मन: ।
सर्वतो गोप्तृ सन्त्रासान्मृत्योरपि जिघांसत: ॥ २९ ॥
etad vapus te bhagavan
dhyāyataḥ paramātmanaḥ
sarvato goptṛ santrāsān
mṛtyor api jighāṁsataḥ
Synonyms
etat — this; vapuḥ — body; te — Your; bhagavan — O Supreme Personality of Godhead; dhyāyataḥ — those who meditate upon; parama-ātmanaḥ — of the Supreme Person; sarvataḥ — from everywhere; goptṛ — the protector; santrāsāt — from all kinds of fear; mṛtyoḥ api — even from fear of death; jighāṁsataḥ — if one is envied by an enemy.

Translation
My dear Lord, O Supreme Personality of Godhead, You are the Supreme Soul. If one meditates upon Your transcendental body, You naturally protect him from all sources of fear, even the imminent danger of death.

Text 30
श्रीभगवानुवाच
मैवं विभोऽसुराणां ते प्रदेय: पद्मसम्भव ।
वर: क्रूरनिसर्गाणामहीनाममृतं यथा ॥ ३० ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
maivaṁ vibho ’surāṇāṁ te
pradeyaḥ padma-sambhava
varaḥ krūra-nisargāṇām
ahīnām amṛtaṁ yathā
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Supreme Personality of Godhead replied (to Brahmā); mā — do not; evam — thus; vibho — O great person; asurāṇām — unto the demons; te — by you; pradeyaḥ — bestow benedictions; padma-sambhava — O Lord Brahmā, born from the lotus flower; varaḥ — benediction; krūra-nisargāṇām — persons who are by nature very cruel and jealous; ahīnām — to snakes; amṛtam — nectar or milk; yathā — just as.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead replied: My dear Lord Brahmā, O great lord born from the lotus flower, just as it is dangerous to feed milk to a snake, so it is dangerous to give benedictions to demons, who are by nature ferocious and jealous. I warn you not to give such benedictions to any demon again.

Text 31
श्रीनारद उवाच
इत्युक्त्वा भगवान् राजंस्ततश्चान्तर्दधे हरि: ।
अद‍ृश्य: सर्वभूतानां पूजित: परमेष्ठिना ॥ ३१ ॥
śrī-nārada uvāca
ity uktvā bhagavān rājaṁs
tataś cāntardadhe hariḥ
adṛśyaḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
pūjitaḥ parameṣṭhinā
Synonyms
śrī-nāradaḥ uvāca — Nārada Muni said; iti uktvā — saying this; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; rājan — O King Yudhiṣṭhira; tataḥ — from that place; ca — also; antardadhe — disappeared; hariḥ — the Lord; adṛśyaḥ — without being visible; sarva-bhūtānām — by all kinds of living entities; pūjitaḥ — being worshiped; parameṣṭhinā — by Lord Brahmā.

Translation
Nārada Muni continued: O King Yudhiṣṭhira, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is not visible to an ordinary human being, spoke in this way, instructing Lord Brahmā. Then, being worshiped by Brahmā, the Lord disappeared from that place.

Text 32
तत: सम्पूज्य शिरसा ववन्दे परमेष्ठिनम् ।
भवं प्रजापतीन्देवान्प्रह्रादो भगवत्कला: ॥ ३२ ॥
tataḥ sampūjya śirasā
vavande parameṣṭhinam
bhavaṁ prajāpatīn devān
prahrādo bhagavat-kalāḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; sampūjya — worshiping; śirasā — by bowing the head; vavande — offered prayers; parameṣṭhinam — to Lord Brahmā; bhavam — to Lord Śiva; prajāpatīn — to the great demigods entrusted with increasing the population; devān — to all the great demigods; prahrādaḥ — Prahlāda Mahārāja; bhagavat-kalāḥ — influential parts of the Lord.

Translation
Prahlāda Mahārāja then worshiped and offered prayers to all the demigods, such as Brahmā, Śiva and the prajāpatis, who are all parts of the Lord.

Text 33
तत: काव्यादिभि: सार्धं मुनिभि: कमलासन: ।
दैत्यानां दानवानां च प्रह्रादमकरोत्पतिम् ॥ ३३ ॥
tataḥ kāvyādibhiḥ sārdhaṁ
munibhiḥ kamalāsanaḥ
daityānāṁ dānavānāṁ ca
prahrādam akarot patim
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; kāvya-ādibhiḥ — with Śukrācārya and others; sārdham — and with; munibhiḥ — great saintly persons; kamala-āsanaḥ — Lord Brahmā; daityānām — of all the demons; dānavānām — of all the giants; ca — and; prahrādam — Prahlāda Mahārāja; akarot — created; patim — the master or king.

Translation
Thereafter, along with Śukrācārya and other great saints, Lord Brahmā, whose seat is on the lotus flower, made Prahlāda the king of all the demons and giants in the universe.

Text 34
प्रतिनन्द्य ततो देवा: प्रयुज्य परमाशिष: ।
स्वधामानि ययू राजन्ब्रह्माद्या: प्रतिपूजिता: ॥ ३४ ॥
pratinandya tato devāḥ
prayujya paramāśiṣaḥ
sva-dhāmāni yayū rājan
brahmādyāḥ pratipūjitāḥ
Synonyms
pratinandya — congratulating; tataḥ — thereafter; devāḥ — all the demigods; prayujya — having offered; parama-āśiṣaḥ — exalted benedictions; sva-dhāmāni — to their respective abodes; yayuḥ — returned; rājan — O King Yudhiṣṭhira; brahma-ādyāḥ — all the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmā; pratipūjitāḥ — being thoroughly worshiped (by Prahlāda Mahārāja).

Translation
O King Yudhiṣṭhira, after all the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmā, were properly worshiped by Prahlāda Mahārāja, they offered Prahlāda their utmost benedictions and then returned to their respective abodes.

Text 35
एवं च पार्षदौ विष्णो: पुत्रत्वं प्रापितौ दिते: ।
हृदि स्थितेन हरिणा वैरभावेन तौ हतौ ॥ ३५ ॥
evaṁ ca pārṣadau viṣṇoḥ
putratvaṁ prāpitau diteḥ
hṛdi sthitena hariṇā
vaira-bhāvena tau hatau
Synonyms
evam — in this way; ca — also; pārṣadau — the two personal associates; viṣṇoḥ — of Lord Viṣṇu; putratvam — becoming the sons; prāpitau — having gotten; diteḥ — of Diti; hṛdi — within the core of the heart; sthitena — being situated; hariṇā — by the Supreme Lord; vaira-bhāvena — by conceiving as an enemy; tau — both of them; hatau — were killed.

Translation
Thus the two associates of Lord Viṣṇu who had become Hiraṇyākṣa and Hiraṇyakaśipu, the sons of Diti, were both killed. By illusion they had thought that the Supreme Lord, who is situated in everyone’s heart, was their enemy.

Text 36
पुनश्च विप्रशापेन राक्षसौ तौ बभूवतु: ।
कुम्भकर्णदशग्रीवौ हतौ तौ रामविक्रमै: ॥ ३६ ॥
punaś ca vipra-śāpena
rākṣasau tau babhūvatuḥ
kumbhakarṇa-daśa-grīvau
hatau tau rāma-vikramaiḥ
Synonyms
punaḥ — again; ca — also; vipra-śāpena — being cursed by the brāhmaṇas; rākṣasau — the two Rākṣasas; tau — both of them; babhūvatuḥ — incarnated as; kumbhakarṇa-daśa-grīvau — known as Kumbhakarṇa and the ten-headed Rāvaṇa (in their next birth); hatau — they also were killed; tau — both of them; rāma-vikramaiḥ — by the extraordinary strength of Lord Rāmacandra.

Translation
Being cursed by the brāhmaṇas, the same two associates took birth again as Kumbhakarṇa and the ten-headed Rāvaṇa. These two Rākṣasas were killed by Lord Rāmacandra’s extraordinary power.

Text 37
शयानौ युधि निर्भिन्नहृदयौ रामशायकै: ।
तच्चित्तौ जहतुर्देहं यथा प्राक्तनजन्मनि ॥ ३७ ॥
śayānau yudhi nirbhinna-
hṛdayau rāma-śāyakaiḥ
tac-cittau jahatur dehaṁ
yathā prāktana-janmani
Synonyms
śayānau — being laid down; yudhi — on the battlefield; nirbhinna — being pierced; hṛdayau — in the core of the heart; rāma-śāyakaiḥ — by the arrows of Lord Rāmacandra; tat-cittau — thinking or being conscious of Lord Rāmacandra; jahatuḥ — gave up; deham — body; yathā — even as; prāktana-janmani — in their previous births.

Translation
Pierced by the arrows of Lord Rāmacandra, both Kumbhakarṇa and Rāvaṇa lay on the ground and left their bodies, fully absorbed in thought of the Lord, just as they had in their previous births as Hiraṇyākṣa and Hiraṇyakaśipu.

Text 38
ताविहाथ पुनर्जातौ शिशुपालकरूषजौ ।
हरौ वैरानुबन्धेन पश्यतस्ते समीयतु: ॥ ३८ ॥
tāv ihātha punar jātau
śiśupāla-karūṣa-jau
harau vairānubandhena
paśyatas te samīyatuḥ
Synonyms
tau — both of them; iha — in this human society; atha — in this way; punaḥ — again; jātau — took their births; śiśupāla — Śiśupāla; karūṣa-jau — Dantavakra; harau — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vaira-anubandhena — by the bondage of considering the Lord an enemy; paśyataḥ — were looking on; te — while you; samīyatuḥ — merged or went into the lotus feet of the Lord.

Translation
They both took birth again in human society as Śiśupāla and Dantavakra and continued in the same enmity toward the Lord. It is they who merged into the body of the Lord in your presence.

Text 39
एन: पूर्वकृतं यत् तद् राजान: कृष्णवैरिण: ।
जहुस्तेऽन्ते तदात्मान: कीट: पेशस्कृतो यथा ॥ ३९ ॥
enaḥ pūrva-kṛtaṁ yat tad
rājānaḥ kṛṣṇa-vairiṇaḥ
jahus te ’nte tad-ātmānaḥ
kīṭaḥ peśaskṛto yathā
Synonyms
enaḥ — this sinful activity (of blaspheming the Supreme Lord); pūrva-kṛtam — executed in previous births; yat — which; tat — that; rājānaḥ — kings; kṛṣṇa-vairiṇaḥ — always acting as enemies of Kṛṣṇa; jahuḥ — gave up; te — all of them; ante — at the time of death; tat-ātmānaḥ — attaining the same spiritual body and form; kīṭaḥ — a worm; peśaskṛtaḥ — (captured by) a black drone; yathā — just like.

Translation
Not only Śiśupāla and Dantavakra but also many, many other kings who acted as enemies of Kṛṣṇa attained salvation at the time of death. Because they thought of the Lord, they received spiritual bodies and forms the same as His, just as worms captured by a black drone obtain the same type of body as the drone.

Text 40
यथा यथा भगवतो भक्त्या परमयाभिदा ।
नृपाश्चैद्यादय: सात्म्यं हरेस्तच्चिन्तया ययु: ॥ ४० ॥
yathā yathā bhagavato
bhaktyā paramayābhidā
nṛpāś caidyādayaḥ sātmyaṁ
hares tac-cintayā yayuḥ
Synonyms
yathā yathā — just as; bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhaktyā — by devotional service; paramayā — supreme; abhidā — incessantly thinking of such activities; nṛpāḥ — kings; caidya-ādayaḥ — Śiśupāla, Dantavakra and others; sātmyam — the same form; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat-cintayā — by constantly thinking of Him; yayuḥ — returned home, back to Godhead.

Translation
By devotional service, pure devotees who incessantly think of the Supreme Personality of Godhead receive bodies similar to His. This is known as sārūpya-mukti. Although Śiśupāla, Dantavakra and other kings thought of Kṛṣṇa as an enemy, they also achieved the same result.

Text 41
आख्यातं सर्वमेतत्ते यन्मां त्वं परिपृष्टवान् ।
दमघोषसुतादीनां हरे: सात्म्यमपि द्विषाम् ॥ ४१ ॥
ākhyātaṁ sarvam etat te
yan māṁ tvaṁ paripṛṣṭavān
damaghoṣa-sutādīnāṁ
hareḥ sātmyam api dviṣām
Synonyms
ākhyātam — described; sarvam — everything; etat — this; te — unto you; yat — whatever; mām — unto me; tvam — you; paripṛṣṭavān — inquired; damaghoṣa-suta-ādīnām — of the son of Damaghoṣa (Śiśupāla) and others; hareḥ — of the Lord; sātmyam — equal bodily features; api — even; dviṣām — although they were inimical.

Translation
Everything you asked me about how Śiśupāla and others attained salvation although they were inimical has now been explained to you by me.

Text 42
एषा ब्रह्मण्यदेवस्य कृष्णस्य च महात्मन: ।
अवतारकथा पुण्या वधो यत्रादिदैत्ययो: ॥ ४२ ॥
eṣā brahmaṇya-devasya
kṛṣṇasya ca mahātmanaḥ
avatāra-kathā puṇyā
vadho yatrādi-daityayoḥ
Synonyms
eṣā — all this; brahmaṇya-devasya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is worshiped by all brāhmaṇas; kṛṣṇasya — of Kṛṣṇa, the original Supreme Personality of Godhead; ca — also; mahā-ātmanaḥ — the Supersoul; avatāra-kathā — narrations about His incarnations; puṇyā — pious, purifying; vadhaḥ — killing; yatra — wherein; ādi — in the beginning of the millennium; daityayoḥ — of the demons (Hiraṇyākṣa and Hiraṇyakaśipu).

Translation
In this narration about Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, various expansions or incarnations of the Lord have been described, and the killing of the two demons Hiraṇyākṣa and Hiraṇyakaśipu has also been described.

Texts 43-44
प्रह्रादस्यानुचरितं महाभागवतस्य च ।
भक्तिर्ज्ञानं विरक्तिश्च याथार्थ्यं चास्य वै हरे: ॥ ४३ ॥
सर्गस्थित्यप्ययेशस्य गुणकर्मानुवर्णनम् ।
परावरेषां स्थानानां कालेन व्यत्ययो महान् ॥ ४४ ॥
prahrādasyānucaritaṁ
mahā-bhāgavatasya ca
bhaktir jñānaṁ viraktiś ca
yāthārthyaṁ cāsya vai hareḥ
sarga-sthity-apyayeśasya
guṇa-karmānuvarṇanam
parāvareṣāṁ sthānānāṁ
kālena vyatyayo mahān
Synonyms
prahrādasya — of Prahlāda Mahārāja; anucaritam — characteristics (understood by reading or describing his activities); mahā-bhāgavatasya — of the great and exalted devotee; ca — also; bhaktiḥ — devotional service unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; jñānam — complete knowledge of the Transcendence (Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān); viraktiḥ — renunciation of material existence; ca — also; yāthārthyam — just to understand each of them perfectly; ca — and; asya — of this; vai — indeed; hareḥ — always in reference to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarga — of creation; sthiti — maintenance; apyaya — and annihilation; īśasya — of the master (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); guṇa — of the transcendental qualities and opulences; karma — and activities; anuvarṇanam — description within the disciplic succession*; para-avareṣām — of different types of living entities known as demigods and demons; sthānānām — of the various planets or places to live; kālena — in due course of time; vyatyayaḥ — the annihilation of everything; mahān — although very great.

Translation
This narration describes the characteristics of the great and exalted devotee Prahlāda Mahārāja, his staunch devotional service, his perfect knowledge, and his perfect detachment from material contamination. It also describes the Supreme Personality of Godhead as the cause of creation, maintenance and annihilation. Prahlāda Mahārāja, in his prayers, has described the transcendental qualities of the Lord and has also described how the various abodes of the demigods and demons, regardless of how materially opulent, are destroyed by the mere direction of the Lord.

Text 45
धर्मो भागवतानां च भगवान्येन गम्यते ।
आख्यानेऽस्मिन्समाम्नातमाध्यात्मिकमशेषत: ॥ ४५ ॥
dharmo bhāgavatānāṁ ca
bhagavān yena gamyate
ākhyāne ’smin samāmnātam
ādhyātmikam aśeṣataḥ
Synonyms
dharmaḥ — religious principles; bhāgavatānām — of the devotees; ca — and; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yena — by which; gamyate — one can understand; ākhyāne — in the narration; asmin — this; samāmnātam — is perfectly described; ādhyātmikam — transcendence; aśeṣataḥ — without reservations.

Translation
The principles of religion by which one can actually understand the Supreme Personality of Godhead are called bhāgavata-dharma. In this narration, therefore, which deals with these principles, actual transcendence is properly described.

Text 46
य एतत्पुण्यमाख्यानं विष्णोर्वीर्योपबृंहितम् ।
कीर्तयेच्छ्रद्धया श्रुत्वा कर्मपाशैर्विमुच्यते ॥ ४६ ॥
ya etat puṇyam ākhyānaṁ
viṣṇor vīryopabṛṁhitam
kīrtayec chraddhayā śrutvā
karma-pāśair vimucyate
Synonyms
yaḥ — anyone who; etat — this; puṇyam — pious; ākhyānam — narration; viṣṇoḥ — of Lord Viṣṇu; vīrya — the supreme power; upabṛṁhitam — in which is described; kīrtayet — chants or repeats; śraddhayā — with great faith; śrutvā — after properly hearing (from the right source); karma-pāśaiḥ — from the bondage of fruitive activities; vimucyate — becomes liberated.

Translation
One who hears and chants this narration about the omnipotence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, is certainly liberated from material bondage without fail.

Text 47
एतद्य आदिपुरुषस्य मृगेन्द्रलीलां
दैत्येन्द्रयूथपवधं प्रयत: पठेत ।
दैत्यात्मजस्य च सतां प्रवरस्य पुण्यं
श्रुत्वानुभावमकुतोभयमेति लोकम् ॥ ४७ ॥
etad ya ādi-puruṣasya mṛgendra-līlāṁ
daityendra-yūtha-pa-vadhaṁ prayataḥ paṭheta
daityātmajasya ca satāṁ pravarasya puṇyaṁ
śrutvānubhāvam akuto-bhayam eti lokam
Synonyms
etat — this narration; yaḥ — anyone who; ādi-puruṣasya — of the original Personality of Godhead; mṛga-indra-līlām — pastimes as a lion and human being combined; daitya-indra — of the King of the demons; yūtha-pa — as strong as an elephant; vadham — the killing; prayataḥ — with great attention; paṭheta — reads; daitya-ātma-jasya — of Prahlāda Mahārāja, the son of the demon; ca — also; satām — among elevated devotees; pravarasya — the best; puṇyam — pious; śrutvā — hearing; anubhāvam — the activities; akutaḥ-bhayam — where there is no fear anywhere or at any time; eti — reaches; lokam — the spiritual world.

Translation
Prahlāda Mahārāja was the best among exalted devotees. Anyone who with great attention hears this narration concerning the activities of Prahlāda Mahārāja, the killing of Hiraṇyakaśipu, and the activities of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nṛsiṁhadeva, surely reaches the spiritual world, where there is no anxiety.

Text 48
यूयं नृलोके बत भूरिभागा
लोकं पुनाना मुनयोऽभियन्ति ।
येषां गृहानावसतीति साक्षाद्
गूढं परं ब्रह्म मनुष्यलिङ्गम् ॥ ४८ ॥
yūyaṁ nṛ-loke bata bhūri-bhāgā
lokaṁ punānā munayo ’bhiyanti
yeṣāṁ gṛhān āvasatīti sākṣād
gūḍhaṁ paraṁ brahma manuṣya-liṅgam
Synonyms
yūyam — all of you (the Pāṇḍavas); nṛ-loke — within this material world; bata — however; bhūri-bhāgāḥ — extremely fortunate; lokam — all the planets; punānāḥ — who can purify; munayaḥ — great saintly persons; abhiyanti — almost always come to visit; yeṣām — of whom; gṛhān — the house; āvasati — resides in; iti — thus; sākṣāt — directly; gūḍham — very confidential; param brahma — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; manuṣya-liṅgam — appearing just like a human being.

Translation
Nārada Muni continued: My dear Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, all of you [the Pāṇḍavas] are extremely fortunate, for the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, lives in your palace just like a human being. Great saintly persons know this very well, and therefore they constantly visit this house.

Text 49
स वा अयं ब्रह्म महद्विमृग्य-
कैवल्यनिर्वाणसुखानुभूति: ।
प्रिय: सुहृद् व: खलु मातुलेय
आत्मार्हणीयो विधिकृद्गुरुश्च ॥ ४९ ॥
sa vā ayaṁ brahma mahad-vimṛgya-
kaivalya-nirvāṇa-sukhānubhūtiḥ
priyaḥ suhṛd vaḥ khalu mātuleya
ātmārhaṇīyo vidhi-kṛd guruś ca
Synonyms
saḥ — that (Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa); vā — also; ayam — this; brahma — the impersonal Brahman (which is an emanation from Kṛṣṇa); mahat — by great personalities; vimṛgya — searched for; kaivalya — oneness; nirvāṇa-sukha — of transcendental happiness; anubhūtiḥ — the source of practical experience; priyaḥ — very, very dear; suhṛt — well-wisher; vaḥ — of you; khalu — indeed; mātuleyaḥ — the son of a maternal uncle; ātmā — exactly like body and soul together; arhaṇīyaḥ — worshipable (because He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead); vidhi-kṛt — (yet He serves you as) an order carrier; guruḥ — your supreme advisor; ca — as well.

Translation
The impersonal Brahman is Kṛṣṇa Himself because Kṛṣṇa is the source of the impersonal Brahman. He is the origin of the transcendental bliss sought by great saintly persons, yet He, the Supreme Person, is your most dear friend and constant well-wisher and is intimately related to you as the son of your maternal uncle. Indeed, He is always like your body and soul. He is worshipable, yet He acts as your servant and sometimes as your spiritual master.

Text 50
न यस्य साक्षाद्भ‍वपद्मजादिभी
रूपं धिया वस्तुतयोपवर्णितम् ।
मौनेन भक्त्योपशमेन पूजित:
प्रसीदतामेष स सात्वतां पति: ॥ ५० ॥
na yasya sākṣād bhava-padmajādibhī
rūpaṁ dhiyā vastutayopavarṇitam
maunena bhaktyopaśamena pūjitaḥ
prasīdatām eṣa sa sātvatāṁ patiḥ
Synonyms
na — not; yasya — of whom; sākṣāt — directly; bhava — Lord Śiva; padma-ja — Lord Brahmā (born from the lotus); ādibhiḥ — by them and others also; rūpam — the form; dhiyā — even by meditation; vastutayā — fundamentally; upavarṇitam — described and perceived; maunena — by samādhi, deep meditation; bhaktyā — by devotional service; upaśamena — by renunciation; pūjitaḥ — worshiped; prasīdatām — may He be pleased; eṣaḥ — this; saḥ — He; sātvatām — of the great devotees; patiḥ — the master.

Translation
Exalted persons like Lord Śiva and Lord Brahmā could not properly describe the truth of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa. May the Lord, who is always worshiped as the protector of all devotees by great saints who observe vows of silence, meditation, devotional service and renunciation, be pleased with us.

Text 51
स एष भगवान् राजन्व्यतनोद्विहतं यश: ।
पुरा रुद्रस्य देवस्य मयेनानन्तमायिना ॥ ५१ ॥
sa eṣa bhagavān rājan
vyatanod vihataṁ yaśaḥ
purā rudrasya devasya
mayenānanta-māyinā
Synonyms
saḥ eṣaḥ bhagavān — the same Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, who is Parabrahman; rājan — my dear King; vyatanot — expanded; vihatam — lost; yaśaḥ — reputation; purā — formerly in history; rudrasya — of Lord Śiva (the most powerful among the demigods); devasya — the demigod; mayena — by a demon named Maya; ananta — unlimited; māyinā — possessing technical knowledge.

Translation
My dear King Yudhiṣṭhira, long, long ago in history, a demon known as Maya Dānava, who was very expert in technical knowledge, reduced the reputation of Lord Śiva. In that situation, Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, saved Lord Śiva.

Text 52
राजोवाच
कस्मिन्कर्मणि देवस्य मयोऽहञ्जगदीशितु: ।
यथा चोपचिता कीर्ति: कृष्णेनानेन कथ्यताम् ॥ ५२ ॥
rājovāca
kasmin karmaṇi devasya
mayo ’hañ jagad-īśituḥ
yathā copacitā kīrtiḥ
kṛṣṇenānena kathyatām
Synonyms
rājā uvāca — King Yudhiṣṭhira inquired; kasmin — for what reason; karmaṇi — by which activities; devasya — of Lord Mahādeva (Śiva); mayaḥ — the great demon Maya Dānava; ahan — vanquished; jagat-īśituḥ — of Lord Śiva, who controls the power of the material energy and is the husband of Durgādevī; yathā — just as; ca — and; upacitā — again expanded; kīrtiḥ — reputation; kṛṣṇena — by Lord Kṛṣṇa; anena — this; kathyatām — please describe.

Translation
Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira said: For what reason did the demon Maya Dānava vanquish Lord Śiva’s reputation? How did Lord Kṛṣṇa save Lord Śiva and expand his reputation again? Kindly describe these incidents.

Text 53
श्रीनारद उवाच
निर्जिता असुरा देवैर्युध्यनेनोपबृंहितै: ।
मायिनां परमाचार्यं मयं शरणमाययु: ॥ ५३ ॥
śrī-nārada uvāca
nirjitā asurā devair
yudhy anenopabṛṁhitaiḥ
māyināṁ paramācāryaṁ
mayaṁ śaraṇam āyayuḥ
Synonyms
śrī-nāradaḥ uvāca — Śrī Nārada Muni said; nirjitāḥ — being defeated; asurāḥ — all the demons; devaiḥ — by the demigods; yudhi — in battle; anena — by Lord Kṛṣṇa; upabṛṁhitaiḥ — increased in power; māyinām — of all the demons; parama-ācāryam — the best and largest; mayam — unto Maya Dānava; śaraṇam — shelter; āyayuḥ — took.

Translation
Nārada Muni said: When the demigods, who are always powerful by the mercy of Lord Kṛṣṇa, fought with the asuras, the asuras were defeated, and therefore they took shelter of Maya Dānava, the greatest of the demons.

Texts 54-55
स निर्माय पुरस्तिस्रो हैमीरौप्यायसीर्विभु: ।
दुर्लक्ष्यापायसंयोगा दुर्वितर्क्यपरिच्छदा: ॥ ५४ ॥
ताभिस्तेऽसुरसेनान्यो लोकांस्त्रीन् सेश्वरान्नृप ।
स्मरन्तो नाशयां चक्रु: पूर्ववैरमलक्षिता: ॥ ५५ ॥
sa nirmāya puras tisro
haimī-raupyāyasīr vibhuḥ
durlakṣyāpāya-saṁyogā
durvitarkya-paricchadāḥ
tābhis te ’sura-senānyo
lokāṁs trīn seśvarān nṛpa
smaranto nāśayāṁ cakruḥ
pūrva-vairam alakṣitāḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — that (great demon Maya Dānava); nirmāya — constructing; puraḥ — big residences; tisraḥ — three; haimī — made of gold; raupyā — made of silver; āyasīḥ — made of iron; vibhuḥ — very great, powerful; durlakṣya — immeasurable; apāya-saṁyogāḥ — whose movements in coming and going; durvitarkya — uncommon; paricchadāḥ — possessing paraphernalia; tābhiḥ — by all of them (the three residences, which resembled airplanes); te — they; asura-senā-anyaḥ — the commanders of the asuras; lokān trīn — the three worlds; sa-īśvarān — with their chief rulers; nṛpa — my dear King Yudhiṣṭhira; smarantaḥ — remembering; nāśayām cakruḥ — began to annihilate; pūrva — former; vairam — enmity; alakṣitāḥ — unseen by anyone else.

Translation
Maya Dānava, the great leader of the demons, prepared three invisible residences and gave them to the demons. These dwellings resembled airplanes made of gold, silver and iron, and they contained uncommon paraphernalia. My dear King Yudhiṣṭhira, because of these three dwellings the commanders of the demons remained invisible to the demigods. Taking advantage of this opportunity, the demons, remembering their former enmity, began to vanquish the three worlds — the upper, middle and lower planetary systems.

Text 56
ततस्ते सेश्वरा लोका उपासाद्येश्वरं नता: ।
त्राहि नस्तावकान्देव विनष्टांस्त्रिपुरालयै: ॥ ५६ ॥
tatas te seśvarā lokā
upāsādyeśvaraṁ natāḥ
trāhi nas tāvakān deva
vinaṣṭāṁs tripurālayaiḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; te — they (the demigods); sa-īśvarāḥ — with their rulers; lokāḥ — the planets; upāsādya — approaching; īśvaram — Lord Śiva; natāḥ — fell down in surrender; trāhi — please save; naḥ — us; tāvakān — near and dear to you and very frightened; deva — O Lord; vinaṣṭān — almost finished; tripura-ālayaiḥ — by the demons dwelling in those three planes.

Translation
Thereafter, when the demons had begun to destroy the higher planetary systems, the rulers of those planets went to Lord Śiva, fully surrendered unto him and said: Dear Lord, we demigods living in the three worlds are about to be vanquished. We are your followers. Kindly save us.

Text 57
अथानुगृह्य भगवान्मा भैष्टेति सुरान्विभु: ।
शरं धनुषि सन्धाय पुरेष्वस्त्रं व्यमुञ्चत ॥ ५७ ॥
athānugṛhya bhagavān
mā bhaiṣṭeti surān vibhuḥ
śaraṁ dhanuṣi sandhāya
pureṣv astraṁ vyamuñcata
Synonyms
atha — thereafter; anugṛhya — just to show them favor; bhagavān — the most powerful; mā — do not; bhaiṣṭa — be afraid; iti — thus; surān — unto the demigods; vibhuḥ — Lord Śiva; śaram — arrows; dhanuṣi — on the bow; sandhāya — fixing; pureṣu — at those three residences occupied by the demons; astram — weapons; vyamuñcata — released.

Translation
The most powerful and able Lord Śiva reassured them and said, “Do not be afraid.” He then fixed his arrows to his bow and released them toward the three residences occupied by the demons.

Text 58
ततोऽग्निवर्णा इषव उत्पेतु: सूर्यमण्डलात् ।
यथा मयूखसन्दोहा नाद‍ृश्यन्त पुरो यत: ॥ ५८ ॥
tato ’gni-varṇā iṣava
utpetuḥ sūrya-maṇḍalāt
yathā mayūkha-sandohā
nādṛśyanta puro yataḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; agni-varṇāḥ — as brilliant as fire; iṣavaḥ — arrows; utpetuḥ — released; sūrya-maṇḍalāt — from the sun globe; yathā — just as; mayūkha-sandohāḥ — beams of light; na adṛśyanta — could not be seen; puraḥ — the three residences; yataḥ — because of this (being covered by the arrows of Lord Śiva).

Translation
The arrows released by Lord Śiva appeared like fiery beams emanating from the sun globe and covered the three residential airplanes, which could then no longer be seen.

Text 59
तै: स्पृष्टा व्यसव: सर्वे निपेतु: स्म पुरौकस: ।
तानानीय महायोगी मय: कूपरसेऽक्षिपत् ॥ ५९ ॥
taiḥ spṛṣṭā vyasavaḥ sarve
nipetuḥ sma puraukasaḥ
tān ānīya mahā-yogī
mayaḥ kūpa-rase ’kṣipat
Synonyms
taiḥ — by those (fiery arrows); spṛṣṭāḥ — being attacked or being touched; vyasavaḥ — without life; sarve — all the demons; nipetuḥ — fell down; sma — formerly; pura-okasaḥ — being the inhabitants of the above-mentioned three residential airplanes; tān — all of them; ānīya — bringing; mahā-yogī — the great mystic; mayaḥ — Maya Dānava; kūpa-rase — in the well of nectar (created by the great mystic Maya); akṣipat — put.

Translation
Attacked by Lord Śiva’s golden arrows, all the demoniac inhabitants of those three dwellings lost their lives and fell down. Then the great mystic Maya Dānava dropped the demons into a nectarean well that he had created.

Text 60
सिद्धामृतरसस्पृष्टा वज्रसारा महौजस: ।
उत्तस्थुर्मेघदलना वैद्युता इव वह्नय: ॥ ६० ॥
siddhāmṛta-rasa-spṛṣṭā
vajra-sārā mahaujasaḥ
uttasthur megha-dalanā
vaidyutā iva vahnayaḥ
Synonyms
siddha-amṛta-rasa-spṛṣṭāḥ — the demons, thus being touched by the powerful mystic nectarean liquid; vajra-sārāḥ — their bodies becoming invincible to thunderbolts; mahā-ojasaḥ — being extremely strong; uttasthuḥ — again got up; megha-dalanāḥ — that which goes through the clouds; vaidyutāḥ — lightning (which penetrates the clouds); iva — like; vahnayaḥ — fiery.

Translation
When the dead bodies of the demons came in touch with the nectar, their bodies became invincible to thunderbolts. Endowed with great strength, they got up like lightning penetrating clouds.

Text 61
विलोक्य भग्नसङ्कल्पं विमनस्कं वृषध्वजम् ।
तदायं भगवान्विष्णुस्तत्रोपायमकल्पयत् ॥ ६१ ॥
vilokya bhagna-saṅkalpaṁ
vimanaskaṁ vṛṣa-dhvajam
tadāyaṁ bhagavān viṣṇus
tatropāyam akalpayat
Synonyms
vilokya — seeing; bhagna-saṅkalpam — disappointed; vimanaskam — extremely unhappy; vṛṣa-dhvajam — Lord Śiva; tadā — at that time; ayam — this; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; viṣṇuḥ — Lord Viṣṇu; tatra — about the well of nectar; upāyam — means (how to stop it); akalpayat — considered.

Translation
Seeing Lord Śiva very much aggrieved and disappointed, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Viṣṇu, considered how to stop this nuisance created by Maya Dānava.

Text 62
वत्सश्चासीत्तदा ब्रह्मा स्वयं विष्णुरयं हि गौ: ।
प्रविश्य त्रिपुरं काले रसकूपामृतं पपौ ॥ ६२ ॥
vatsaś cāsīt tadā brahmā
svayaṁ viṣṇur ayaṁ hi gauḥ
praviśya tripuraṁ kāle
rasa-kūpāmṛtaṁ papau
Synonyms
vatsaḥ — a calf; ca — also; āsīt — became; tadā — at that time; brahmā — Lord Brahmā; svayam — personally; viṣṇuḥ — Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ayam — this; hi — indeed; gauḥ — a cow; praviśya — entering; tri-puram — the three residences; kāle — at noon; rasa-kūpa-amṛtam — the nectar contained in that well; papau — drank.

Translation
Then Lord Brahmā became a calf and Lord Viṣṇu a cow, and at noon they entered the residences and drank all the nectar in the well.

Text 63
तेऽसुरा ह्यपि पश्यन्तो न न्यषेधन्विमोहिता: ।
तद्विज्ञाय महायोगी रसपालानिदं जगौ ।
स्मयन्विशोक: शोकार्तान्स्मरन्दैवगतिं च ताम् ॥ ६३ ॥
te ’surā hy api paśyanto
na nyaṣedhan vimohitāḥ
tad vijñāya mahā-yogī
rasa-pālān idaṁ jagau
smayan viśokaḥ śokārtān
smaran daiva-gatiṁ ca tām
Synonyms
te — those; asurāḥ — demons; hi — indeed; api — although; paśyantaḥ — seeing (the calf and cow drinking the nectar); na — not; nyaṣedhan — forbade them; vimohitāḥ — being bewildered by illusion; tat vijñāya — knowing this fully; mahā-yogī — the great mystic Maya Dānava; rasa-pālān — unto the demons who guarded the nectar; idam — this; jagau — said; smayan — being bewildered; viśokaḥ — not being very unhappy; śoka-ārtān — greatly lamenting; smaran — remembering; daiva-gatim — spiritual power; ca — also; tām — that.

Translation
The demons could see the calf and cow, but because of the illusion created by the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the demons could not forbid them. The great mystic Maya Dānava became aware that the calf and cow were drinking the nectar, and he could understand this to be the unseen power of providence. Thus he spoke to the demons, who were grievously lamenting.

Text 64
देवोऽसुरो नरोऽन्यो वा नेश्वरोऽस्तीह कश्चन ।
आत्मनोऽन्यस्य वा दिष्टं दैवेनापोहितुं द्वयो: ॥ ६४ ॥
devo ’suro naro ’nyo vā
neśvaro ’stīha kaścana
ātmano ’nyasya vā diṣṭaṁ
daivenāpohituṁ dvayoḥ
Synonyms
devaḥ — the demigods; asuraḥ — the demons; naraḥ — humans; anyaḥ — or anyone else; vā — either; na — not; īśvaraḥ — the supreme controller; asti — is; iha — in this world; kaścana — anyone; ātmanaḥ — one’s own; anyasya — another’s; vā — either; diṣṭam — destiny; daivena — which is given by the Supreme Lord; apohitum — to undo; dvayoḥ — of both of them.

Translation
Maya Dānava said: What has been destined by the Supreme Lord for oneself, for others, or for both oneself and others cannot be undone anywhere or by anyone, whether one be a demigod, a demon, a human being or anyone else.

Texts 65-66
अथासौ शक्तिभि: स्वाभि: शम्भो: प्राधानिकं व्यधात् ।
धर्मज्ञानविरक्त्यृद्धितपोविद्याक्रियादिभि: ॥ ६५ ॥
रथं सूतं ध्वजं वाहान्धनुर्वर्मशरादि यत् ।
सन्नद्धो रथमास्थाय शरं धनुरुपाददे ॥ ६६ ॥
athāsau śaktibhiḥ svābhiḥ
śambhoḥ prādhānikaṁ vyadhāt
dharma-jñāna-virakty-ṛddhi-
tapo-vidyā-kriyādibhiḥ
rathaṁ sūtaṁ dhvajaṁ vāhān
dhanur varma-śarādi yat
sannaddho ratham āsthāya
śaraṁ dhanur upādade
Synonyms
atha — thereafter; asau — He (Lord Kṛṣṇa); śaktibhiḥ — by His potencies; svābhiḥ — personal; śambhoḥ — of Lord Śiva; prādhānikam — ingredients; vyadhāt — created; dharma — religion; jñāna — knowledge; virakti — renunciation; ṛddhi — opulence; tapaḥ — austerity; vidyā — education; kriyā — activities; ādibhiḥ — by all these and other transcendental opulences; ratham — chariot; sūtam — charioteer; dhvajam — flag; vāhān — horses and elephants; dhanuḥ — bow; varma — shield; śara-ādi — arrows and so on; yat — everything that was required; sannaddhaḥ — equipped; ratham — on the chariot; āsthāya — seated; śaram — arrow; dhanuḥ — unto the bow; upādade — joined.

Translation
Nārada Muni continued: Thereafter, Lord Kṛṣṇa, by His own personal potency, consisting of religion, knowledge, renunciation, opulence, austerity, education and activities, equipped Lord Śiva with all the necessary paraphernalia, such as a chariot, a charioteer, a flag, horses, elephants, a bow, a shield and arrows. When Lord Śiva was fully equipped in this way, he sat down on the chariot with his arrows and bow to fight with the demons.

Text 67
शरं धनुषि सन्धाय मुहूर्तेऽभिजितीश्वर: ।
ददाह तेन दुर्भेद्या हरोऽथ त्रिपुरो नृप ॥ ६७ ॥
śaraṁ dhanuṣi sandhāya
muhūrte ’bhijitīśvaraḥ
dadāha tena durbhedyā
haro ’tha tripuro nṛpa
Synonyms
śaram — the arrows; dhanuṣi — on the bow; sandhāya — joining together; muhūrte abhijiti — at noon; īśvaraḥ — Lord Śiva; dadāha — set afire; tena — by them (the arrows); durbhedyāḥ — very difficult to pierce; haraḥ — Lord Śiva; atha — in this way; tri-puraḥ — the three residences of the demons; nṛpa — O King Yudhiṣṭhira.

Translation
My dear King Yudhiṣṭhira, the most powerful Lord Śiva joined the arrows to his bow, and at noon he set fire to all three residences of the demons and thus destroyed them.

Text 68
दिवि दुन्दुभयो नेदुर्विमानशतसङ्कुला: ।
देवर्षिपितृसिद्धेशा जयेति कुसुमोत्करै: ।
अवाकिरञ्जगुर्हृष्टा ननृतुश्चाप्सरोगणा: ॥ ६८ ॥
divi dundubhayo nedur
vimāna-śata-saṅkulāḥ
devarṣi-pitṛ-siddheśā
jayeti kusumotkaraiḥ
avākirañ jagur hṛṣṭā
nanṛtuś cāpsaro-gaṇāḥ
Synonyms
divi — in the sky; dundubhayaḥ — kettledrums; neduḥ — vibrated; vimāna — of airplanes; śata — hundreds and thousands; saṅkulāḥ — endowed; deva-ṛṣi — all the demigods and saints; pitṛ — the residents of Pitṛloka; siddha — the residents of Siddhaloka; īśāḥ — all the great personalities; jaya iti — vibrated the chant “let there be victory”; kusuma-utkaraiḥ — various kinds of flowers; avākiran — showered on the head of Lord Śiva; jaguḥ — chanted; hṛṣṭāḥ — in great pleasure; nanṛtuḥ — danced; ca — and; apsaraḥ-gaṇāḥ — the beautiful women of the heavenly planets.

Translation
Seated in their airplanes in the sky, the inhabitants of the higher planetary systems beat many kettledrums. The demigods, saints, Pitās, Siddhas and various great personalities showered flowers on the head of Lord Śiva, wishing him all victory, and the Apsarās began to chant and dance with great pleasure.

Text 69
एवं दग्ध्वा पुरस्तिस्रो भगवान्पुरहा नृप ।
ब्रह्मादिभि: स्तूयमान: स्वं धाम प्रत्यपद्यत ॥ ६९ ॥
evaṁ dagdhvā puras tisro
bhagavān pura-hā nṛpa
brahmādibhiḥ stūyamānaḥ
svaṁ dhāma pratyapadyata
Synonyms
evam — thus; dagdhvā — burning to ashes; puraḥ tisraḥ — the three residences of the demons; bhagavān — the supreme powerful; pura-hā — who annihilated the residences of the asuras; nṛpa — O King Yudhiṣṭhira; brahma-ādibhiḥ — by Lord Brahmā and other demigods; stūyamānaḥ — being worshiped; svam — to his own; dhāma — abode; pratyapadyata — returned.

Translation
O King Yudhiṣṭhira, thus Lord Śiva is known as Tripurāri, the annihilator of the three dwellings of the demons, because he burnt these dwellings to ashes. Being worshiped by the demigods, headed by Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva returned to his own abode.

Text 70
एवं विधान्यस्य हरे: स्वमायया
विडम्बमानस्य नृलोकमात्मन: ।
वीर्याणि गीतान्यृषिभिर्जगद्गुरो-
र्लोकं पुनानान्यपरं वदामि किम् ॥ ७० ॥
evaṁ vidhāny asya hareḥ sva-māyayā
viḍambamānasya nṛ-lokam ātmanaḥ
vīryāṇi gītāny ṛṣibhir jagad-guror
lokaṁ punānāny aparaṁ vadāmi kim
Synonyms
evam vidhāni — in this way; asya — of Kṛṣṇa; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sva-māyayā — by His transcendental potencies; viḍambamānasya — acting like an ordinary human being; nṛ-lokam — within human society; ātmanaḥ — of Him; vīryāṇi — transcendental activities; gītāni — narrations; ṛṣibhiḥ — by great saintly persons; jagat-guroḥ — of the supreme master; lokam — all the planetary systems; punānāni — purifying; aparam — what else; vadāmi kim — can I say.

Translation
The Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, appeared as a human being, yet He performed many uncommon and wonderful pastimes by His own potency. How can I say more about His activities than what has already been said by great saintly persons? Everyone can be purified by His activities, simply by hearing about them from the right source.