Text 1
श्रीयुधिष्ठिर उवाच
गृहस्थ एतां पदवीं विधिना येन चाञ्जसा ।
यायाद्देवऋषे ब्रूहि माद‍ृशो गृहमूढधी: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-yudhiṣṭhira uvāca
gṛhastha etāṁ padavīṁ
vidhinā yena cāñjasā
yāyād deva-ṛṣe brūhi
mādṛśo gṛha-mūḍha-dhīḥ
Synonyms
śrī-yudhiṣṭhiraḥ uvāca — Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja said; gṛhasthaḥ — a person living with his family; etām — this (the process mentioned in the previous chapter); padavīm — position of liberation; vidhinā — according to the instructions of Vedic scripture; yena — by which; ca — also; añjasā — easily; yāyāt — may get; deva-ṛṣe — O great sage among the demigods; brūhi — kindly explain; mādṛśaḥ — such as me; gṛha-mūḍha-dhīḥ — completely ignorant of the goal of life.

Translation
Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira inquired from Nārada Muni: O my lord, O great sage, kindly explain how we who are staying at home without knowledge of the goal of life may also easily attain liberation, according to the instructions of the Vedas.

Text 2
श्रीनारद उवाच
गृहेष्ववस्थितो राजन्क्रिया: कुर्वन्यथोचिता: ।
वासुदेवार्पणं साक्षादुपासीत महामुनीन् ॥ २ ॥
śrī-nārada uvāca
gṛheṣv avasthito rājan
kriyāḥ kurvan yathocitāḥ
vāsudevārpaṇaṁ sākṣād
upāsīta mahā-munīn
Synonyms
śrī-nāradaḥ uvāca — Śrī Nārada Muni replied; gṛheṣu — at home; avasthitaḥ — staying (a householder generally stays home with his wife and children); rājan — O King; kriyāḥ — activities; kurvan — performing; yathocitāḥ — suitable (as instructed by the guru and śāstra); vāsudeva — unto Lord Vāsudeva; arpaṇam — dedicating; sākṣāt — directly; upāsīta — should worship; mahā-munīn — the great devotees.

Translation
Nārada Muni replied: My dear King, those who stay at home as householders must act to earn their livelihood, and instead of trying to enjoy the results of their work themselves, they should offer these results to Kṛṣṇa, Vāsudeva. How to satisfy Vāsudeva in this life can be perfectly understood through the association of great devotees of the Lord.

Texts 3-4
श‍ृण्वन्भगवतोऽभीक्ष्णमवतारकथामृतम् ।
श्रद्दधानो यथाकालमुपशान्तजनावृत: ॥ ३ ॥
सत्सङ्गाच्छनकै: सङ्गमात्मजायात्मजादिषु ।
विमुञ्चेन्मुच्यमानेषु स्वयं स्वप्नवदुत्थित: ॥ ४ ॥
śṛṇvan bhagavato ’bhīkṣṇam
avatāra-kathāmṛtam
śraddadhāno yathā-kālam
upaśānta-janāvṛtaḥ
sat-saṅgāc chanakaiḥ saṅgam
ātma-jāyātmajādiṣu
vimuñcen mucyamāneṣu
svayaṁ svapnavad utthitaḥ
Synonyms
śṛṇvan — hearing; bhagavataḥ — of the Lord; abhīkṣṇam — always; avatāra — of the incarnations; kathā — narrations; amṛtam — the nectar; śraddadhānaḥ — being very faithful in hearing about the Supreme Personality of Godhead; yathā-kālam — according to time (generally a gṛhastha can find time in the evening or in the afternoon); upaśānta — completely relieved of material activities; jana — by persons; āvṛtaḥ — being surrounded; sat-saṅgāt — from such good association; śanakaiḥ — gradually; saṅgam — association; ātma — in the body; jāyā — wife; ātma-ja-ādiṣu — as well as in children; vimuñcet — one should get free from the attachment for such association; mucyamāneṣu — being severed (from him); svayam — personally; svapna-vat — like a dream; utthitaḥ — awakened.

Translation
A gṛhastha must associate again and again with saintly persons, and with great respect he must hear the nectar of the activities of the Supreme Lord and His incarnations as these activities are described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other Purāṇas. Thus one should gradually become detached from affection for his wife and children, exactly like a man awakening from a dream.

Text 5
यावदर्थमुपासीनो देहे गेहे च पण्डित: ।
विरक्तो रक्तवत्तत्र नृलोके नरतां न्यसेत् ॥ ५ ॥
yāvad-artham upāsīno
dehe gehe ca paṇḍitaḥ
virakto raktavat tatra
nṛ-loke naratāṁ nyaset
Synonyms
yāvat-artham — as much endeavor for one’s livelihood as necessary; upāsīnaḥ — earning; dehe — in the body; gehe — in family matters; ca — also; paṇḍitaḥ — one who is learned; viraktaḥ — not at all attached; rakta-vat — as if very much attached; tatra — in this; nṛ-loke — human society; naratām — the human form of life; nyaset — one should depict.

Translation
While working to earn his livelihood as much as necessary to maintain body and soul together, one who is actually learned should live in human society unattached to family affairs, although externally appearing very much attached.

Text 6
ज्ञातय: पितरौ पुत्रा भ्रातर: सुहृदोऽपरे ।
यद्वदन्ति यदिच्छन्ति चानुमोदेत निर्मम: ॥ ६ ॥
jñātayaḥ pitarau putrā
bhrātaraḥ suhṛdo ’pare
yad vadanti yad icchanti
cānumodeta nirmamaḥ
Synonyms
jñātayaḥ — relatives, family members; pitarau — the father and mother; putrāḥ — children; bhrātaraḥ — brothers; suhṛdaḥ — friends; apare — and others; yat — whatever; vadanti — they suggest (in regard to one’s means of livelihood); yat — whatever; icchanti — they wish; ca — and; anumodeta — he should agree; nirmamaḥ — but without taking them seriously.

Translation
An intelligent man in human society should make his own program of activities very simple. If there are suggestions from his friends, children, parents, brothers or anyone else, he should externally agree, saying, “Yes, that is all right,” but internally he should be determined not to create a cumbersome life in which the purpose of life will not be fulfilled.

Text 7
दिव्यं भौमं चान्तरीक्षं वित्तमच्युतनिर्मितम् ।
तत्सर्वमुपयुञ्जान एतत्कुर्यात्स्वतो बुध: ॥ ७ ॥
divyaṁ bhaumaṁ cāntarīkṣaṁ
vittam acyuta-nirmitam
tat sarvam upayuñjāna
etat kuryāt svato budhaḥ
Synonyms
divyam — easily obtained because of rainfall from the sky; bhaumam — obtained from the mines and the sea; ca — and; āntarīkṣam — obtained by chance; vittam — all property; acyuta-nirmitam — created by the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tat — those things; sarvam — all; upayuñjāna — utilizing (for all human society or all living beings); etat — this (maintaining body and soul together); kuryāt — one must do; svataḥ — obtained of itself, without extra endeavor; budhaḥ — the intelligent person.

Translation
The natural products created by the Supreme Personality of Godhead should be utilized to maintain the bodies and souls of all living entities. The necessities of life are of three types: those produced from the sky [from rainfall], from the earth [from the mines, the seas or the fields], and from the atmosphere [that which is obtained suddenly and unexpectedly].

Text 8
यावद् भ्र्रियेत जठरं तावत् स्वत्वं हि देहिनाम् ।
अधिकं योऽभिमन्येत स स्तेनो दण्डमर्हति ॥ ८ ॥
yāvad bhriyeta jaṭharaṁ
tāvat svatvaṁ hi dehinām
adhikaṁ yo ’bhimanyeta
sa steno daṇḍam arhati
Synonyms
yāvat — as much as; bhriyeta — may be filled; jaṭharam — the stomach; tāvat — that much; svatvam — proprietorship; hi — indeed; dehinām — of the living entities; adhikam — more than that; yaḥ — anyone who; abhimanyeta — may accept; saḥ — he; stenaḥ — a thief; daṇḍam — punishment; arhati — deserves.

Translation
One may claim proprietorship to as much wealth as required to maintain body and soul together, but one who desires proprietorship over more than that must be considered a thief, and he deserves to be punished by the laws of nature.

Text 9
मृगोष्ट्रखरमर्काखुसरीसृप्खगमक्षिका: ।
आत्मन: पुत्रवत् पश्येत्तैरेषामन्तरं कियत् ॥ ९ ॥
mṛgoṣṭra-khara-markākhu-
sarīsṛp khaga-makṣikāḥ
ātmanaḥ putravat paśyet
tair eṣām antaraṁ kiyat
Synonyms
mṛga — deer; uṣṭra — camels; khara — asses; marka — monkeys; ākhu — mice; sarīsṛp — snakes; khaga — birds; makṣikāḥ — flies; ātmanaḥ — of one’s self; putra-vat — like the sons; paśyet — one should see; taiḥ — with those sons; eṣām — of these animals; antaram — difference; kiyat — how little.

Translation
One should treat animals such as deer, camels, asses, monkeys, mice, snakes, birds and flies exactly like one’s own son. How little difference there actually is between children and these innocent animals.

Text 10
त्रिवर्गं नातिकृच्छ्रेण भजेत गृहमेध्यपि ।
यथादेशं यथाकालं यावद्दैवोपपादितम् ॥ १० ॥
tri-vargaṁ nātikṛcchreṇa
bhajeta gṛha-medhy api
yathā-deśaṁ yathā-kālaṁ
yāvad-daivopapāditam
Synonyms
tri-vargam — three principles, namely religiosity, economic development and sense gratification; na — not; ati-kṛcchreṇa — by very severe endeavor; bhajeta — should execute; gṛha-medhī — a person interested only in family life; api — although; yathā-deśam — according to the place; yathā-kālam — according to the time; yāvat — as much as; daiva — by the grace of the Lord; upapāditam — obtained.

Translation
Even if one is a householder rather than a brahmacārī, a sannyāsī or a vānaprastha, one should not endeavor very hard for religiosity, economic development or satisfaction of the senses. Even in householder life, one should be satisfied to maintain body and soul together with whatever is available with minimum endeavor, according to place and time, by the grace of the Lord. One should not engage oneself in ugra-karma.

Text 11
आश्वाघान्तेऽवसायिभ्य: कामान्संविभजेद्यथा ।
अप्येकामात्मनो दारां नृणां स्वत्वग्रहो यत: ॥ ११ ॥
āśvāghānte ’vasāyibhyaḥ
kāmān saṁvibhajed yathā
apy ekām ātmano dārāṁ
nṛṇāṁ svatva-graho yataḥ
Synonyms
ā — even up to; śva — the dog; agha — sinful animals or living entities; ante avasāyibhyaḥ — unto the caṇḍālas, the lowest of men (dog-eaters and hog-eaters); kāmān — the necessities of life; saṁvibhajet — should divide; yathā — as much as (deserved); api — even; ekām — one; ātmanaḥ — own; dārām — the wife; nṛṇām — of the people in general; svatva-grahaḥ — the wife is accepted as being identical with one’s self; yataḥ — because of which.

Translation
Dogs, fallen persons and untouchables, including caṇḍālas [dog-eaters], should all be maintained with their proper necessities, which should be contributed by the householders. Even one’s wife at home, with whom one is most intimately attached, should be offered for the reception of guests and people in general.

Text 12
जह्याद् यदर्थे स्वान्प्राणान्हन्याद्वा पितरं गुरुम् ।
तस्यां स्वत्वं स्‍त्रियां जह्याद्यस्तेन ह्यजितो जित: ॥ १२ ॥
jahyād yad-arthe svān prāṇān
hanyād vā pitaraṁ gurum
tasyāṁ svatvaṁ striyāṁ jahyād
yas tena hy ajito jitaḥ
Synonyms
jahyāt — one may give up; yat-arthe — for whom; svān — one’s own; prāṇān — life; hanyāt — one may kill; vā — or; pitaram — the father; gurum — the teacher or spiritual master; tasyām — unto her; svatvam — ownership; striyām — unto the wife; jahyāt — one must give up; yaḥ — one who (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); tena — by him; hi — indeed; ajitaḥ — cannot be conquered; jitaḥ — conquered.

Translation
One so seriously considers one’s wife to be his own that he sometimes kills himself for her or kills others, including even his parents or his spiritual master or teacher. Therefore if one can give up his attachment to such a wife, he conquers the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is never conquered by anyone.

Text 13
कृमिविड्भस्मनिष्ठान्तं क्‍वेदं तुच्छं कलेवरम् ।
क्व‍ तदीयरतिर्भार्या क्व‍ायमात्मा नभश्छदि: ॥ १३ ॥
kṛmi-viḍ-bhasma-niṣṭhāntaṁ
kvedaṁ tucchaṁ kalevaram
kva tadīya-ratir bhāryā
kvāyam ātmā nabhaś-chadiḥ
Synonyms
kṛmi — insects, germs; viṭ — stool; bhasma — ashes; niṣṭha — attachment; antam — at the end; kva — what is; idam — this (body); tuccham — very insignificant; kalevaram — material tabernacle; kva — what is that; tadīya-ratiḥ — attraction for that body; bhāryā — wife; kva ayam — what is the value of this body; ātmā — the Supreme Soul; nabhaḥ-chadiḥ — all-pervading like the sky.

Translation
Through proper deliberation, one should give up attraction to his wife’s body because that body will ultimately be transformed into small insects, stool or ashes. What is the value of this insignificant body? How much greater is the Supreme Being, who is all-pervading like the sky?

Text 14
सिद्धैर्यज्ञावशिष्टार्थै: कल्पयेद् वृत्तिमात्मन: ।
शेषे स्वत्वं त्यजन्प्राज्ञ: पदवीं महतामियात् ॥ १४ ॥
siddhair yajñāvaśiṣṭārthaiḥ
kalpayed vṛttim ātmanaḥ
śeṣe svatvaṁ tyajan prājñaḥ
padavīṁ mahatām iyāt
Synonyms
siddhaiḥ — things obtained by the grace of the Lord; yajñā-avaśiṣṭa-arthaiḥ — things obtained after a sacrifice is offered to the Lord or after the recommended pañca-sūnā yajña is performed; kalpayet — one should consider; vṛttim — the means of livelihood; ātmanaḥ — for the self; śeṣe — at the end; svatvam — so-called proprietorship over one’s wife, children, home, business and so on; tyajan — giving up; prājñaḥ — those who are wise; padavīm — the position; mahatām — of the great personalities who are fully satisfied in spiritual consciousness; iyāt — should achieve.

Translation
An intelligent person should be satisfied with eating prasāda [food offered to the Lord] or with performing the five different kinds of yajña [pañca-sūnā]. By such activities, one can give up attachment for the body and so-called proprietorship with reference to the body. When one is able to do this, he is firmly fixed in the position of a mahātmā.

Text 15
देवानृषीन् नृभूतानि पितृनात्मानमन्वहम् ।
स्ववृत्त्यागतवित्तेन यजेत पुरुषं पृथक् ॥ १५ ॥
devān ṛṣīn nṛ-bhūtāni
pitṝn ātmānam anvaham
sva-vṛttyāgata-vittena
yajeta puruṣaṁ pṛthak
Synonyms
devān — unto the demigods; ṛṣīn — unto the great sages; nṛ — unto human society; bhūtāni — unto the living entities in general; pitṝn — unto the forefathers; ātmānam — one’s self or the Supreme Self; anvaham — daily; sva-vṛttyā — by one’s means of livelihood; āgata-vittena — money that automatically comes; yajeta — one should worship; puruṣam — the person situated in everyone’s heart; pṛthak — separately.

Translation
Every day, one should worship the Supreme Being who is situated in everyone’s heart, and on this basis one should separately worship the demigods, the saintly persons, ordinary human beings and living entities, one’s forefathers and one’s self. In this way one is able to worship the Supreme Being in the core of everyone’s heart.

Text 16
यर्ह्यात्मनोऽधिकाराद्या: सर्वा: स्युर्यज्ञसम्पद: ।
वैतानिकेन विधिना अग्निहोत्रादिना यजेत् ॥ १६ ॥
yarhy ātmano ’dhikārādyāḥ
sarvāḥ syur yajña-sampadaḥ
vaitānikena vidhinā
agni-hotrādinā yajet
Synonyms
yarhi — when; ātmanaḥ — of one’s self; adhikāra-ādyāḥ — things possessed by him under full control; sarvāḥ — everything; syuḥ — becomes; yajña-sampadaḥ — paraphernalia for performing yajña, or the means for pleasing the Supreme Personality of Godhead; vaitānikena — with authorized books that direct the performance of yajña; vidhinā — according to regulative principles; agni-hotra-ādinā — by offering sacrifices to the fire, etc.; yajet — one should worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
When one is enriched with wealth and knowledge which are under his full control and by means of which he can perform yajña or please the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one must perform sacrifices, offering oblations to the fire according to the directions of the śāstras. In this way one should worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 17
न ह्यग्निमुखतोऽयं वै भगवान्सर्वयज्ञभुक् ।
इज्येत हविषा राजन्यथा विप्रमुखे हुतै: ॥ १७ ॥
na hy agni-mukhato ’yaṁ vai
bhagavān sarva-yajña-bhuk
ijyeta haviṣā rājan
yathā vipra-mukhe hutaiḥ
Synonyms
na — not; hi — indeed; agni — fire; mukhataḥ — from the mouth or the flames; ayam — this; vai — certainly; bhagavān — Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; sarva-yajña-bhuk — the enjoyer of the results of all kinds of sacrifices; ijyeta — is worshiped; haviṣā — by offering of clarified butter; rājan — O King; yathā — as much as; vipra-mukhe — through the mouth of a brāhmaṇa; hutaiḥ — by offering him first-class food.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is the enjoyer of sacrificial offerings. Yet although His Lordship eats the oblations offered in the fire, my dear King, He is still more satisfied when nice food made of grains and ghee is offered to Him through the mouths of qualified brāhmaṇas.

Text 18
तस्माद् ब्राह्मणदेवेषु मर्त्यादिषु यथार्हत: ।
तैस्तै: कामैर्यजस्वैनं क्षेत्रज्ञं ब्राह्मणाननु ॥ १८ ॥
tasmād brāhmaṇa-deveṣu
martyādiṣu yathārhataḥ
tais taiḥ kāmair yajasvainaṁ
kṣetra-jñaṁ brāhmaṇān anu
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; brāhmaṇa-deveṣu — through the brāhmaṇas and the demigods; martya-ādiṣu — through ordinary human beings and other living entities; yathā-arhataḥ — according to your ability; taiḥ taiḥ — with all those; kāmaiḥ — various objects of enjoyment such as sumptuous food, flower garlands, sandalwood paste, etc.; yajasva — you should worship; enam — this; kṣetra-jñam — Supreme Lord situated in the hearts of all beings; brāhmaṇān — the brāhmaṇas; anu — after.

Translation
Therefore, my dear King, first offer prasāda unto the brāhmaṇas and the demigods, and after sumptuously feeding them you may distribute prasāda to other living entities according to your ability. In this way you will be able to worship all living entities — or, in other words, the supreme living entity within every living entity.

Text 19
कुर्यादपरपक्षीयं मासि प्रौष्ठपदे द्विज: ।
श्राद्धं पित्रोर्यथावित्तं तद्बन्धूनां च वित्तवान् ॥ १९ ॥
kuryād apara-pakṣīyaṁ
māsi prauṣṭha-pade dvijaḥ
śrāddhaṁ pitror yathā-vittaṁ
tad-bandhūnāṁ ca vittavān
Synonyms
kuryāt — one should perform; apara-pakṣīyam — during the fortnight of the dark moon; māsi — in the month of Āśvina (October-November); prauṣṭha-pade — in the month of Bhādra (August-September); dvijaḥ — twice-born; śrāddham — oblations; pitroḥ — unto the forefathers; yathā-vittam — according to one’s means of income; tat-bandhūnām ca — as well as relatives of forefathers; vitta-vān — one who is sufficiently rich.

Translation
A brāhmaṇa who is sufficiently rich must offer oblations to the forefathers during the dark-moon fortnight in the latter part of the month of Bhādra. Similarly, he should offer oblations to the relatives of the forefathers during the mahālayā ceremonies in the month of Āśvina.*

Texts 20-23
अयने विषुवे कुर्याद् व्यतीपाते दिनक्षये ।
चन्द्रादित्योपरागे च द्वादश्यां श्रवणेषु च ॥ २० ॥
तृतीयायां शुक्लपक्षे नवम्यामथ कार्तिके ।
चतसृष्वप्यष्टकासु हेमन्ते शिशिरे तथा ॥ २१ ॥
माघे च सितसप्तम्यां मघाराकासमागमे ।
राकया चानुमत्या च मासर्क्षाणि युतान्यपि ॥ २२ ॥
द्वादश्यामनुराधा स्याच्छ्रवणस्तिस्र उत्तरा: ।
तिसृष्वेकादशी वासु जन्मर्क्षश्रोणयोगूयुक् ॥ २३ ॥
ayane viṣuve kuryād
vyatīpāte dina-kṣaye
candrādityoparāge ca
dvādaśyāṁ śravaṇeṣu ca
tṛtīyāyāṁ śukla-pakṣe
navamyām atha kārtike
catasṛṣv apy aṣṭakāsu
hemante śiśire tathā
māghe ca sita-saptamyāṁ
maghā-rākā-samāgame
rākayā cānumatyā ca
māsarkṣāṇi yutāny api
dvādaśyām anurādhā syāc
chravaṇas tisra uttarāḥ
tisṛṣv ekādaśī vāsu
janmarkṣa-śroṇa-yoga-yuk
Synonyms
ayane — on the day when the sun begins to move north, or Makara-saṅkrānti, and on the day when the sun begins to move south, or Karkaṭa-saṅkrānti; viṣuve — on the Meṣa-saṅkrānti and on the Tulā-saṅkrānti; kuryāt — one should perform; vyatīpāte — in the yoga named Vyatīpāta; dina-kṣaye — on that day in which three tithis are combined; candra-āditya-uparāge — at the time of the eclipse of either the moon or the sun; ca — and also; dvādaśyām śravaṇeṣu — on the twelfth lunar day and in the nakṣatra named Śravaṇa; ca — and; tṛtīyāyām — on the Akṣaya-tṛtīyā day; śukla-pakṣe — in the bright fortnight of the month; navamyām — on the ninth lunar day; atha — also; kārtike — in the month of Kārtika (October-November); catasṛṣu — on the four; api — also; aṣṭakāsu — on the Aṣṭakās; hemante — before the winter season; śiśire — in the winter season; tathā — and also; māghe — in the month of Māgha (January-February); ca — and; sita-saptamyām — on the seventh lunar day of the bright fortnight; maghā-rākā-samāgame — in the conjunction of Maghā-nakṣatra and the full-moon day; rākayā — with a day of the completely full moon; ca — and; anumatyā — with a full-moon day when the moon is slightly less than completely full; ca — and; māsa-ṛkṣāṇi — the nakṣatras that are the sources of the names of the various months; yutāni — are conjoined; api — also; dvādaśyām — on the twelfth lunar day; anurādhā — the nakṣatra named Anurādhā; syāt — may occur; śravaṇaḥ — the nakṣatra named Śravaṇa; tisraḥ — the three (nakṣatras); uttarāḥ — the nakṣatras named Uttarā (Uttara-phalgunī, Uttarāṣāḍhā and Uttara-bhādrapadā); tisṛṣu — on three; ekādaśī — the eleventh lunar day; vā — or; āsu — on these; janma-ṛkṣa — of one’s own janma-nakṣatra, or birth star; śroṇa — of Śravaṇa-nakṣatra; yoga — by a conjunction; yuk — having.

Translation
One should perform the śrāddha ceremony on the Makara-saṅkrānti [the day when the sun begins to move north] or on the Karkaṭa-saṅkrānti [the day when the sun begins to move south]. One should also perform this ceremony on the Meṣa-saṅkrānti day and the Tulā-saṅkrānti day, in the yoga named Vyatīpāta, on that day in which three lunar tithis are conjoined, during an eclipse of either the moon or the sun, on the twelfth lunar day, and in the Śravaṇa-nakṣatra. One should perform this ceremony on the Akṣaya-tṛtīyā day, on the ninth lunar day of the bright fortnight of the month of Kārtika, on the four aṣṭakās in the winter season and cool season, on the seventh lunar day of the bright fortnight of the month of Māgha, during the conjunction of Maghā-nakṣatra and the full-moon day, and on the days when the moon is completely full, or not quite completely full, when these days are conjoined with the nakṣatras from which the names of certain months are derived. One should also perform the śrāddha ceremony on the twelfth lunar day when it is in conjunction with any of the nakṣatras named Anurādhā, Śravaṇa, Uttara-phalgunī, Uttarāṣāḍhā or Uttara-bhādrapadā. Again, one should perform this ceremony when the eleventh lunar day is in conjunction with either Uttara-phalgunī, Uttarāṣāḍhā or Uttara-bhādrapadā. Finally, one should perform this ceremony on days conjoined with one’s own birth star [janma-nakṣatra] or with Śravaṇa-nakṣatra.

Text 24
त एते श्रेयस: काला नृणां श्रेयोविवर्धना: ।
कुर्यात्सर्वात्मनैतेषु श्रेयोऽमोघं तदायुष: ॥ २४ ॥
ta ete śreyasaḥ kālā
nṝṇāṁ śreyo-vivardhanāḥ
kuryāt sarvātmanaiteṣu
śreyo ’moghaṁ tad-āyuṣaḥ
Synonyms
te — therefore; ete — all these (descriptions of astronomical calculations); śreyasaḥ — of auspiciousness; kālāḥ — times; nṝṇām — for human beings; śreyaḥ — auspiciousness; vivardhanāḥ — increase; kuryāt — one should perform; sarva-ātmanā — by other activities (not only the śrāddha ceremony); eteṣu — in these (seasons); śreyaḥ — (causing) auspiciousness; amogham — and success; tat — of a human being; āyuṣaḥ — of the duration of life.

Translation
All of these seasonal times are considered extremely auspicious for humanity. At such times, one should perform all auspicious activities, for by such activities a human being attains success in his short duration of life.

Text 25
एषु स्‍नानं जपो होमो व्रतं देवद्विजार्चनम् ।
पितृदेवनृभूतेभ्यो यद्दत्तं तद्ध्यनश्वरम् ॥ २५ ॥
eṣu snānaṁ japo homo
vrataṁ deva-dvijārcanam
pitṛ-deva-nṛ-bhūtebhyo
yad dattaṁ tad dhy anaśvaram
Synonyms
eṣu — in all these (seasonal times); snānam — bathing in the Ganges, Yamunā or any other sacred places; japaḥ — chanting; homaḥ — performing fire sacrifices; vratam — executing vows; deva — the Supreme Lord; dvija-arcanam — worshiping the brāhmaṇas or Vaiṣṇavas; pitṛ — unto the forefathers; deva — demigods; nṛ — human beings in general; bhūtebhyaḥ — and all other living entities; yat — whatever; dattam — offered; tat — that; hi — indeed; anaśvaram — permanently beneficial.

Translation
During these periods of seasonal change, if one bathes in the Ganges, in the Yamunā or in another sacred place, if one chants, offers fire sacrifices or executes vows, or if one worships the Supreme Lord, the brāhmaṇas, the forefathers, the demigods and the living entities in general, whatever he gives in charity yields a permanently beneficial result.

Text 26
संस्कारकालो जायाया अपत्यस्यात्मनस्तथा ।
प्रेतसंस्था मृताहश्च कर्मण्यभ्युदये नृप ॥ २६ ॥
saṁskāra-kālo jāyāyā
apatyasyātmanas tathā
preta-saṁsthā mṛtāhaś ca
karmaṇy abhyudaye nṛpa
Synonyms
saṁskāra-kālaḥ — at the proper time indicated for Vedic reformatory performances; jāyāyāḥ — for the wife; apatyasya — for the children; ātmanaḥ — and one’s own self; tathā — as well as; preta-saṁsthā — funeral ceremonies; mṛta-ahaḥ — annual death ceremonies; ca — and; karmaṇi — of fruitive activity; abhyudaye — for furtherance; nṛpa — O King.

Translation
O King Yudhiṣṭhira, at the time prescribed for reformatory ritualistic ceremonies for one’s self, one’s wife or one’s children, or during funeral ceremonies and annual death ceremonies, one must perform the auspicious ceremonies mentioned above in order to flourish in fruitive activities.

Texts 27-28
अथ देशान्प्रवक्ष्यामि धर्मादिश्रेयआवहान् ।
स वै पुण्यतमो देश: सत्पात्रं यत्र लभ्यते ॥ २७ ॥
बिम्बं भगवतो यत्र सर्वमेतच्चराचरम् ।
यत्र ह ब्राह्मणकुलं तपोविद्यादयान्वितम् ॥ २८ ॥
atha deśān pravakṣyāmi
dharmādi-śreya-āvahān
sa vai puṇyatamo deśaḥ
sat-pātraṁ yatra labhyate
bimbaṁ bhagavato yatra
sarvam etac carācaram
yatra ha brāhmaṇa-kulaṁ
tapo-vidyā-dayānvitam
Synonyms
atha — thereafter; deśān — places; pravakṣyāmi — I shall describe; dharma-ādi — religious performances, etc.; śreya — auspiciousness; āvahān — which can bring; saḥ — that; vai — indeed; puṇya-tamaḥ — the most sacred; deśaḥ — place; sat-pātram — a Vaiṣṇava; yatra — wherein; labhyate — is available; bimbam — the Deity (in the temple); bhagavataḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead (who is the support); yatra — where; sarvam etat — of this entire cosmic manifestation; cara-acaram — with all the moving and nonmoving living entities; yatra — wherein; ha — indeed; brāhmaṇa-kulam — association with brāhmaṇas; tapaḥ — austerities; vidyā — education; dayā — mercy; anvitam — endowed with.

Translation
Nārada Muni continued: Now I shall describe the places where religious performances may be well executed. Any place where a Vaiṣṇava is available is an excellent place for all auspicious activities. The Supreme Personality of Godhead is the support of this entire cosmic manifestation, with all its moving and nonmoving living entities, and the temple where the Deity of the Lord is installed is a most sacred place. Furthermore, places where learned brāhmaṇas observe Vedic principles by means of austerity, education and mercy are also most auspicious and sacred.

Text 29
यत्र यत्र हरेरर्चा स देश: श्रेयसां पदम् ।
यत्र गङ्गादयो नद्य: पुराणेषु च विश्रुता: ॥ २९ ॥
yatra yatra harer arcā
sa deśaḥ śreyasāṁ padam
yatra gaṅgādayo nadyaḥ
purāṇeṣu ca viśrutāḥ
Synonyms
yatra yatra — wherever; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa; arcā — the Deity is worshiped; saḥ — that; deśaḥ — place, country or neighborhood; śreyasām — of all auspiciousness; padam — the place; yatra — wherever; gaṅgā-ādayaḥ — like the Ganges, Yamunā, Narmadā and Kāverī; nadyaḥ — sacred rivers; purāṇeṣu — in the Purāṇas (supplementary Vedic literature); ca — also; viśrutāḥ — are celebrated.

Translation
Auspicious indeed are the places where there is a temple of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, in which He is duly worshiped, and also the places where there flow the celebrated sacred rivers mentioned in the Purāṇas, the supplementary Vedic literatures. Anything spiritual done there is certainly very effective.

Texts 30-33
सरांसि पुष्करादीनि क्षेत्राण्यर्हाश्रितान्युत ।
कुरुक्षेत्रं गयशिर: प्रयाग: पुलहाश्रम: ॥ ३० ॥
नैमिषं फाल्गुनं सेतु: प्रभासोऽथ कुशस्थली ।
वाराणसी मधुपुरी पम्पा बिन्दुसरस्तथा ॥ ३१ ॥
नारायणाश्रमो नन्दा सीतारामाश्रमादय: ।
सर्वे कुलाचला राजन्महेन्द्रमलयादय: ॥ ३२ ॥
एते पुण्यतमा देशा हरेरर्चाश्रिताश्च ये ।
एतान्देशान्निषेवेत श्रेयस्कामो ह्यभीक्ष्णश: ।
धर्मो ह्यत्रेहित: पुंसां सहस्राधिफलोदय: ॥ ३३ ॥
sarāṁsi puṣkarādīni
kṣetrāṇy arhāśritāny uta
kurukṣetraṁ gaya-śiraḥ
prayāgaḥ pulahāśramaḥ
naimiṣaṁ phālgunaṁ setuḥ
prabhāso ’tha kuśa-sthalī
vārāṇasī madhu-purī
pampā bindu-saras tathā
nārāyaṇāśramo nandā
sītā-rāmāśramādayaḥ
sarve kulācalā rājan
mahendra-malayādayaḥ
ete puṇyatamā deśā
harer arcāśritāś ca ye
etān deśān niṣeveta
śreyas-kāmo hy abhīkṣṇaśaḥ
dharmo hy atrehitaḥ puṁsāṁ
sahasrādhi-phalodayaḥ
Synonyms
sarāṁsi — lakes; puṣkara-ādīni — such as Puṣkara; kṣetrāṇi — sacred places (like Kurukṣetra, Gayākṣetra and Jagannātha Purī); arha — for worshipable, saintly persons; āśritāni — places of shelter; uta — celebrated; kurukṣetram — a particular sacred place (dharma-kṣetra); gaya-śiraḥ — the place known as Gayā, where Gayāsura took shelter of the lotus feet of Lord Viṣṇu; prayāgaḥ — Allahabad, at the confluence of the two sacred rivers Ganges and Yamunā; pulaha-āśramaḥ — the residence of Pulaha Muni; naimiṣam — the place known as Naimiṣāraṇya (near Lucknow); phālgunam — the place where the Phālgu River flows; setuḥ — Setubandha, where Lord Rāmacandra constructed a bridge between India and Laṅkā; prabhāsaḥ — Prabhāsakṣetra; atha — as well as; kuśa-sthalī — Dvāravatī, or Dvārakā; vārāṇasī — Benares; madhu-purī — Mathurā; pampā — a place where there is a lake called Pampā; bindu-saraḥ — the place where Bindu-sarovara is situated; tathā — there; nārāyaṇa-āśramaḥ — known as Badarikāśrama; nandā — the place where the Nandā River flows; sītā-rāma — of Lord Rāmacandra and mother Sītā; āśrama-ādayaḥ — places of shelter like Citrakūṭa; sarve — all (such places); kulācalāḥ — hilly tracts of land; rājan — O King; mahendra — known as Mahendra; malaya-ādayaḥ — and others, like Malayācala; ete — all of them; puṇya-tamāḥ — extremely sacred; deśāḥ — places; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; arca-āśritāḥ — places where the Deity of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa is worshiped (such as big American cities like New York, Los Angeles and San Francisco, and European cities like London and Paris, or wherever there are centers of Kṛṣṇa consciousness); ca — as well as; ye — those which; etān deśān — all these countries; niṣeveta — should worship or visit; śreyaḥ-kāmaḥ — one who desires auspiciousness; hi — indeed; abhīkṣṇaśaḥ — again and again; dharmaḥ — religious activities; hi — from which; atra — in these places; īhitaḥ — performed; puṁsām — of the persons; sahasra-adhi — more than a thousand times; phala-udayaḥ — effective.

Translation
The sacred lakes like Puṣkara and places where saintly persons live, like Kurukṣetra, Gayā, Prayāga, Pulahāśrama, Naimiṣāraṇya, the banks of the Phālgu River, Setubandha, Prabhāsa, Dvārakā, Vārāṇasī, Mathurā, Pampā, Bindu-sarovara, Badarikāśrama [Nārāyaṇāśrama], the places where the Nandā River flows, the places where Lord Rāmacandra and mother Sītā took shelter, such as Citrakūṭa, and also the hilly tracts of land known as Mahendra and Malaya — all of these are to be considered most pious and sacred. Similarly, places outside India where there are centers of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement and where Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Deities are worshiped must all be visited and worshiped by those who want to be spiritually advanced. One who intends to advance in spiritual life may visit all these places and perform ritualistic ceremonies to get results a thousand times better than the results of the same activities performed in any other place.

Text 34
पात्रं त्वत्र निरुक्तं वै कविभि: पात्रवित्तमै: ।
हरिरेवैक उर्वीश यन्मयं वै चराचरम् ॥ ३४ ॥
pātraṁ tv atra niruktaṁ vai
kavibhiḥ pātra-vittamaiḥ
harir evaika urvīśa
yan-mayaṁ vai carācaram
Synonyms
pātram — the true person to whom charity must be given; tu — but; atra — in the world; niruktam — decided; vai — indeed; kavibhiḥ — by learned scholars; pātra-vittamaiḥ — who are expert in finding the actual person to whom charity must be given; hariḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; eva — indeed; ekaḥ — only one; urvī-īśa — O King of the earth; yat-mayam — in whom everything is resting; vai — from whom everything is coming; cara-acaram — all that is moving or nonmoving within this universe.

Translation
O King of the earth, it has been decided by expert, learned scholars that only the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, in whom all that is moving or nonmoving within this universe is resting and from whom everything is coming, is the best person to whom everything must be given.

Text 35
देवर्ष्यर्हत्सु वै सत्सु तत्र ब्रह्मात्मजादिषु ।
राजन्यदग्रपूजायां मत: पात्रतयाच्युत: ॥ ३५ ॥
devarṣy-arhatsu vai satsu
tatra brahmātmajādiṣu
rājan yad agra-pūjāyāṁ
mataḥ pātratayācyutaḥ
Synonyms
deva-ṛṣi — among the demigods and great saintly persons, including Nārada Muni; arhatsu — the most venerable and worshipable personalities; vai — indeed; satsu — the great devotees; tatra — there (at the Rājasūya-yajña); brahma-ātma-jādiṣu — and the sons of Lord Brahmā (such as Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanat and Sanātana); rājan — O King; yat — from whom; agra-pūjāyām — the first to be worshiped; mataḥ — decision; pātratayā — selected as the best person to preside over the Rājasūya-yajña; acyutaḥ — Kṛṣṇa.

Translation
O King Yudhiṣṭhira, the demigods, many great sages and saints including even the four sons of Lord Brahmā, and I myself were present at your Rājasūya sacrificial ceremony, but when there was a question of who should be the first person worshiped, everyone decided upon Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Person.

Text 36
जीवराशिभिराकीर्ण अण्डकोशाङ्‌घ्रिपो महान् ।
तन्मूलत्वादच्युतेज्या सर्वजीवात्मतर्पणम् ॥ ३६ ॥
jīva-rāśibhir ākīrṇa
aṇḍa-kośāṅghripo mahān
tan-mūlatvād acyutejyā
sarva-jīvātma-tarpaṇam
Synonyms
jīva-rāśibhiḥ — by millions and millions of living entities; ākīrṇaḥ — filled up or spread over; aṇḍa-kośa — the whole universe; aṅghripaḥ — like a tree; mahān — very, very great; tat-mūlatvāt — because of being the root of this tree; acyuta-ijyā — worship of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarva — of all; jīva-ātma — living entities; tarpaṇam — satisfaction.

Translation
The entire universe, which is full of living entities, is like a tree whose root is the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Acyuta [Kṛṣṇa]. Therefore simply by worshiping Lord Kṛṣṇa one can worship all living entities.

Text 37
पुराण्यनेन सृष्टानि नृतिर्यगृषिदेवता: ।
शेते जीवेन रूपेण पुरेषु पुरुषो ह्यसौ ॥ ३७ ॥
purāṇy anena sṛṣṭāni
nṛ-tiryag-ṛṣi-devatāḥ
śete jīvena rūpeṇa
pureṣu puruṣo hy asau
Synonyms
purāṇi — residential places or bodies; anena — by Him (the Supreme Personality of Godhead); sṛṣṭāni — among those creations; nṛ — man; tiryak — other than human beings (animals, birds, etc); ṛṣi — saintly persons; devatāḥ — and demigods; śete — lies down; jīvena — with the living entities; rūpeṇa — in the form of Paramātmā; pureṣu — within these residential places or bodies; puruṣaḥ — the Supreme Lord; hi — indeed; asau — He (the Personality of Godhead).

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead has created many residential places like the bodies of human beings, animals, birds, saints and demigods. In all of these innumerable bodily forms, the Lord resides with the living being as Paramātmā. Thus He is known as the puruṣāvatāra.

Text 38
तेष्वेव भगवान् राजंस्तारतम्येन वर्तते ।
तस्मात्पात्रं हि पुरुषो यावानात्मा यथेयते ॥ ३८ ॥
teṣv eva bhagavān rājaṁs
tāratamyena vartate
tasmāt pātraṁ hi puruṣo
yāvān ātmā yatheyate
Synonyms
teṣu — among the different types of bodies (demigod, human, animal, bird, etc.); eva — indeed; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead in His Paramātmā feature; rājan — O King; tāratamyena — comparatively, more or less; vartate — is situated; tasmāt — therefore; pātram — the Supreme Person; hi — indeed; puruṣaḥ — Paramātmā; yāvān — as far as; ātmā — the degree of understanding; yathā — development of austerity and penance; īyate — is manifest.

Translation
O King Yudhiṣṭhira, the Supersoul in every body gives intelligence to the individual soul according to his capacity for understanding. Therefore the Supersoul is the chief within the body. The Supersoul is manifested to the individual soul according to the individual’s comparative development of knowledge, austerity, penance and so on.

Text 39
द‍ृष्ट्वा तेषां मिथो नृणामवज्ञानात्मतां नृप ।
त्रेतादिषु हरेरर्चा क्रियायै कविभि: कृता ॥ ३९ ॥
dṛṣṭvā teṣāṁ mitho nṛṇām
avajñānātmatāṁ nṛpa
tretādiṣu harer arcā
kriyāyai kavibhiḥ kṛtā
Synonyms
dṛṣṭvā — after practically seeing; teṣām — among the brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas; mithaḥ — mutually; nṛṇām — of human society; avajñāna-ātmatām — the mutually disrespectful behavior; nṛpa — O King; tretā-ādiṣu — beginning from Tretā-yuga; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; arcā — the Deity worship (in the temple); kriyāyai — for the purpose of introducing the method of worship; kavibhiḥ — by learned persons; kṛtā — has been done.

Translation
My dear King, when great sages and saintly persons saw mutually disrespectful dealings at the beginning of Tretā-yuga, Deity worship in the temple was introduced with all paraphernalia.

Text 40
ततोऽर्चायां हरिं केचित् संश्रद्धाय सपर्यया ।
उपासत उपास्तापि नार्थदा पुरुषद्विषाम् ॥ ४० ॥
tato ’rcāyāṁ hariṁ kecit
saṁśraddhāya saparyayā
upāsata upāstāpi
nārthadā puruṣa-dviṣām
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; arcāyām — the Deity; harim — who is the Supreme Personality of Godhead (the form of the Lord being identical with the Lord); kecit — someone; saṁśraddhāya — with great faith; saparyayā — and with the required paraphernalia; upāsate — worships; upāstā api — although worshiping the Deity (with faith and regularity); na — not; artha-dā — beneficial; puruṣa-dviṣām — for those who are envious of Lord Viṣṇu and His devotees.

Translation
Sometimes a neophyte devotee offers all the paraphernalia for worshiping the Lord, and he factually worships the Lord as the Deity, but because he is envious of the authorized devotees of Lord Viṣṇu, the Lord is never satisfied with his devotional service.

Text 41
पुरुषेष्वपि राजेन्द्र सुपात्रं ब्राह्मणं विदु: ।
तपसा विद्यया तुष्टय‍ा धत्ते वेदं हरेस्तनुम् ॥ ४१ ॥
puruṣeṣv api rājendra
supātraṁ brāhmaṇaṁ viduḥ
tapasā vidyayā tuṣṭyā
dhatte vedaṁ hares tanum
Synonyms
puruṣeṣu — among persons; api — indeed; rāja-indra — O best of kings; su-pātram — the best person; brāhmaṇam — the qualified brāhmaṇa; viduḥ — one should know; tapasā — due to austerity; vidyayā — education; tuṣṭyā — and satisfaction; dhatte — he assumes; vedam — the transcendental knowledge known as Veda; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tanum — body, or representation.

Translation
My dear King, of all persons a qualified brāhmaṇa must be accepted as the best within this material world because such a brāhmaṇa, by practicing austerity, Vedic studies and satisfaction, becomes the counterpart body of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 42
नन्वस्य ब्राह्मणा राजन्कृष्णस्य जगदात्मन: ।
पुनन्त: पादरजसा त्रिलोकीं दैवतं महत् ॥ ४२ ॥
nanv asya brāhmaṇā rājan
kṛṣṇasya jagad-ātmanaḥ
punantaḥ pāda-rajasā
tri-lokīṁ daivataṁ mahat
Synonyms
nanu — but; asya — by Him; brāhmaṇāḥ — the qualified brāhmaṇas; rājan — O King; kṛṣṇasya — by Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; jagat-ātmanaḥ — who is the life and soul of the whole creation; punantaḥ — sanctifying; pāda-rajasā — by the dust of their lotus feet; tri-lokīm — the three worlds; daivatam — worshipable; mahat — most exalted.

Translation
My dear King Yudhiṣṭhira, the brāhmaṇas, especially those engaged in preaching the glories of the Lord throughout the entire world, are recognized and worshiped by the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the heart and soul of all creation. The brāhmaṇas, by their preaching, sanctify the three worlds with the dust of their lotus feet, and thus they are worshipable even for Kṛṣṇa.