Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
यतश्चान्तर्हितोऽनन्तस्तस्यै कृत्वा दिशे नम: ।
विद्याधरश्चित्रकेतुश्चचार गगने चर: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
yataś cāntarhito ’nantas
tasyai kṛtvā diśe namaḥ
vidyādharaś citraketuś
cacāra gagane caraḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; yataḥ — in which (direction); ca — and; antarhitaḥ — disappeared; anantaḥ — the unlimited Supreme Personality of Godhead; tasyai — unto that; kṛtvā — after offering; diśe — direction; namaḥ — obeisances; vidyādharaḥ — the King of the Vidyādhara planet; citraketuḥ — Citraketu; cacāra — traveled; gagane — in outer space; caraḥ — moving.

Translation
Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: After offering obeisances to the direction from which Ananta, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, had disappeared, Citraketu began traveling in outer space as the head of the Vidyādharas.

Texts 2-3
स लक्षं वर्षलक्षाणामव्याहतबलेन्द्रिय: ।
स्तूयमानो महायोगी मुनिभि: सिद्धचारणै: ॥ २ ॥
कुलाचलेन्द्रद्रोणीषु नानासङ्कल्पसिद्धिषु ।
रेमे विद्याधरस्त्रीभिर्गापयन् हरिमीश्वरम् ॥ ३ ॥
sa lakṣaṁ varṣa-lakṣāṇām
avyāhata-balendriyaḥ
stūyamāno mahā-yogī
munibhiḥ siddha-cāraṇaiḥ
kulācalendra-droṇīṣu
nānā-saṅkalpa-siddhiṣu
reme vidyādhara-strībhir
gāpayan harim īśvaram
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Citraketu); lakṣam — one hundred thousand; varṣa — of years; lakṣāṇām — one hundred thousand; avyāhata — without hindrance; bala-indriyaḥ — whose strength and power of the senses; stūyamānaḥ — being praised; mahā-yogī — the great mystic yogī; munibhiḥ — by saintly persons; siddha-cāraṇaiḥ — by the Siddhas and Cāraṇas; kulācalendra-droṇīṣu — within the valleys of the great mountain known as Kulācalendra, or Sumeru; nānā-saṅkalpa-siddhiṣu — where one becomes perfect in all kinds of mystic power; reme — enjoyed; vidyādhara-strībhiḥ — with the women of the Vidyādhara planet; gāpayan — causing to praise; harim — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari; īśvaram — the controller.

Translation
Being praised by great sages and saints and by the inhabitants of Siddhaloka and Cāraṇaloka, Citraketu, the most powerful mystic yogī, wandered about enjoying life for millions of years. With bodily strength and senses free from deterioration, he traveled within the valleys of Sumeru Mountain, which is the place of perfection for various kinds of mystic power. In those valleys he enjoyed life with the women of Vidyādhara-loka by chanting the glories of the Supreme Lord, Hari.

Texts 4-5
एकदा स विमानेन विष्णुदत्तेन भास्वता ।
गिरिशं दद‍ृशे गच्छन् परीतं सिद्धचारणै: ॥ ४ ॥
आलिङ्गय‍ाङ्कीकृतां देवीं बाहुना मुनिसंसदि ।
उवाच देव्या: श‍ृण्वन्त्या जहासोच्चैस्तदन्तिके ॥ ५ ॥
ekadā sa vimānena
viṣṇu-dattena bhāsvatā
giriśaṁ dadṛśe gacchan
parītaṁ siddha-cāraṇaiḥ
āliṅgyāṅkīkṛtāṁ devīṁ
bāhunā muni-saṁsadi
uvāca devyāḥ śṛṇvantyā
jahāsoccais tad-antike
Synonyms
ekadā — one time; saḥ — he (King Citraketu); vimānena — with his airplane; viṣṇu-dattena — given to him by Lord Viṣṇu; bhāsvatā — shining brilliantly; giriśam — Lord Śiva; dadṛśe — he saw; gacchan — going; parītam — surrounded; siddha — by the inhabitants of Siddhaloka; cāraṇaiḥ — and the inhabitants of Cāraṇaloka; āliṅgya — embracing; aṅkīkṛtām — sitting on his lap; devīm — his wife, Pārvatī; bāhunā — with his arm; muni-saṁsadi — in the presence of great saintly persons; uvāca — he said; devyāḥ — while the goddess Pārvatī; śṛṇvantyāḥ — was hearing; jahāsa — he laughed; uccaiḥ — very loudly; tad-antike — in the vicinity.

Translation
One time while King Citraketu was traveling in outer space on a brilliantly effulgent airplane given to him by Lord Viṣṇu, he saw Lord Śiva, surrounded by Siddhas and Cāraṇas. Lord Śiva was sitting in an assembly of great saintly persons and embracing Pārvatī on his lap with his arm. Citraketu laughed loudly and spoke, within the hearing of Pārvatī.

Text 6
चित्रकेतुरुवाच
एष लोकगुरु: साक्षाद्धर्मं वक्ता शरीरिणाम् ।
आस्ते मुख्य: सभायां वै मिथुनीभूय भार्यया ॥ ६ ॥
citraketur uvāca
eṣa loka-guruḥ sākṣād
dharmaṁ vaktā śarīriṇām
āste mukhyaḥ sabhāyāṁ vai
mithunī-bhūya bhāryayā
Synonyms
citraketuḥ uvāca — King Citraketu said; eṣaḥ — this; loka-guruḥ — the spiritual master of the people who follow Vedic instructions; sākṣāt — directly; dharmam — of religion; vaktā — the speaker; śarīriṇām — for all living entities who have accepted material bodies; āste — sits; mukhyaḥ — the chief; sabhāyām — in an assembly; vai — indeed; mithunī-bhūya — embracing; bhāryayā — with his wife.

Translation
Citraketu said: Lord Śiva, the spiritual master of the general populace, is the best of all living entities who have accepted material bodies. He enunciates the system of religion. Yet how wonderful it is that he is embracing his wife, Pārvatī, in the midst of an assembly of great saintly persons.

Text 7
जटाधरस्तीव्रतपा ब्रह्मवादिसभापति: ।
अङ्कीकृत्य स्त्रियं चास्ते गतह्री: प्राकृतो यथा ॥ ७ ॥
jaṭā-dharas tīvra-tapā
brahmavādi-sabhā-patiḥ
aṅkīkṛtya striyaṁ cāste
gata-hrīḥ prākṛto yathā
Synonyms
jaṭā-dharaḥ — keeping matted locks of hair; tīvra-tapāḥ — highly elevated due to undergoing fierce austerities and penances; brahma-vādi — of strict followers of the Vedic principles; sabhā-patiḥ — the president of an assembly; aṅkīkṛtya — embracing; striyam — a woman; ca — and; āste — sits; gata-hrīḥ — without shame; prākṛtaḥ — a person conditioned by material nature; yathā — just as.

Translation
Lord Śiva, whose hair is matted on his head, has certainly undergone great austerities and penances. Indeed, he is the president in the assembly of strict followers of Vedic principles. Nonetheless, he is seated with his wife on his lap in the midst of saintly persons and is embracing her as if he were a shameless, ordinary human being.

Text 8
प्रायश: प्राकृताश्चापि स्त्रियं रहसि बिभ्रति ।
अयं महाव्रतधरो बिभर्ति सदसि स्त्रियम् ॥ ८ ॥
prāyaśaḥ prākṛtāś cāpi
striyaṁ rahasi bibhrati
ayaṁ mahā-vrata-dharo
bibharti sadasi striyam
Synonyms
prāyaśaḥ — generally; prākṛtāḥ — conditioned souls; ca — also; api — although; striyam — a woman; rahasi — in a solitary place; bibhrati — embrace; ayam — this (Lord Śiva); mahā-vrata-dharaḥ — the master of great vows and austerities; bibharti — enjoys; sadasi — in an assembly of great saintly persons; striyam — his wife.

Translation
Ordinary conditioned persons generally embrace their wives and enjoy their company in solitary places. How wonderful it is that Lord Mahādeva, although a great master of austerity, is embracing his wife openly in the midst of an assembly of great saints.

Text 9
श्रीशुक उवाच
भगवानपि तच्छ्रुत्वा प्रहस्यागाधधीर्नृप ।
तूष्णीं बभूव सदसि सभ्याश्च तदनुव्रता: ॥ ९ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
bhagavān api tac chrutvā
prahasyāgādha-dhīr nṛpa
tūṣṇīṁ babhūva sadasi
sabhyāś ca tad-anuvratāḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; bhagavān — Lord Śiva; api — also; tat — that; śrutvā — hearing; prahasya — smiling; agādha-dhīḥ — whose intelligence is unfathomed; nṛpa — O King; tūṣṇīm — silent; babhūva — remained; sadasi — in the assembly; sabhyāḥ — everyone assembled there; ca — and; tat-anuvratāḥ — followed Lord Śiva (remained silent).

Translation
Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, after hearing Citraketu’s statement, Lord Śiva, the most powerful personality, whose knowledge is fathomless, simply smiled and remained silent, and all the members of the assembly followed the lord by not saying anything.

Text 10
इत्यतद्वीर्यविदुषि ब्रुवाणे बह्वशोभनम् ।
रुषाह देवी धृष्टाय निर्जितात्माभिमानिने ॥ १० ॥
ity atad-vīrya-viduṣi
bruvāṇe bahv-aśobhanam
ruṣāha devī dhṛṣṭāya
nirjitātmābhimānine
Synonyms
iti — thus; a-tat-vīrya-viduṣi — when Citraketu, who did not know the prowess of Lord Śiva; bruvāṇe — spoke; bahu-aśobhanam — that which is not up to the standard of etiquette (the criticism of the exalted Lord Śiva); ruṣā — with anger; āha — said; devī — the goddess Pārvatī; dhṛṣṭāya — unto Citraketu, who was quite shameless; nirjita-ātma — as one who has controlled his senses; abhimānine — thinking of himself.

Translation
Not knowing the prowess of Lord Śiva and Pārvatī, Citraketu strongly criticized them. His statements were not at all pleasing, and therefore the goddess Pārvatī, being very angry, spoke as follows to Citraketu, who thought himself better than Lord Śiva in controlling the senses.

Text 11
श्रीपार्वत्युवाच
अयं किमधुना लोके शास्ता दण्डधर: प्रभु: ।
अस्मद्विधानां दुष्टानां निर्लज्जानां च विप्रकृत् ॥ ११ ॥
śrī-pārvaty uvāca
ayaṁ kim adhunā loke
śāstā daṇḍa-dharaḥ prabhuḥ
asmad-vidhānāṁ duṣṭānāṁ
nirlajjānāṁ ca viprakṛt
Synonyms
śrī-pārvatī uvāca — the goddess Pārvatī said; ayam — this; kim — whether; adhunā — now; loke — in the world; śāstā — the supreme controller; daṇḍa-dharaḥ — the carrier of the rod of punishment; prabhuḥ — the master; asmat-vidhānām — of persons like us; duṣṭānām — criminals; nirlajjānām — who have no shame; ca — and; viprakṛt — the restrainer.

Translation
The goddess Pārvatī said: Alas, has this upstart now received a post from which to punish shameless persons like us? Has he been appointed ruler, carrier of the rod of punishment? Is he now the only master of everything?

Text 12
न वेद धर्मं किल पद्मयोनि-
र्न ब्रह्मपुत्रा भृगुनारदाद्या: ।
न वै कुमार: कपिलो मनुश्च
ये नो निषेधन्त्यतिवर्तिनं हरम् ॥ १२ ॥
na veda dharmaṁ kila padmayonir
na brahma-putrā bhṛgu-nāradādyāḥ
na vai kumāraḥ kapilo manuś ca
ye no niṣedhanty ati-vartinaṁ haram
Synonyms
na — not; veda — knows; dharmam — the religious principles; kila — indeed; padma-yoniḥ — Lord Brahmā; na — nor; brahma-putrāḥ — the sons of Lord Brahmā; bhṛgu — Bhṛgu; nārada — Nārada; ādyāḥ — and so on; na — nor; vai — indeed; kumāraḥ — the four Kumāras (Sanaka, Sanat-kumāra, Sananda and Sanātana); kapilaḥ — Lord Kapila; manuḥ — Manu himself; ca — and; ye — who; no — not; niṣedhanti — order to stop; ati-vartinam — who is beyond laws and orders; haram — Lord Śiva.

Translation
Alas, Lord Brahmā, who has taken his birth from the lotus flower, does not know the principles of religion, nor do the great saints like Bhṛgu and Nārada, nor the four Kumāras, headed by Sanat-kumāra. Manu and Kapila have also forgotten the religious principles. I suppose it to be because of this that they have not tried to stop Lord Śiva from behaving improperly.

Text 13
एषामनुध्येयपदाब्जयुग्मं
जगद्गुरुं मङ्गलमङ्गलं स्वयम् ।
य: क्षत्रबन्धु: परिभूय सूरीन्
प्रशास्ति धृष्टस्तदयं हि दण्ड्य: ॥ १३ ॥
eṣām anudhyeya-padābja-yugmaṁ
jagad-guruṁ maṅgala-maṅgalaṁ svayam
yaḥ kṣatra-bandhuḥ paribhūya sūrīn
praśāsti dhṛṣṭas tad ayaṁ hi daṇḍyaḥ
Synonyms
eṣām — of all these (exalted personalities); anudhyeya — to be constantly meditated upon; pada-abja-yugmam — whose two lotus feet; jagat-gurum — the spiritual master of the whole world; maṅgala-maṅgalam — personification of the topmost religious principle; svayam — himself; yaḥ — he who; kṣatra-bandhuḥ — the lowest of the kṣatriyas; paribhūya — overriding; sūrīn — the demigods (like Brahmā and the others); praśāsti — chastises; dhṛṣṭaḥ — impudent; tat — therefore; ayam — this person; hi — indeed; daṇḍyaḥ — to be punished.

Translation
This Citraketu is the lowest of kṣatriyas, for he has impudently overridden Brahmā and the other demigods by insulting Lord Śiva, upon whose lotus feet they always meditate. Lord Śiva is personified religion and the spiritual master of the entire world, and therefore Citraketu must be punished.

Text 14
नायमर्हति वैकुण्ठपादमूलोपसर्पणम् ।
सम्भावितमति: स्तब्ध: साधुभि: पर्युपासितम् ॥ १४ ॥
nāyam arhati vaikuṇṭha-
pāda-mūlopasarpaṇam
sambhāvita-matiḥ stabdhaḥ
sādhubhiḥ paryupāsitam
Synonyms
na — not; ayam — this person; arhati — deserves; vaikuṇṭha-pāda-mūla-upasarpaṇam — the approaching of the shelter of Lord Viṣṇu’s lotus feet; sambhāvita-matiḥ — considering himself highly esteemed; stabdhaḥ — impudent; sādhubhiḥ — by great saintly persons; paryupāsitam — worshiped.

Translation
This person is puffed up because of his achievements, thinking, “I am the best.” He does not deserve to approach the shelter of Lord Viṣṇu’s lotus feet, which are worshiped by all saintly persons, for he is impudent, thinking himself greatly important.

Text 15
अत: पापीयसीं योनिमासुरीं याहि दुर्मते ।
यथेह भूयो महतां न कर्ता पुत्र किल्बिषम् ॥ १५ ॥
ataḥ pāpīyasīṁ yonim
āsurīṁ yāhi durmate
yatheha bhūyo mahatāṁ
na kartā putra kilbiṣam
Synonyms
ataḥ — therefore; pāpīyasīm — most sinful; yonim — to the species of life; āsurīm — demoniac; yāhi — go; durmate — O impudent one; yathā — so that; iha — in this world; bhūyaḥ — again; mahatām — to great personalities; na — not; kartā — will commit; putra — my dear son; kilbiṣam — any offense.

Translation
O impudent one, my dear son, now take birth in a low, sinful family of demons so that you will not commit such an offense again toward exalted, saintly persons in this world.

Text 16
श्रीशुक उवाच
एवं शप्तश्चित्रकेतुर्विमानादवरुह्य स: ।
प्रसादयामास सतीं मूर्ध्ना नम्रेण भारत ॥ १६ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
evaṁ śaptaś citraketur
vimānād avaruhya saḥ
prasādayām āsa satīṁ
mūrdhnā namreṇa bhārata
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; evam — thus; śaptaḥ — cursed; citraketuḥ — King Citraketu; vimānāt — from his airplane; avaruhya — coming down; saḥ — he; prasādayām āsa — completely pleased; satīm — Pārvatī; mūrdhnā — by his head; namreṇa — bent low; bhārata — O King Parīkṣit.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King Parīkṣit, when Citraketu was cursed by Pārvatī, he descended from his airplane, bowed before her with great humility and pleased her completely.

Text 17
चित्रकेतुरुवाच
प्रतिगृह्णामि ते शापमात्मनोऽञ्जलिनाम्बिके ।
देवैर्मर्त्याय यत्प्रोक्तं पूर्वदिष्टं हि तस्य तत् ॥ १७ ॥
citraketur uvāca
pratigṛhṇāmi te śāpam
ātmano ’ñjalināmbike
devair martyāya yat proktaṁ
pūrva-diṣṭaṁ hi tasya tat
Synonyms
citraketuḥ uvāca — King Citraketu said; pratigṛhṇāmi — I accept; te — your; śāpam — curse; ātmanaḥ — my own; añjalinā — with folded bands; ambike — O mother; devaiḥ — by the demigods; martyāya — unto a mortal; yat — which; proktam — prescribed; pūrva-diṣṭam — fixed previously according to one’s past deeds; hi — indeed; tasya — of him; tat — that.

Translation
Citraketu said: My dear mother, with my own hands folded together I accept the curse upon me. I do not mind the curse, for happiness and distress are given by the demigods as a result of one’s past deeds.

Text 18
संसारचक्र एतस्मिञ्जन्तुरज्ञानमोहित: ।
भ्राम्यन् सुखं च दु:खं च भुङ्क्ते सर्वत्र सर्वदा ॥ १८ ॥
saṁsāra-cakra etasmiñ
jantur ajñāna-mohitaḥ
bhrāmyan sukhaṁ ca duḥkhaṁ ca
bhuṅkte sarvatra sarvadā
Synonyms
saṁsāra-cakre — in the wheel of material existence; etasmin — this; jantuḥ — the living entity; ajñāna-mohitaḥ — being bewildered by ignorance; bhrāmyan — wandering; sukham — happiness; ca — and; duḥkham — distress; ca — also; bhuṅkte — he undergoes; sarvatra — everywhere; sarvadā — always.

Translation
Deluded by ignorance, the living entity wanders in the forest of this material world, enjoying the happiness and distress resulting from his past deeds, everywhere and at all times. [Therefore, my dear mother, neither you nor I am to be blamed for this incident.]

Text 19
नैवात्मा न परश्चापि कर्ता स्यात् सुखदु:खयो: ।
कर्तारं मन्यतेऽत्राज्ञ आत्मानं परमेव च ॥ १९ ॥
naivātmā na paraś cāpi
kartā syāt sukha-duḥkhayoḥ
kartāraṁ manyate ’trājña
ātmānaṁ param eva ca
Synonyms
na — not; eva — indeed; ātmā — the spirit soul; na — nor; paraḥ — another (friend or enemy); ca — also; api — indeed; kartā — the doer; syāt — can be; sukha-duḥkhayoḥ — of happiness and distress; kartāram — the doer; manyate — considers; atra — in this connection; ajñaḥ — a person not aware of the real fact; ātmānam — himself; param — another; eva — indeed; ca — also.

Translation
In this material world, neither the living entity himself nor others [friends and enemies] are the cause of material happiness and distress. But because of gross ignorance, the living entity thinks that he and others are the cause.

Text 20
गुणप्रवाह एतस्मिन् क: शाप: को न्वनुग्रह: ।
क: स्वर्गो नरक: को वा किं सुखं दु:खमेव वा ॥ २० ॥
guṇa-pravāha etasmin
kaḥ śāpaḥ ko nv anugrahaḥ
kaḥ svargo narakaḥ ko vā
kiṁ sukhaṁ duḥkham eva vā
Synonyms
guṇa-pravāhe — in the current of the modes of material nature; etasmin — this; kaḥ — what; śāpaḥ — a curse; kaḥ — what; nu — indeed; anugrahaḥ — a favor; kaḥ — what; svargaḥ — elevation to heavenly planets; narakaḥ — hell; kaḥ — what; vā — or; kim — what; sukham — happiness; duḥkham — distress; eva — indeed; vā — or.

Translation
This material world resembles the waves of a constantly flowing river. Therefore, what is a curse and what is a favor? What are the heavenly planets, and what are the hellish planets? What is actually happiness, and what is actually distress? Because the waves flow constantly, none of them has an eternal effect.

Text 21
एक: सृजति भूतानि भगवानात्ममायया ।
एषां बन्धं च मोक्षं च सुखं दु:खं च निष्कल: ॥ २१ ॥
ekaḥ sṛjati bhūtāni
bhagavān ātma-māyayā
eṣāṁ bandhaṁ ca mokṣaṁ ca
sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ ca niṣkalaḥ
Synonyms
ekaḥ — one; sṛjati — creates; bhūtāni — different varieties of living entities; bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; ātma-māyayā — by His personal potencies; eṣām — of all the conditioned souls; bandham — the conditional life; ca — and; mokṣam — the liberated life; ca — also; sukham — happiness; duḥkham — distresses; ca — and; niṣkalaḥ — not affected by the material qualities.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is one. Unaffected by the conditions of the material world, He creates all the conditioned souls by His own personal potency. Because of being contaminated by the material energy, the living entity is put into ignorance and thus into different conditions of bondage. Sometimes, by knowledge, the living entity is given liberation. In sattva-guṇa and rajo-guṇa, he is subjected to happiness and distress.

Text 22
न तस्य कश्चिद्दयित: प्रतीपो
न ज्ञातिबन्धुर्न परो न च स्व: ।
समस्य सर्वत्र निरञ्जनस्य
सुखे न राग: कुत एव रोष: ॥ २२ ॥
na tasya kaścid dayitaḥ pratīpo
na jñāti-bandhur na paro na ca svaḥ
samasya sarvatra nirañjanasya
sukhe na rāgaḥ kuta eva roṣaḥ
Synonyms
na — not; tasya — of Him (the Supreme Lord); kaścit — anyone; dayitaḥ — dear; pratīpaḥ — not dear; na — nor; jñāti — kinsman; bandhuḥ — friend; na — nor; paraḥ — other; na — nor; ca — also; svaḥ — own; samasya — who is equal; sarvatra — everywhere; nirañjanasya — without being affected by material nature; sukhe — in happiness; na — not; rāgaḥ — attachment; kutaḥ — from where; eva — indeed; roṣaḥ — anger.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead is equally disposed toward all living entities. Therefore no one is very dear to Him, and no one is a great enemy for Him; no one is His friend, and no one is His relative. Being unattached to the material world, He has no affection for so-called happiness or hatred for so-called distress. The two terms happiness and distress are relative. Since the Lord is always happy, for Him there is no question of distress.

Text 23
तथापि तच्छक्तिविसर्ग एषां
सुखाय दु:खाय हिताहिताय ।
बन्धाय मोक्षाय च मृत्युजन्मनो:
शरीरिणां संसृतयेऽवकल्पते ॥ २३ ॥
tathāpi tac-chakti-visarga eṣāṁ
sukhāya duḥkhāya hitāhitāya
bandhāya mokṣāya ca mṛtyu-janmanoḥ
śarīriṇāṁ saṁsṛtaye ’vakalpate
Synonyms
tathāpi — still; tat-śakti — of the Lord’s energy; visargaḥ — the creation; eṣām — of these (conditioned souls); sukhāya — for the happiness; duḥkhāya — for the distress; hita-ahitāya — for the profit and loss; bandhāya — for the bondage; mokṣāya — for the liberation; ca — also; mṛtyu — of death; janmanoḥ — and birth; śarīriṇām — of all those who accept material bodies; saṁsṛtaye — for the repetition; avakalpate — acts.

Translation
Although the Supreme Lord is unattached to our happiness and distress according to karma, and although no one is His enemy or favorite, He creates pious and impious activities through the agency of His material potency. Thus for the continuation of the materialistic way of life He creates happiness and distress, good fortune and bad, bondage and liberation, birth and death.

Text 24
अथ प्रसादये न त्वां शापमोक्षाय भामिनि ।
यन्मन्यसे ह्यसाधूक्तं मम तत्क्षम्यतां सति ॥ २४ ॥
atha prasādaye na tvāṁ
śāpa-mokṣāya bhāmini
yan manyase hy asādhūktaṁ
mama tat kṣamyatāṁ sati
Synonyms
atha — therefore; prasādaye — I am trying to please; na — not; tvām — you; śāpa-mokṣāya — for being released from your curse; bhāmini — O most angry one; yat — which; manyase — you consider; hi — indeed; asādhu-uktam — improper speech; mama — my; tat — that; kṣamyatām — let it be excused; sati — O most chaste one.

Translation
O mother, you are now unnecessarily angry, but since all my happiness and distress are destined by my past activities, I do not plead to be excused or relieved from your curse. Although what I have said is not wrong, please let whatever you think is wrong be pardoned.

Text 25
श्रीशुक उवाच
इति प्रसाद्य गिरिशौ चित्रकेतुररिन्दम ।
जगाम स्वविमानेन पश्यतो: स्मयतोस्तयो: ॥ २५ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
iti prasādya giriśau
citraketur arindama
jagāma sva-vimānena
paśyatoḥ smayatos tayoḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti — thus; prasādya — after satisfying; giriśau — Lord Śiva and his wife, Pārvatī; citraketuḥ — King Citraketu; arim-dama — O King Parīkṣit, who are always able to subdue the enemy; jagāma — went away; sva-vimānena — by his own airplane; paśyatoḥ — were watching; smayatoḥ — were smiling; tayoḥ — while Lord Śiva and Pārvatī.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O King Parīkṣit, subduer of the enemy, after Citraketu satisfied Lord Śiva and his wife, Pārvatī, he boarded his airplane and left as they looked on. When Lord Śiva and Pārvatī saw that Citraketu, although informed of the curse, was unafraid, they smiled, being fully astonished by his behavior.

Text 26
ततस्तु भगवान् रुद्रो रुद्राणीमिदमब्रवीत् ।
देवर्षिदैत्यसिद्धानां पार्षदानां च श‍ृण्वताम् ॥ २६ ॥
tatas tu bhagavān rudro
rudrāṇīm idam abravīt
devarṣi-daitya-siddhānāṁ
pārṣadānāṁ ca śṛṇvatām
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; tu — then; bhagavān — the most powerful; rudraḥ — Lord Śiva; rudrāṇīm — unto his wife, Pārvatī; idam — this; abravīt — said; devarṣi — while the great sage Nārada; daitya — the demons; siddhānām — and the inhabitants of Siddhaloka, who are expert in yogic power; pārṣadānām — his personal associates; ca — also; śṛṇvatām — were listening.

Translation
Thereafter, in the presence of the great sage Nārada, the demons, the inhabitants of Siddhaloka, and his personal associates, Lord Śiva, who is most powerful, spoke to his wife, Pārvatī, while they all listened.

Text 27
श्रीरुद्र उवाच
द‍ृष्टवत्यसि सुश्रोणि हरेरद्भ‍ुतकर्मण: ।
माहात्म्यं भृत्यभृत्यानां नि:स्पृहाणां महात्मनाम् ॥ २७ ॥
śrī-rudra uvāca
dṛṣṭavaty asi suśroṇi
harer adbhuta-karmaṇaḥ
māhātmyaṁ bhṛtya-bhṛtyānāṁ
niḥspṛhāṇāṁ mahātmanām
Synonyms
śrī-rudraḥ uvāca — Lord Śiva said; dṛṣṭavatī asi — have you seen; su-śroṇi — O beautiful Pārvatī; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; adbhuta-karmaṇaḥ — whose acts are wonderful; māhātmyam — the greatness; bhṛtya-bhṛtyānām — of the servants of the servants; niḥspṛhāṇām — who are without ambitions for sense gratification; mahātmanām — great souls.

Translation
Lord Śiva said: My dear beautiful Pārvatī, have you seen the greatness of the Vaiṣṇavas? Being servants of the servants of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, they are great souls and are not interested in any kind of material happiness.

Text 28
नारायणपरा: सर्वे न कुतश्चन बिभ्यति ।
स्वर्गापवर्गनरकेष्वपि तुल्यार्थदर्शिन: ॥ २८ ॥
nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve
na kutaścana bibhyati
svargāpavarga-narakeṣv
api tulyārtha-darśinaḥ
Synonyms
nārāyaṇa-parāḥ — pure devotees, who are interested only in the service of Nārāyaṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead; sarve — all; na — not; kutaścana — anywhere; bibhyati — are afraid; svarga — in the higher planetary systems; apavarga — in liberation; narakeṣu — and in hell; api — even; tulya — equal; artha — value; darśinaḥ — who see.

Translation
Devotees solely engaged in the devotional service of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, never fear any condition of life. For them the heavenly planets, liberation and the hellish planets are all the same, for such devotees are interested only in the service of the Lord.

Text 29
देहिनां देहसंयोगाद् द्वन्द्वानीश्वरलीलया ।
सुखं दु:खं मृतिर्जन्म शापोऽनुग्रह एव च ॥ २९ ॥
dehināṁ deha-saṁyogād
dvandvānīśvara-līlayā
sukhaṁ duḥkhaṁ mṛtir janma
śāpo ’nugraha eva ca
Synonyms
dehinām — of all those who have accepted material bodies; deha-saṁyogāt — because of contact with the material body; dvandvāni — dualities; īśvara-līlayā — by the supreme will of the Lord; sukham — happiness; duḥkham — distress; mṛtiḥ — death; janma — birth; śāpaḥ — curse; anugrahaḥ — favor; eva — certainly; ca — and.

Translation
Because of the actions of the Supreme Lord’s external energy, the living entities are conditioned in contact with material bodies. The dualities of happiness and distress, birth and death, curses and favors, are natural by-products of this contact in the material world.

Text 30
अविवेककृत: पुंसो ह्यर्थभेद इवात्मनि ।
गुणदोषविकल्पश्च भिदेव स्रजिवत्कृत: ॥ ३० ॥
aviveka-kṛtaḥ puṁso
hy artha-bheda ivātmani
guṇa-doṣa-vikalpaś ca
bhid eva srajivat kṛtaḥ
Synonyms
aviveka-kṛtaḥ — done in ignorance, without mature consideration; puṁsaḥ — of the living entity; hi — indeed; artha-bhedaḥ — differentiation of value; iva — like; ātmani — in himself; guṇa-doṣa — of quality and fault; vikalpaḥ — imagination; ca — and; bhit — difference; eva — certainly; sraji — in a garland; vat — like; kṛtaḥ — male.

Translation
As one mistakenly considers a flower garland to be a snake or experiences happiness and distress in a dream, so, in the material world, by a lack of careful consideration, we differentiate between happiness and distress, considering one good and the other bad.

Text 31
वासुदेवे भगवति भक्तिमुद्वहतां नृणाम् ।
ज्ञानवैराग्यवीर्याणां न हि कश्चिद् व्यपाश्रय: ॥ ३१ ॥
vāsudeve bhagavati
bhaktim udvahatāṁ nṛṇām
jñāna-vairāgya-vīryāṇāṁ
na hi kaścid vyapāśrayaḥ
Synonyms
vāsudeve — to Lord Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa; bhagavati — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; bhaktim — love and faith in devotional service; udvahatām — for those who are carrying; nṛṇām — men; jñāna-vairāgya — of real knowledge and detachment; vīryāṇām — possessing the powerful strength; na — not; hi — indeed; kaścit — anything; vyapāśrayaḥ — as interest or shelter.

Translation
Persons engaged in devotional service to Lord Vāsudeva, Kṛṣṇa, have naturally perfect knowledge and detachment from this material world. Therefore such devotees are not interested in the so-called happiness or so-called distress of this world.

Text 32
नाहं विरिञ्चो न कुमारनारदौ
न ब्रह्मपुत्रा मुनय: सुरेशा: ।
विदाम यस्येहितमंशकांशका
न तत्स्वरूपं पृथगीशमानिन: ॥ ३२ ॥
nāhaṁ viriñco na kumāra-nāradau
na brahma-putrā munayaḥ sureśāḥ
vidāma yasyehitam aṁśakāṁśakā
na tat-svarūpaṁ pṛthag-īśa-māninaḥ
Synonyms
na — not; aham — I (Lord Śiva); viriñcaḥ — Lord Brahmā; na — nor; kumāra — the Aśvinī-kumāras; nāradau — the great saint Nārada; na — nor; brahma-putrāḥ — the sons of Lord Brahmā; munayaḥ — great saintly persons; sura-īśāḥ — all the great demigods; vidāma — know; yasya — of whom; īhitam — activity; aṁśaka-aṁśakāḥ — those who are parts of the parts; na — not; tat — His; sva-rūpam — real personality; pṛthak — separate; īśa — rulers; māninaḥ — who consider ourselves to be.

Translation
Neither I [Lord Śiva], nor Brahmā, nor the Aśvinī-kumāras, nor Nārada or the other great sages who are Brahmā’s sons, nor even the demigods can understand the pastimes and personality of the Supreme Lord. Although we are part of the Supreme Lord, we consider ourselves independent, separate controllers, and thus we cannot understand His identity.

Text 33
न ह्यस्यास्ति प्रिय: कश्चिन्नाप्रिय: स्व: परोऽपि वा ।
आत्मत्वात्सर्वभूतानां सर्वभूतप्रियो हरि: ॥ ३३ ॥
na hy asyāsti priyaḥ kaścin
nāpriyaḥ svaḥ paro ’pi vā
ātmatvāt sarva-bhūtānāṁ
sarva-bhūta-priyo hariḥ
Synonyms
na — not; hi — indeed; asya — of the Lord; asti — there is; priyaḥ — very dear; kaścit — anyone; na — nor; apriyaḥ — not dear; svaḥ — own; paraḥ — other; api — even; vā — or; ātmatvāt — due to being the soul of the soul; sarva-bhūtānām — of all living entities; sarva-bhūta — to all living entities; priyaḥ — very, very dear; hariḥ — Lord Hari.

Translation
He holds no one as very dear and no one as inimical. He has no one for His own relative, and no one is alien to Him. He is actually the soul of the soul of all living entities. Thus He is the auspicious friend of all living beings and is very near and dear to all of them.

Texts 34-35
तस्य चायं महाभागश्चित्रकेतु: प्रियोऽनुग: ।
सर्वत्र समद‍ृक् शान्तो ह्यहं चैवाच्युतप्रिय: ॥ ३४ ॥
तस्मान्न विस्मय: कार्य: पुरुषेषु महात्मसु ।
महापुरुषभक्तेषु शान्तेषु समदर्शिषु ॥ ३५ ॥
tasya cāyaṁ mahā-bhāgaś
citraketuḥ priyo ’nugaḥ
sarvatra sama-dṛk śānto
hy ahaṁ caivācyuta-priyaḥ
tasmān na vismayaḥ kāryaḥ
puruṣeṣu mahātmasu
mahāpuruṣa-bhakteṣu
śānteṣu sama-darśiṣu
Synonyms
tasya — of Him (the Lord); ca — and; ayam — this; mahā-bhāgaḥ — the most fortunate; citraketuḥ — King Citraketu; priyaḥ — beloved; anugaḥ — most obedient servant; sarvatra — everywhere; sama-dṛk — sees equally; śāntaḥ — very peaceful; hi — indeed; aham — I; ca — also; eva — certainly; acyuta-priyaḥ — very dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa, who never fails; tasmāt — therefore; na — no; vismayaḥ — wonder; kāryaḥ — to be done; puruṣeṣu — among persons; mahā-ātmasu — who are exalted souls; mahā-puruṣa-bhakteṣu — devotees of Lord Viṣṇu; śānteṣu — peaceful; sama-darśiṣu — equal to everyone.

Translation
This magnanimous Citraketu is a dear devotee of the Lord. He is equal to all living entities and is free from attachment and hatred. Similarly, I am also very dear to Lord Nārāyaṇa. Therefore, no one should be astonished to see the activities of the most exalted devotees of Nārāyaṇa, for they are free from attachment and envy. They are always peaceful, and they are equal to everyone.

Text 36
श्रीशुक उवाच
इति श्रुत्वा भगवत: शिवस्योमाभिभाषितम् ।
बभूव शान्तधी राजन् देवी विगतविस्मया ॥ ३६ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
iti śrutvā bhagavataḥ
śivasyomābhibhāṣitam
babhūva śānta-dhī rājan
devī vigata-vismayā
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; iti — thus; śrutvā — hearing; bhagavataḥ — of the most powerful demigod; śivasya — of Lord Śiva; umā — Pārvatī; abhibhāṣitam — instruction; babhūva — became; śānta-dhīḥ — very peaceful; rājan — O King Parīkṣit; devī — the goddess; vigata-vismayā — released from astonishment.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, after hearing this speech by her husband, the demigoddess [Umā, the wife of Lord Śiva] gave up her astonishment at the behavior of King Citraketu and became steady in intelligence.

Text 37
इति भागवतो देव्या: प्रतिशप्तुमलन्तम: ।
मूर्ध्ना स जगृहे शापमेतावत्साधुलक्षणम् ॥ ३७ ॥
iti bhāgavato devyāḥ
pratiśaptum alantamaḥ
mūrdhnā sa jagṛhe śāpam
etāvat sādhu-lakṣaṇam
Synonyms
iti — thus; bhāgavataḥ — the most exalted devotee; devyāḥ — of Pārvatī; pratiśaptum — to make a counter-curse; alantamaḥ — able in all respects; mūrdhnā — with his head; saḥ — he (Citraketu); jagṛhe — accepted; śāpam — the curse; etāvat — this much; sādhu-lakṣaṇam — the symptom of a devotee.

Translation
The great devotee Citraketu was so powerful that he was quite competent to curse mother Pārvatī in retaliation, but instead of doing so he very humbly accepted the curse and bowed his head before Lord Śiva and his wife. This is very much to be appreciated as the standard behavior of a Vaiṣṇava.

Text 38
जज्ञे त्वष्टुर्दक्षिणाग्नौ दानवीं योनिमाश्रित: ।
वृत्र इत्यभिविख्यातो ज्ञानविज्ञानसंयुत: ॥ ३८ ॥
jajñe tvaṣṭur dakṣiṇāgnau
dānavīṁ yonim āśritaḥ
vṛtra ity abhivikhyāto
jñāna-vijñāna-saṁyutaḥ
Synonyms
jajñe — was born; tvaṣṭuḥ — of the brāhmaṇa known as Tvaṣṭā; dakṣiṇa-agnau — in the fire sacrifice known as dakṣiṇāgni; dānavīm — demoniac; yonim — species of life; āśritaḥ — taking shelter of; vṛtraḥ — Vṛtra; iti — thus; abhivikhyātaḥ — celebrated; jñāna-vijñāna-saṁyutaḥ — fully equipped with transcendental knowledge and practical application of that knowledge in life.

Translation
Being cursed by mother Durgā [Bhavānī, the wife of Lord Śiva], that same Citraketu accepted birth in a demoniac species of life. Although still fully equipped with transcendental knowledge and practical application of that knowledge in life, he appeared as a demon at the fire sacrifice performed by Tvaṣṭā, and thus he became famous as Vṛtrāsura.

Text 39
एतत्ते सर्वमाख्यातं यन्मां त्वं परिपृच्छसि ।
वृत्रस्यासुरजातेश्च कारणं भगवन्मते: ॥ ३९ ॥
etat te sarvam ākhyātaṁ
yan māṁ tvaṁ paripṛcchasi
vṛtrasyāsura-jāteś ca
kāraṇaṁ bhagavan-mateḥ
Synonyms
etat — this; te — unto you; sarvam — all; ākhyātam — explained; yat — which; mām — me; tvam — you; paripṛcchasi — asked; vṛtrasya — of Vṛtrāsura; asura-jāteḥ — whose birth was in a species of asuras; ca — and; kāraṇam — the cause; bhagavat-mateḥ — of exalted intelligence in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Translation
My dear King Parīkṣit, you inquired from me how Vṛtrāsura, a great devotee, took birth in a demoniac family. Thus I have tried to explain to you everything about this.

Text 40
इतिहासमिमं पुण्यं चित्रकेतोर्महात्मन: ।
माहात्म्यं विष्णुभक्तानां श्रुत्वा बन्धाद्विमुच्यते ॥ ४० ॥
itihāsam imaṁ puṇyaṁ
citraketor mahātmanaḥ
māhātmyaṁ viṣṇu-bhaktānāṁ
śrutvā bandhād vimucyate
Synonyms
itihāsam — history; imam — this; puṇyam — very pious; citraketoḥ — of Citraketu; mahā-ātmanaḥ — the exalted devotee; māhātmyam — containing glory; viṣṇu-bhaktānām — from the devotees of Viṣṇu; śrutvā — hearing; bandhāt — from bondage or conditional, material life; vimucyate — is freed.

Translation
Citraketu was a great devotee [mahātmā]. If one hears this history of Citraketu from a pure devotee, the listener also is freed from the conditional life of material existence.

Text 41
य एतत्प्रातरुत्थाय श्रद्धया वाग्यत: पठेत् ।
इतिहासं हरिं स्मृत्वा स याति परमां गतिम् ॥ ४१ ॥
ya etat prātar utthāya
śraddhayā vāg-yataḥ paṭhet
itihāsaṁ hariṁ smṛtvā
sa yāti paramāṁ gatim
Synonyms
yaḥ — any person who; etat — this; prātaḥ — early in the morning; utthāya — rising; śraddhayā — with faith; vāk-yataḥ — controlling the mind and words; paṭhet — may read; itihāsam — history; harim — the Supreme Lord; smṛtvā — remembering; saḥ — that person; yāti — goes; paramām gatim — back home, back to Godhead.

Translation
One who rises from bed early in the morning and recites this history of Citraketu, controlling his words and mind and remembering the Supreme Personality of Godhead, will return home, back to Godhead, without difficulty.