Text 1
श्रीबादरायणिरुवाच
एवं ते भगवद्दूता यमदूताभिभाषितम् ।
उपधार्याथ तान् राजन् प्र्रत्याहुर्नयकोविदा: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca
evaṁ te bhagavad-dūtā
yamadūtābhibhāṣitam
upadhāryātha tān rājan
pratyāhur naya-kovidāḥ
Synonyms
śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the son of Vyāsadeva, said; evam — thus; te — they; bhagavat-dūtāḥ — the servants of Lord Viṣṇu; yamadūta — by the servants of Yamarāja; abhibhāṣitam — what was spoken; upadhārya — hearing; atha — then; tān — unto them; rājan — O King; pratyāhuḥ — replied properly; naya-kovidāḥ — being conversant in good arguments or good logic.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, the servants of Lord Viṣṇu are always very expert in logic and arguments. After hearing the statements of the Yamadūtas, they replied as follows.

Text 2
श्रीविष्णुदूता ऊचु:
अहो कष्टं धर्मद‍ृशामधर्म: स्पृशते सभाम् ।
यत्रादण्ड्येष्वपापेषु दण्डो यैर्ध्रियते वृथा ॥ २ ॥
śrī-viṣṇudūtā ūcuḥ
aho kaṣṭaṁ dharma-dṛśām
adharmaḥ spṛśate sabhām
yatrādaṇḍyeṣv apāpeṣu
daṇḍo yair dhriyate vṛthā
Synonyms
śrī-viṣṇudūtāḥ ūcuḥ — the Viṣṇudūtas said; aho — alas; kaṣṭam — how painful it is; dharma-dṛśām — of persons interested in maintaining religion; adharmaḥ — irreligion; spṛśate — is affecting; sabhām — the assembly; yatra — wherein; adaṇḍyeṣu — upon persons not to be punished; apāpeṣu — who are sinless; daṇḍaḥ — punishment; yaiḥ — by whom; dhriyate — is being allotted; vṛthā — unnecessarily.

Translation
The Viṣṇudūtas said: Alas, how painful it is that irreligion is being introduced into an assembly where religion should be maintained. Indeed, those in charge of maintaining the religious principles are needlessly punishing a sinless, unpunishable person.

Text 3
प्रजानां पितरो ये च शास्तार: साधव: समा: ।
यदि स्यात्तेषु वैषम्यं कं यान्ति शरणं प्रजा: ॥ ३ ॥
prajānāṁ pitaro ye ca
śāstāraḥ sādhavaḥ samāḥ
yadi syāt teṣu vaiṣamyaṁ
kaṁ yānti śaraṇaṁ prajāḥ
Synonyms
prajānām — of the citizens; pitaraḥ — protectors, guardians (kings or government servants); ye — they who; ca — and; śāstāraḥ — give instructions concerning law and order; sādhavaḥ — endowed with all good qualities; samāḥ — equal to everyone; yadi — if; syāt — there is; teṣu — among them; vaiṣamyam — partiality; kam — what; yānti — will go to; śaraṇam — shelter; prajāḥ — the citizens.

Translation
A king or governmental official should be so well qualified that he acts as a father, maintainer and protector of the citizens because of affection and love. He should give the citizens good advice and instructions according to the standard scriptures and should be equal to everyone. Yamarāja does this, for he is the supreme master of justice, and so do those who follow in his footsteps. However, if such persons become polluted and exhibit partiality by punishing an innocent, blameless person, where will the citizens go to take shelter for their maintenance and security?

Text 4
यद्यदाचरति श्रेयानितरस्तत्तदीहते ।
स यत्प्रमाणं कुरुते लोकस्तदनुवर्तते ॥ ४ ॥
yad yad ācarati śreyān
itaras tat tad īhate
sa yat pramāṇaṁ kurute
lokas tad anuvartate
Synonyms
yat yat — whatever; ācarati — executes; śreyān — a first-class man with full knowledge of religious principles; itaraḥ — the subordinate man; tat tat — that; īhate — performs; saḥ — he (the great man); yat — whatever; pramāṇam — as evidence or as the right thing; kurute — accepts; lokaḥ — the general public; tat — that; anuvartate — follows.

Translation
The mass of people follow the example of a leader in society and imitate his behavior. They accept as evidence whatever the leader accepts.

Texts 5-6
यस्याङ्के शिर आधाय लोक: स्वपिति निर्वृत: ।
स्वयं धर्ममधर्मं वा न हि वेद यथा पशु: ॥ ५ ॥
स कथं न्यर्पितात्मानं कृतमैत्रमचेतनम् ।
विस्रम्भणीयो भूतानां सघृणो दोग्धुमर्हति ॥ ६ ॥
yasyāṅke śira ādhāya
lokaḥ svapiti nirvṛtaḥ
svayaṁ dharmam adharmaṁ vā
na hi veda yathā paśuḥ
sa kathaṁ nyarpitātmānaṁ
kṛta-maitram acetanam
visrambhaṇīyo bhūtānāṁ
saghṛṇo dogdhum arhati
Synonyms
yasya — of whom; aṅke — on the lap; śiraḥ — the head; ādhāya — placing; lokaḥ — the general mass of people; svapiti — sleep; nirvṛtaḥ — in peace; svayam — personally; dharmam — religious principles or the goal of life; adharmam — irreligious principles; vā — or; na — not; hi — indeed; veda — know; yathā — exactly like; paśuḥ — an animal; saḥ — such a person; katham — how; nyarpita-ātmānam — unto the living entity who has fully surrendered; kṛta-maitram — endowed with good faith and friendship; acetanam — with undeveloped consciousness, foolish; visrambhaṇīyaḥ — deserving to be the object of faith; bhūtānām — of the living entities; sa-ghṛṇaḥ — who has a soft heart for the good of all people; dogdhum — to give pain; arhati — is able.

Translation
People in general are not very advanced in knowledge by which to discriminate between religion and irreligion. The innocent, unenlightened citizen is like an ignorant animal sleeping in peace with its head on the lap of its master, faithfully believing in the master’s protection. If a leader is actually kindhearted and deserves to be the object of a living entity’s faith, how can he punish or kill a foolish person who has fully surrendered in good faith and friendship?

Text 7
अयं हि कृतनिर्वेशो जन्मकोट्यंहसामपि ।
यद्‌व्याजहार विवशो नाम स्वस्त्ययनं हरे: ॥ ७ ॥
ayaṁ hi kṛta-nirveśo
janma-koṭy-aṁhasām api
yad vyājahāra vivaśo
nāma svasty-ayanaṁ hareḥ
Synonyms
ayam — this person (Ajāmila); hi — indeed; kṛta-nirveśaḥ — has undergone all kinds of atonement; janma — of births; koṭi — of millions; aṁhasām — for the sinful activities; api — even; yat — because; vyājahāra — he has chanted; vivaśaḥ — in a helpless condition; nāma — the holy name; svasti-ayanam — the means of liberation; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
Ajāmila has already atoned for all his sinful actions. Indeed, he has atoned not only for sins performed in one life but for those performed in millions of lives, for in a helpless condition he chanted the holy name of Nārāyaṇa. Even though he did not chant purely, he chanted without offense, and therefore he is now pure and eligible for liberation.

Text 8
एतेनैव ह्यघोनोऽस्य कृतं स्यादघनिष्कृतम् ।
यदा नारायणायेति जगाद चतुरक्षरम् ॥ ८ ॥
etenaiva hy aghono ’sya
kṛtaṁ syād agha-niṣkṛtam
yadā nārāyaṇāyeti
jagāda catur-akṣaram
Synonyms
etena — by this (chanting); eva — indeed; hi — certainly; aghonaḥ — who possesses sinful reactions; asya — of this (Ajāmila); kṛtam — performed; syāt — is; agha — of sins; niṣkṛtam — complete atonement; yadā — when; nārāyaṇa — O Nārāyaṇa (the name of his son); āya — please come; iti — thus; jagāda — he chanted; catuḥ-akṣaram — the four syllables (nā-rā-ya-ṇa).

Translation
The Viṣṇudūtas continued: Even previously, while eating and at other times, this Ajāmila would call his son, saying, “My dear Nārāyaṇa, please come here.” Although calling the name of his son, he nevertheless uttered the four syllables nā-rā-ya-ṇa. Simply by chanting the name of Nārāyaṇa in this way, he sufficiently atoned for the sinful reactions of millions of lives.

Texts 9-10
स्तेन: सुरापो मित्रध्रुग् ब्रह्महा गुरुतल्पग: ।
स्त्रीराजपितृगोहन्ता ये च पातकिनोऽपरे ॥ ९ ॥
सर्वेषामप्यघवतामिदमेव सुनिष्कृतम् ।
नामव्याहरणं विष्णोर्यतस्तद्विषया मति: ॥ १० ॥
stenaḥ surā-po mitra-dhrug
brahma-hā guru-talpa-gaḥ
strī-rāja-pitṛ-go-hantā
ye ca pātakino ’pare
sarveṣām apy aghavatām
idam eva suniṣkṛtam
nāma-vyāharaṇaṁ viṣṇor
yatas tad-viṣayā matiḥ
Synonyms
stenaḥ — one who steals; surā-paḥ — a drunkard; mitra-dhruk — one who turns against a friend or relative; brahma-hā — one who kills a brāhmaṇa; guru-talpa-gaḥ — one who indulges in sex with the wife of his teacher or guru; strī — women; rāja — king; pitṛ — father; go — of cows; hantā — the killer; ye — those who; ca — also; pātakinaḥ — committed sinful activities; apare — many others; sarveṣām — of all of them; api — although; agha-vatām — persons who have committed many sins; idam — this; eva — certainly; su-niṣkṛtam — perfect atonement; nāma-vyāharaṇam — chanting of the holy name; viṣṇoḥ — of Lord Viṣṇu; yataḥ — because of which; tat-viṣayā — on the person who chants the holy name; matiḥ — His attention.

Translation
The chanting of the holy name of Lord Viṣṇu is the best process of atonement for a thief of gold or other valuables, for a drunkard, for one who betrays a friend or relative, for one who kills a brāhmaṇa, or for one who indulges in sex with the wife of his guru or another superior. It is also the best method of atonement for one who murders women, the king or his father, for one who slaughters cows, and for all other sinful men. Simply by chanting the holy name of Lord Viṣṇu, such sinful persons may attract the attention of the Supreme Lord, who therefore considers, “Because this man has chanted My holy name, My duty is to give him protection.”

Text 11
न निष्कृतैरुदितैर्ब्रह्मवादिभि-
स्तथा विशुद्ध्यत्यघवान् व्रतादिभि: ।
यथा हरेर्नामपदैरुदाहृतै-
स्तदुत्तमश्लोकगुणोपलम्भकम् ॥ ११ ॥
na niṣkṛtair uditair brahma-vādibhis
tathā viśuddhyaty aghavān vratādibhiḥ
yathā harer nāma-padair udāhṛtais
tad uttamaśloka-guṇopalambhakam
Synonyms
na — not; niṣkṛtaiḥ — by the processes of atonement; uditaiḥ — prescribed; brahma-vādibhiḥ — by learned scholars such as Manu; tathā — to that extent; viśuddhyati — becomes purified; agha-vān — a sinful man; vrata-ādibhiḥ — by observing the vows and regulative principles; yathā — as; hareḥ — of Lord Hari; nāma-padaiḥ — by the syllables of the holy name; udāhṛtaiḥ — chanted; tat — that; uttamaśloka — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; guṇa — of the transcendental qualities; upalambhakam — reminding one.

Translation
By following the Vedic ritualistic ceremonies or undergoing atonement, sinful men do not become as purified as by chanting once the holy name of Lord Hari. Although ritualistic atonement may free one from sinful reactions, it does not awaken devotional service, unlike the chanting of the Lord’s names, which reminds one of the Lord’s fame, qualities, attributes, pastimes and paraphernalia.

Text 12
नैकान्तिकं तद्धि कृतेऽपि निष्कृते
मन: पुनर्धावति चेदसत्पथे ।
तत्कर्मनिर्हारमभीप्सतां हरे-
र्गुणानुवाद: खलु सत्त्वभावन: ॥ १२ ॥
naikāntikaṁ tad dhi kṛte ’pi niṣkṛte
manaḥ punar dhāvati ced asat-pathe
tat karma-nirhāram abhīpsatāṁ harer
guṇānuvādaḥ khalu sattva-bhāvanaḥ
Synonyms
na — not; aikāntikam — absolutely cleansed; tat — the heart; hi — because; kṛte — very nicely performed; api — although; niṣkṛte — atonement; manaḥ — the mind; punaḥ — again; dhāvati — runs; cet — if; asat-pathe — on the path of material activities; tat — therefore; karma-nirhāram — cessation of the fruitive reactions of material activities; abhīpsatām — for those who seriously want; hareḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; guṇa-anuvādaḥ — constant chanting of the glories; khalu — indeed; sattva-bhāvanaḥ — actually purifying one’s existence.

Translation
The ritualistic ceremonies of atonement recommended in the religious scriptures are insufficient to cleanse the heart absolutely because after atonement one’s mind again runs toward material activities. Consequently, for one who wants liberation from the fruitive reactions of material activities, the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, or glorification of the name, fame and pastimes of the Lord, is recommended as the most perfect process of atonement because such chanting eradicates the dirt from one’s heart completely.

Text 13
अथैनं मापनयत कृताशेषाघनिष्कृतम् ।
यदसौ भगवन्नाम म्रियमाण: समग्रहीत् ॥ १३ ॥
athainaṁ māpanayata
kṛtāśeṣāgha-niṣkṛtam
yad asau bhagavan-nāma
mriyamāṇaḥ samagrahīt
Synonyms
atha — therefore; enam — him (Ajāmila); mā — do not; apanayata — try to take; kṛta — already done; aśeṣa — unlimited; agha-niṣkṛtam — atonement for his sinful actions; yat — because; asau — he; bhagavat-nāma — the holy name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mriyamāṇaḥ — while dying; samagrahīt — perfectly chanted.

Translation
At the time of death, this Ajāmila helplessly and very loudly chanted the holy name of the Lord, Nārāyaṇa. That chanting alone has already freed him from the reactions of all sinful life. Therefore, O servants of Yamarāja, do not try to take him to your master for punishment in hellish conditions.

Text 14
साङ्केत्यं पारिहास्यं वा स्तोभं हेलनमेव वा ।
वैकुण्ठनामग्रहणमशेषाघहरं विदु: ॥ १४ ॥
sāṅketyaṁ pārihāsyaṁ vā
stobhaṁ helanam eva vā
vaikuṇṭha-nāma-grahaṇam
aśeṣāgha-haraṁ viduḥ
Synonyms
sāṅketyam — as an assignation; pārihāsyam — jokingly; vā — or; stobham — as musical entertainment; helanam — neglectfully; eva — certainly; vā — or; vaikuṇṭha — of the Lord; nāma-grahaṇam — chanting the holy name; aśeṣa — unlimited; agha-haram — neutralizing the effect of sinful life; viduḥ — advanced transcendentalists know.

Translation
One who chants the holy name of the Lord is immediately freed from the reactions of unlimited sins, even if he chants indirectly [to indicate something else], jokingly, for musical entertainment, or even neglectfully. This is accepted by all the learned scholars of the scriptures.

Text 15
पतित: स्खलितो भग्न: सन्दष्टस्तप्त आहत: ।
हरिरित्यवशेनाह पुमान्नार्हति यातना: ॥ १५ ॥
patitaḥ skhalito bhagnaḥ
sandaṣṭas tapta āhataḥ
harir ity avaśenāha
pumān nārhati yātanāḥ
Synonyms
patitaḥ — fallen down; skhalitaḥ — slipped; bhagnaḥ — having broken his bones; sandaṣṭaḥ — bitten; taptaḥ — severely attacked by fever or similar painful conditions; āhataḥ — injured; hariḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; iti — thus; avaśena — accidentally; āha — chants; pumān — a person; na — not; arhati — deserves; yātanāḥ — hellish conditions.

Translation
If one chants the holy name of Hari and then dies because of an accidental misfortune, such as falling from the top of a house, slipping and suffering broken bones while traveling on the road, being bitten by a serpent, being afflicted with pain and high fever, or being injured by a weapon, one is immediately absolved from having to enter hellish life, even though he is sinful.

Text 16
गुरूणां च लघूनां च गुरूणि च लघूनि च ।
प्रायश्चित्तानि पापानां ज्ञात्वोक्तानि महर्षिभि: ॥ १६ ॥
gurūṇāṁ ca laghūnāṁ ca
gurūṇi ca laghūni ca
prāyaścittāni pāpānāṁ
jñātvoktāni maharṣibhiḥ
Synonyms
gurūṇām — heavy; ca — and; laghūnām — light; ca — also; gurūṇi — heavy; ca — and; laghūni — light; ca — also; prāyaścittāni — the processes of atonement; pāpānām — of sinful activities; jñātvā — knowing perfectly well; uktāni — have been prescribed; mahā-ṛṣibhiḥ — by great sages.

Translation
Authorities who are learned scholars and sages have carefully ascertained that one should atone for the heaviest sins by undergoing a heavy process of atonement and one should atone for lighter sins by undergoing lighter atonement. Chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, however, vanquishes all the effects of sinful activities, regardless of whether heavy or light.

Text 17
तैस्तान्यघानि पूयन्ते तपोदानव्रतादिभि: ।
नाधर्मजं तद्‌धृदयं तदपीशाङ्‌घ्रिसेवया ॥ १७ ॥
tais tāny aghāni pūyante
tapo-dāna-vratādibhiḥ
nādharmajaṁ tad-dhṛdayaṁ
tad apīśāṅghri-sevayā
Synonyms
taiḥ — by those; tāni — all those; aghāni — sinful activities and their results; pūyante — become vanquished; tapaḥ — austerity; dāna — charity; vrata-ādibhiḥ — by vows and other such activities; na — not; adharma-jam — produced from irreligious actions; tat — of that; hṛdayam — the heart; tat — that; api — also; īśa-aṅghri — of the lotus feet of the Lord; sevayā — by service.

Translation
Although one may neutralize the reactions of sinful life through austerity, charity, vows and other such methods, these pious activities cannot uproot the material desires in one’s heart. However, if one serves the lotus feet of the Personality of Godhead, he is immediately freed from all such contaminations.

Text 18
अज्ञानादथवा ज्ञानादुत्तमश्लोकनाम यत् ।
सङ्कीर्तितमघं पुंसो दहेदेधो यथानल: ॥ १८ ॥
ajñānād athavā jñānād
uttamaśloka-nāma yat
saṅkīrtitam aghaṁ puṁso
dahed edho yathānalaḥ
Synonyms
ajñānāt — out of ignorance; athavā — or; jñānāt — with knowledge; uttamaśloka — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; nāma — the holy name; yat — that which; saṅkīrtitam — chanted; agham — sin; puṁsaḥ — of a person; dahet — burns to ashes; edhaḥ — dry grass; yathā — just as; analaḥ — fire.

Translation
As a fire burns dry grass to ashes, so the holy name of the Lord, whether chanted knowingly or unknowingly, burns to ashes, without fail, all the reactions of one’s sinful activities.

Text 19
यथागदं वीर्यतममुपयुक्तं यद‍ृच्छया ।
अजानतोऽप्यात्मगुणं कुर्यान्मन्त्रोऽप्युदाहृत: ॥ १९ ॥
yathāgadaṁ vīryatamam
upayuktaṁ yadṛcchayā
ajānato ’py ātma-guṇaṁ
kuryān mantro ’py udāhṛtaḥ
Synonyms
yathā — just like; agadam — medicine; vīrya-tamam — very powerful; upayuktam — properly taken; yadṛcchayā — somehow or other; ajānataḥ — by a person without knowledge; api — even; ātma-guṇam — its own potency; kuryāt — manifests; mantraḥ — the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra; api — also; udāhṛtaḥ — chanted.

Translation
If a person unaware of the effective potency of a certain medicine takes that medicine or is forced to take it, it will act even without his knowledge because its potency does not depend on the patient’s understanding. Similarly, even though one does not know the value of chanting the holy name of the Lord, if one chants knowingly or unknowingly, the chanting will be very effective.

Text 20
श्रीशुक उवाच
त एवं सुविनिर्णीय धर्मं भागवतं नृप ।
तं याम्यपाशान्निर्मुच्य विप्रं मृत्योरमूमुचन् ॥ २० ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
ta evaṁ suvinirṇīya
dharmaṁ bhāgavataṁ nṛpa
taṁ yāmya-pāśān nirmucya
vipraṁ mṛtyor amūmucan
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; te — they (the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu); evam — thus; su-vinirṇīya — perfectly ascertaining; dharmam — real religion; bhāgavatam — in terms of devotional service; nṛpa — O King; tam — him (Ajāmila); yāmya-pāśāt — from the bondage of the order carriers of Yamarāja; nirmucya — releasing; vipram — the brāhmaṇa; mṛtyoḥ — from death; amūmucan — rescued.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: My dear King, having thus perfectly judged the principles of devotional service with reasoning and arguments, the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu released the brāhmaṇa Ajāmila from the bondage of the Yamadūtas and saved him from imminent death.

Text 21
इति प्रत्युदिता याम्या दूता यात्वा यमान्तिकम् ।
यमराज्ञे यथा सर्वमाचचक्षुररिन्दम ॥ २१ ॥
iti pratyuditā yāmyā
dūtā yātvā yamāntikam
yama-rājñe yathā sarvam
ācacakṣur arindama
Synonyms
iti — thus; pratyuditāḥ — having been replied to (by the order carriers of Viṣṇu); yāmyāḥ — the servants of Yamarāja; dūtāḥ — the messengers; yātvā — going; yama-antikam — to the abode of Lord Yamarāja; yama-rājñe — unto King Yamarāja; yathā — duly; sarvam — everything; ācacakṣuḥ — informed in full detail; arindama — O subduer of the enemies.

Translation
My dear Mahārāja Parīkṣit, O subduer of all enemies, after the servants of Yamarāja had been answered by the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu, they went to Yamarāja and explained to him everything that had happened.

Text 22
द्विज: पाशाद्विनिर्मुक्तो गतभी: प्रकृतिं गत: ।
ववन्दे शिरसा विष्णो: किङ्करान् दर्शनोत्सव: ॥ २२ ॥
dvijaḥ pāśād vinirmukto
gata-bhīḥ prakṛtiṁ gataḥ
vavande śirasā viṣṇoḥ
kiṅkarān darśanotsavaḥ
Synonyms
dvijaḥ — the brāhmaṇa (Ajāmila); pāśāt — from the noose; vinirmuktaḥ — being released; gata-bhīḥ — freed from fear; prakṛtim gataḥ — came to his senses; vavande — offered his respectful obeisances; śirasā — by bowing his head; viṣṇoḥ — of Lord Viṣṇu; kiṅkarān — unto the servants; darśana-utsavaḥ — very pleased by seeing them.

Translation
Having been released from the nooses of Yamarāja’s servants, the brāhmaṇa Ajāmila, now free from fear, came to his senses and immediately offered obeisances to the Viṣṇudūtas by bowing his head at their lotus feet. He was extremely pleased by their presence, for he had seen them save his life from the hands of the servants of Yamarāja.

Text 23
तं विवक्षुमभिप्रेत्य महापुरुषकिङ्करा: ।
सहसा पश्यतस्तस्य तत्रान्तर्दधिरेऽनघ ॥ २३ ॥
taṁ vivakṣum abhipretya
mahāpuruṣa-kiṅkarāḥ
sahasā paśyatas tasya
tatrāntardadhire ’nagha
Synonyms
tam — him (Ajāmila); vivakṣum — desiring to speak; abhipretya — understanding; mahāpuruṣa-kiṅkarāḥ — the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu; sahasā — suddenly; paśyataḥ tasya — while he looked on; tatra — there; antardadhire — disappeared; anagha — O sinless Mahārāja Parīkṣit.

Translation
O sinless Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the order carriers of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Viṣṇudūtas, saw that Ajāmila was attempting to say something, and thus they suddenly disappeared from his presence.

Texts 24-25
अजामिलोऽप्यथाकर्ण्य दूतानां यमकृष्णयो: ।
धर्मं भागवतं शुद्धं त्रैवेद्यं च गुणाश्रयम् ॥ २४ ॥
भक्तिमान् भगवत्याशु माहात्म्यश्रवणाद्धरे: ।
अनुतापो महानासीत्स्मरतोऽशुभमात्मन: ॥ २५ ॥
ajāmilo ’py athākarṇya
dūtānāṁ yama-kṛṣṇayoḥ
dharmaṁ bhāgavataṁ śuddhaṁ
trai-vedyaṁ ca guṇāśrayam
bhaktimān bhagavaty āśu
māhātmya-śravaṇād dhareḥ
anutāpo mahān āsīt
smarato ’śubham ātmanaḥ
Synonyms
ajāmilaḥ — Ajāmila; api — also; atha — thereafter; ākarṇya — hearing; dūtānām — of the order carriers; yama-kṛṣṇayoḥ — of Yamarāja and Lord Kṛṣṇa; dharmam — actual religious principles; bhāgavatam — as described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, or concerning the relationship between the living being and the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śuddham — pure; trai-vedyam — mentioned in three Vedas; ca — also; guṇa-aśrayam — material religion, under the modes of material nature; bhakti-mān — a pure devotee (cleansed of the modes of material nature); bhagavati — unto the Supreme Personality of Godhead; āśu — immediately; māhātmya — glorification of the name, fame, etc.; śravaṇāt — because of hearing; hareḥ — of Lord Hari; anutāpaḥ — regret; mahān — very great; āsīt — there was; smarataḥ — remembering; aśubham — all the inglorious activities; ātmanaḥ — done by himself.

Translation
After hearing the discourses between the Yamadūtas and the Viṣṇudūtas, Ajāmila could understand the religious principles that act under the three modes of material nature. These principles are mentioned in the three Vedas. He could also understand the transcendental religious principles, which are above the modes of material nature and which concern the relationship between the living being and the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Furthermore, Ajāmila heard glorification of the name, fame, qualities and pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He thus became a perfectly pure devotee. He could then remember his past sinful activities, which he greatly regretted having performed.

Text 26
अहो मे परमं कष्टमभूदविजितात्मन: ।
येन विप्लावितं ब्रह्म वृषल्यां जायतात्मना ॥ २६ ॥
aho me paramaṁ kaṣṭam
abhūd avijitātmanaḥ
yena viplāvitaṁ brahma
vṛṣalyāṁ jāyatātmanā
Synonyms
aho — alas; me — my; paramam — extreme; kaṣṭam — miserable condition; abhūt — became; avijita-ātmanaḥ — because my senses were uncontrolled; yena — by which; viplāvitam — destroyed; brahma — all my brahminical qualifications; vṛṣalyām — through a śūdrāṇī, a maidservant; jāyatā — being born; ātmanā — by me.

Translation
Ajāmila said: Alas, being a servant of my senses, how degraded I became! I fell down from my position as a duly qualified brāhmaṇa and begot children in the womb of a prostitute.

Text 27
धिङ्‌मां विगर्हितं सद्भ‍िर्दुष्कृतं कुलकज्जलम् ।
हित्वा बालां सतीं योऽहं सुरापीमसतीमगाम् ॥ २७ ॥
dhiṅ māṁ vigarhitaṁ sadbhir
duṣkṛtaṁ kula-kajjalam
hitvā bālāṁ satīṁ yo ’haṁ
surā-pīm asatīm agām
Synonyms
dhik mām — all condemnation upon me; vigarhitam — condemned; sadbhiḥ — by honest men; duṣkṛtam — who has committed sinful acts; kula-kajjalam — who has defamed the family tradition; hitvā — giving up; bālām — a young wife; satīm — chaste; yaḥ — who; aham — I; surā-pīm — with a woman accustomed to drinking wine; asatīm — unchaste; agām — I had sexual intercourse.

Translation
Alas, all condemnation upon me! I acted so sinfully that I degraded my family tradition. Indeed, I gave up my chaste and beautiful young wife to have sexual intercourse with a fallen prostitute accustomed to drinking wine. All condemnation upon me!

Text 28
वृद्धावनाथौ पितरौ नान्यबन्धू तपस्विनौ ।
अहो मयाधुना त्यक्तावकृतज्ञेन नीचवत् ॥ २८ ॥
vṛddhāv anāthau pitarau
nānya-bandhū tapasvinau
aho mayādhunā tyaktāv
akṛtajñena nīcavat
Synonyms
vṛddhau — old; anāthau — who had no other person to look after their comforts; pitarau — my father and mother; na anya-bandhū — who had no other friend; tapasvinau — who underwent great difficulties; aho — alas; mayā — by me; adhunā — at that moment; tyaktau — were given up; akṛta-jñena — ungrateful; nīca-vat — like the most abominable low-class person.

Translation
My father and mother were old and had no other son or friend to look after them. Because I did not take care of them, they lived with great difficulty. Alas, like an abominable lower-class man, I ungratefully left them in that condition.

Text 29
सोऽहं व्यक्तं पतिष्यामि नरके भृशदारुणे ।
धर्मघ्ना: कामिनो यत्र विन्दन्ति यमयातना: ॥ २९ ॥
so ’haṁ vyaktaṁ patiṣyāmi
narake bhṛśa-dāruṇe
dharma-ghnāḥ kāmino yatra
vindanti yama-yātanāḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — such a person; aham — I; vyaktam — it is now clear; patiṣyāmi — will fall down; narake — in hell; bhṛśa-dāruṇe — most miserable; dharma-ghnāḥ — they who break the principles of religion; kāminaḥ — who are too lusty; yatra — where; vindanti — undergo; yama-yātanāḥ — the miserable conditions imposed by Yamarāja.

Translation
It is now clear that as a consequence of such activities, a sinful person like me must be thrown into hellish conditions meant for those who have broken religious principles and must there suffer extreme miseries.

Text 30
किमिदं स्वप्न आहो स्वित् साक्षाद् द‍ृष्टमिहाद्भ‍ुतम् ।
क्‍व याता अद्य ते ये मां व्यकर्षन् पाशपाणय: ॥ ३० ॥
kim idaṁ svapna āho svit
sākṣād dṛṣṭam ihādbhutam
kva yātā adya te ye māṁ
vyakarṣan pāśa-pāṇayaḥ
Synonyms
kim — whether; idam — this; svapne — in a dream; āho svit — or; sākṣāt — directly; dṛṣṭam — seen; iha — here; adbhutam — wonderful; kva — where; yātāḥ — have gone; adya — now; te — all of them; ye — who; mām — me; vyakarṣan — were dragging; pāśa-pāṇayaḥ — with ropes in their hands.

Translation
Was this a dream I saw, or was it reality? I saw fearsome men with ropes in their hands coming to arrest me and drag me away. Where have they gone?

Text 31
अथ ते क्‍व गता: सिद्धाश्चत्वारश्चारुदर्शना: ।
व्यामोचयन्नीयमानं बद्ध्वा पाशैरधो भुव: ॥ ३१ ॥
atha te kva gatāḥ siddhāś
catvāraś cāru-darśanāḥ
vyāmocayan nīyamānaṁ
baddhvā pāśair adho bhuvaḥ
Synonyms
atha — thereafter; te — those persons; kva — where; gatāḥ — went; siddhāḥ — liberated; catvāraḥ — four personalities; cāru-darśanāḥ — extremely beautiful to see; vyāmocayan — they released; nīyamānam — me, who was being carried away; baddhvā — being arrested; pāśaiḥ — by ropes; adhaḥ bhuvaḥ — downward to the hellish region.

Translation
And where have those four liberated and very beautiful persons gone who released me from arrest and saved me from being dragged down to the hellish regions?

Text 32
अथापि मे दुर्भगस्य विबुधोत्तमदर्शने ।
भवितव्यं मङ्गलेन येनात्मा मे प्रसीदति ॥ ३२ ॥
athāpi me durbhagasya
vibudhottama-darśane
bhavitavyaṁ maṅgalena
yenātmā me prasīdati
Synonyms
atha — therefore; api — although; me — of me; durbhagasya — so unfortunate; vibudha-uttama — exalted devotees; darśane — because of seeing; bhavitavyam — there must be; maṅgalena — auspicious activities; yena — by which; ātmā — self; me — my; prasīdati — actually becomes happy.

Translation
I am certainly most abominable and unfortunate to have merged in an ocean of sinful activities, but nevertheless, because of my previous spiritual activities, I could see those four exalted personalities who came to rescue me. Now I feel exceedingly happy because of their visit.

Text 33
अन्यथा म्रियमाणस्य नाशुचेर्वृषलीपते: ।
वैकुण्ठनामग्रहणं जिह्वा वक्तुमिहार्हति ॥ ३३ ॥
anyathā mriyamāṇasya
nāśucer vṛṣalī-pateḥ
vaikuṇṭha-nāma-grahaṇaṁ
jihvā vaktum ihārhati
Synonyms
anyathā — otherwise; mriyamāṇasya — of a person who is just ready for death; na — not; aśuceḥ — most unclean; vṛṣalī-pateḥ — the keeper of a prostitute; vaikuṇṭha — of the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha; nāma-grahaṇam — the chanting of the holy name; jihvā — the tongue; vaktum — to speak; iha — in this situation; arhati — is able.

Translation
Were it not for my past devotional service, how could I, a most unclean keeper of a prostitute, have gotten an opportunity to chant the holy name of Vaikuṇṭhapati when I was just ready to die? Certainly it could not have been possible.

Text 34
क्‍व चाहं कितव: पापो ब्रह्मघ्नो निरपत्रप: ।
क्‍व च नारायणेत्येतद्भ‍गवन्नाम मङ्गलम् ॥ ३४ ॥
kva cāhaṁ kitavaḥ pāpo
brahma-ghno nirapatrapaḥ
kva ca nārāyaṇety etad
bhagavan-nāma maṅgalam
Synonyms
kva — where; ca — also; aham — I; kitavaḥ — a cheater; pāpaḥ — all sins personified; brahma-ghnaḥ — the killer of my brahminical culture; nirapatrapaḥ — shameless; kva — where; ca — also; nārāyaṇa — Nārāyaṇa; iti — thus; etat — this; bhagavat-nāma — the holy name of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; maṅgalam — all-auspicious.

Translation
Ajāmila continued: I am a shameless cheater who has killed his brahminical culture. Indeed, I am sin personified. Where am I in comparison to the all-auspicious chanting of the holy name of Lord Nārāyaṇa?

Text 35
सोऽहं तथा यतिष्यामि यतचित्तेन्द्रियानिल: ।
यथा न भूय आत्मानमन्धे तमसि मज्जये ॥ ३५ ॥
so ’haṁ tathā yatiṣyāmi
yata-cittendriyānilaḥ
yathā na bhūya ātmānam
andhe tamasi majjaye
Synonyms
saḥ — such a person; aham — I; tathā — in that way; yatiṣyāmi — I shall endeavor; yata-citta-indriya — controlling the mind and senses; anilaḥ — and the internal airs; yathā — so that; na — not; bhūyaḥ — again; ātmānam — my soul; andhe — in darkness; tamasi — in ignorance; majjaye — I drown.

Translation
I am such a sinful person, but since I have now gotten this opportunity, I must completely control my mind, life and senses and always engage in devotional service so that I may not fall again into the deep darkness and ignorance of material life.

Texts 36-37
विमुच्य तमिमं बन्धमविद्याकामकर्मजम् ।
सर्वभूतसुहृच्छान्तो मैत्र: करुण आत्मवान् ॥ ३६ ॥
मोचये ग्रस्तमात्मानं योषिन्मय्यात्ममायया ।
विक्रीडितो ययैवाहं क्रीडामृग इवाधम: ॥ ३७ ॥
vimucya tam imaṁ bandham
avidyā-kāma-karmajam
sarva-bhūta-suhṛc chānto
maitraḥ karuṇa ātmavān
mocaye grastam ātmānaṁ
yoṣin-mayyātma-māyayā
vikrīḍito yayaivāhaṁ
krīḍā-mṛga ivādhamaḥ
Synonyms
vimucya — having become free from; tam — that; imam — this; bandham — bondage; avidyā — due to ignorance; kāma — due to lusty desire; karma-jam — caused by activities; sarva-bhūta — of all living entities; suhṛt — friend; śāntaḥ — very peaceful; maitraḥ — friendly; karuṇaḥ — merciful; ātma-vān — self-realized; mocaye — I shall disentangle; grastam — encaged; ātmānam — my soul; yoṣit-mayyā — in the form of woman; ātma-māyayā — by the illusory energy of the Lord; vikrīḍitaḥ — played with; yayā — by which; eva — certainly; aham — I; krīḍā-mṛgaḥ — a controlled animal; iva — like; adhamaḥ — so fallen.

Translation
Because of identifying oneself with the body, one is subjected to desires for sense gratification, and thus one engages in many different types of pious and impious action. This is what constitutes material bondage. Now I shall disentangle myself from my material bondage, which has been caused by the Supreme Personality of Godhead’s illusory energy in the form of a woman. Being a most fallen soul, I was victimized by the illusory energy and have become like a dancing dog led around by a woman’s hand. Now I shall give up all lusty desires and free myself from this illusion. I shall become a merciful, well-wishing friend to all living entities and always absorb myself in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Text 38
ममाहमिति देहादौ हित्वामिथ्यार्थधीर्मतिम् ।
धास्ये मनो भगवति शुद्धं तत्कीर्तनादिभि: ॥ ३८ ॥
mamāham iti dehādau
hitvāmithyārtha-dhīr matim
dhāsye mano bhagavati
śuddhaṁ tat-kīrtanādibhiḥ
Synonyms
mama — my; aham — I; iti — thus; deha-ādau — in the body and things related to the body; hitvā — giving up; amithyā — not false; artha — on values; dhīḥ — with my consciousness; matim — the attitude; dhāsye — I shall engage; manaḥ — my mind; bhagavati — on the Supreme Personality of Godhead; śuddham — pure; tat — His name; kīrtana-ādibhiḥ — by chanting, hearing and so on.

Translation
Simply because I chanted the holy name of the Lord in the association of devotees, my heart is now becoming purified. Therefore I shall not fall victim again to the false lures of material sense gratification. Now that I have become fixed in the Absolute Truth, henceforward I shall not identify myself with the body. I shall give up false conceptions of “I” and “mine” and fix my mind on the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa.

Text 39
इति जातसुनिर्वेद: क्षणसङ्गेन साधुषु ।
गङ्गाद्वारमुपेयाय मुक्तसर्वानुबन्धन: ॥ ३९ ॥
iti jāta-sunirvedaḥ
kṣaṇa-saṅgena sādhuṣu
gaṅgā-dvāram upeyāya
mukta-sarvānubandhanaḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus; jāta-sunirvedaḥ — (Ajāmila) who had become detached from the material conception of life; kṣaṇa-saṅgena — by a moment’s association; sādhuṣu — with devotees; gaṅgā-dvāram — to Hardwar (hari-dvāra), the doorway to Hari (because the Ganges begins there, Hardwar is also called gaṅgā-dvāra); upeyāya — went; mukta — being freed from; sarva-anubandhanaḥ — all kinds of material bondage.

Translation
Because of a moment’s association with devotees [the Viṣṇudūtas], Ajāmila detached himself from the material conception of life with determination. Thus freed from all material attraction, he immediately started for Hardwar.

Text 40
स तस्मिन् देवसदन आसीनो योगमास्थित: ।
प्रत्याहृतेन्द्रियग्रामो युयोज मन आत्मनि ॥ ४० ॥
sa tasmin deva-sadana
āsīno yogam āsthitaḥ
pratyāhṛtendriya-grāmo
yuyoja mana ātmani
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Ajāmila); tasmin — at that place (Hardwar); deva-sadane — in one Viṣṇu temple; āsīnaḥ — being situated; yogam āsthitaḥ — performed bhakti-yoga; pratyāhṛta — withdrawn from all activities of sense gratification; indriya-grāmaḥ — his senses; yuyoja — he fixed; manaḥ — the mind; ātmani — on the self or the Supersoul, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
In Hardwar, Ajāmila took shelter at a Viṣṇu temple, where he executed the process of bhakti-yoga. He controlled his senses and fully applied his mind in the service of the Lord.

Text 41
ततो गुणेभ्य आत्मानं वियुज्यात्मसमाधिना ।
युयुजे भगवद्धाम्नि ब्रह्मण्यनुभवात्मनि ॥ ४१ ॥
tato guṇebhya ātmānaṁ
viyujyātma-samādhinā
yuyuje bhagavad-dhāmni
brahmaṇy anubhavātmani
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; guṇebhyaḥ — from the modes of material nature; ātmānam — the mind; viyujya — detaching; ātma-samādhinā — by being fully engaged in devotional service; yuyuje — engaged; bhagavat-dhāmni — in the form of the Lord; brahmaṇi — which is Parabrahman (not idol worship); anubhava-ātmani — which is always thought of (beginning from the lotus feet and gradually progressing upward).

Translation
Ajāmila fully engaged in devotional service. Thus he detached his mind from the process of sense gratification and became fully absorbed in thinking of the form of the Lord.

Text 42
यर्ह्युपारतधीस्तस्मिन्नद्राक्षीत्पुरुषान् पुर: ।
उपलभ्योपलब्धान् प्राग्ववन्दे शिरसा द्विज: ॥ ४२ ॥
yarhy upārata-dhīs tasminn
adrākṣīt puruṣān puraḥ
upalabhyopalabdhān prāg
vavande śirasā dvijaḥ
Synonyms
yarhi — when; upārata-dhīḥ — his mind and intelligence were fixed; tasmin — at that time; adrākṣīt — had seen; puruṣān — the persons (the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu); puraḥ — before him; upalabhya — getting; upalabdhān — who were gotten; prāk — previously; vavande — offered obeisances; śirasā — by the head; dvijaḥ — the brāhmaṇa.

Translation
When his intelligence and mind were fixed upon the form of the Lord, the brāhmaṇa Ajāmila once again saw before him four celestial persons. He could understand that they were those he had seen previously, and thus he offered them his obeisances by bowing down before them.

Text 43
हित्वा कलेवरं तीर्थे गङ्गायां दर्शनादनु ।
सद्य: स्वरूपं जगृहे भगवत्पार्श्ववर्तिनाम् ॥ ४३ ॥
hitvā kalevaraṁ tīrthe
gaṅgāyāṁ darśanād anu
sadyaḥ svarūpaṁ jagṛhe
bhagavat-pārśva-vartinām
Synonyms
hitvā — giving up; kalevaram — the material body; tīrthe — in the holy place; gaṅgāyām — on the bank of the Ganges; darśanāt anu — after seeing; sadyaḥ — immediately; sva-rūpam — his original spiritual form; jagṛhe — he assumed; bhagavat-pārśva-vartinām — which is fit for an associate of the Lord.

Translation
Upon seeing the Viṣṇudūtas, Ajāmila gave up his material body at Hardwar on the bank of the Ganges. He regained his original spiritual body, which was a body appropriate for an associate of the Lord.

Text 44
साकं विहायसा विप्रो महापुरुषकिङ्करै: ।
हैमं विमानमारुह्य ययौ यत्र श्रिय: पति: ॥ ४४ ॥
sākaṁ vihāyasā vipro
mahāpuruṣa-kiṅkaraiḥ
haimaṁ vimānam āruhya
yayau yatra śriyaḥ patiḥ
Synonyms
sākam — along; vihāyasā — by the path in the sky, or the airways; vipraḥ — the brāhmaṇa (Ajāmila); mahāpuruṣa-kiṅkaraiḥ — with the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu; haimam — made of gold; vimānam — an airplane; āruhya — boarding; yayau — went; yatra — where; śriyaḥ patiḥ — Lord Viṣṇu, the husband of the goddess of fortune.

Translation
Accompanied by the order carriers of Lord Viṣṇu, Ajāmila boarded an airplane made of gold. Passing through the airways, he went directly to the abode of Lord Viṣṇu, the husband of the goddess of fortune.

Text 45
एवं स विप्लावितसर्वधर्मा
दास्या: पति: पतितो गर्ह्यकर्मणा ।
निपात्यमानो निरये हतव्रत:
सद्यो विमुक्तो भगवन्नाम गृह्णन् ॥ ४५ ॥
evaṁ sa viplāvita-sarva-dharmā
dāsyāḥ patiḥ patito garhya-karmaṇā
nipātyamāno niraye hata-vrataḥ
sadyo vimukto bhagavan-nāma gṛhṇan
Synonyms
evam — in this way; saḥ — he (Ajāmila); viplāvita-sarva-dharmāḥ — who gave up all religious principles; dāsyāḥ patiḥ — the husband of a prostitute; patitaḥ — fallen; garhya-karmaṇā — by being engaged in abominable activities; nipātyamānaḥ — falling; niraye — in hellish life; hata-vrataḥ — who broke all his vows; sadyaḥ — immediately; vimuktaḥ — liberated; bhagavat-nāma — the holy name of the Lord; gṛhṇan — chanting.

Translation
Ajāmila was a brāhmaṇa who because of bad association had given up all brahminical culture and religious principles. Becoming most fallen, he stole, drank and performed other abominable acts. He even kept a prostitute. Thus he was destined to be carried away to hell by the order carriers of Yamarāja, but he was immediately rescued simply by a glimpse of the chanting of the holy name Nārāyaṇa.

Text 46
नात: परं कर्मनिबन्धकृन्तनं
मुमुक्षतां तीर्थपदानुकीर्तनात् ।
न यत्पुन: कर्मसु सज्जते मनो
रजस्तमोभ्यां कलिलं ततोऽन्यथा ॥ ४६ ॥
nātaḥ paraṁ karma-nibandha-kṛntanaṁ
mumukṣatāṁ tīrtha-pādānukīrtanāt
na yat punaḥ karmasu sajjate mano
rajas-tamobhyāṁ kalilaṁ tato ’nyathā
Synonyms
na — not; ataḥ — therefore; param — better means; karma-nibandha — the obligation to suffer or undergo tribulations as a result of fruitive activities; kṛntanam — that which can completely cut off; mumukṣatām — of persons desiring to get out of the clutches of material bondage; tīrtha-pāda — about the Supreme Personality of Godhead, at whose feet all the holy places stand; anukīrtanāt — than constantly chanting under the direction of the bona fide spiritual master; na — not; yat — because; punaḥ — again; karmasu — in fruitive activities; sajjate — becomes attached; manaḥ — the mind; rajaḥ-tamobhyām — by the modes of passion and ignorance; kalilam — contaminated; tataḥ — thereafter; anyathā — by any other means.

Translation
Therefore one who desires freedom from material bondage should adopt the process of chanting and glorifying the name, fame, form and pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, at whose feet all the holy places stand. One cannot derive the proper benefit from other methods, such as pious atonement, speculative knowledge and meditation in mystic yoga, because even after following such methods one takes to fruitive activities again, unable to control his mind, which is contaminated by the base qualities of nature, namely passion and ignorance.

Texts 47-48
य एतं परमं गुह्यमितिहासमघापहम् ।
श‍ृणुयाच्छ्रद्धया युक्तो यश्च भक्त्यानुकीर्तयेत् ॥ ४७ ॥
न वै स नरकं याति नेक्षितो यमकिङ्करै: ।
यद्यप्यमङ्गलो मर्त्यो विष्णुलोके महीयते ॥ ४८ ॥
ya etaṁ paramaṁ guhyam
itihāsam aghāpaham
śṛṇuyāc chraddhayā yukto
yaś ca bhaktyānukīrtayet
na vai sa narakaṁ yāti
nekṣito yama-kiṅkaraiḥ
yady apy amaṅgalo martyo
viṣṇu-loke mahīyate
Synonyms
yaḥ — anyone who; etam — this; paramam — very; guhyam — confidential; itihāsam — historical narration; agha-apaham — which frees one from all reactions to sins; śṛṇuyāt — hears; śraddhayā — with faith; yuktaḥ — endowed; yaḥ — one who; ca — also; bhaktyā — with great devotion; anukīrtayet — repeats; na — not; vai — indeed; saḥ — such a person; narakam — to hell; yāti — goes; na — not; īkṣitaḥ — is observed; yama-kiṅkaraiḥ — by the order carriers of Yamarāja; yadi api — although; amaṅgalaḥ — inauspicious; martyaḥ — a living entity with a material body; viṣṇu-loke — in the spiritual world; mahīyate — is welcomed and respectfully received.

Translation
Because this very confidential historical narration has the potency to vanquish all sinful reactions, one who hears or describes it with faith and devotion is no longer doomed to hellish life, regardless of his having a material body and regardless of how sinful he may have been. Indeed, the Yamadūtas, who carry out the orders of Yamarāja, do not approach him even to see him. After giving up his body, he returns home, back to Godhead, where he is very respectfully received and worshiped.

Text 49
म्रियमाणो हरेर्नाम गृणन् पुत्रोपचारितम् ।
अजामिलोऽप्यगाद्धाम किमुत श्रद्धया गृणन् ॥ ४९ ॥
mriyamāṇo harer nāma
gṛṇan putropacāritam
ajāmilo ’py agād dhāma
kim uta śraddhayā gṛṇan
Synonyms
mriyamāṇaḥ — at the time of death; hareḥ nāma — the holy name of Hari; gṛṇan — chanting; putra-upacāritam — indicating his son; ajāmilaḥ — Ajāmila; api — even; agāt — went; dhāma — to the spiritual world; kim uta — what to speak of; śraddhayā — with faith and love; gṛṇan — chanting.

Translation
While suffering at the time of death, Ajāmila chanted the holy name of the Lord, and although the chanting was directed toward his son, he nevertheless returned home, back to Godhead. Therefore if one faithfully and inoffensively chants the holy name of the Lord, where is the doubt that he will return to Godhead?