Text 1
श्रीराजोवाच
कस्य हेतो: परित्यक्ता आचार्येणात्मन: सुरा: ।
एतदाचक्ष्व भगवञ्छिष्याणामक्रमं गुरौ ॥ १ ॥
śrī-rājovāca
kasya hetoḥ parityaktā
ācāryeṇātmanaḥ surāḥ
etad ācakṣva bhagavañ
chiṣyāṇām akramaṁ gurau
Synonyms
śrī-rājā uvāca — the King inquired; kasya hetoḥ — for what reason; parityaktāḥ — rejected; ācāryeṇa — by the spiritual master, Bṛhaspati; ātmanaḥ — of himself; surāḥ — all the demigods; etat — this; ācakṣva — kindly describe; bhagavan — O great sage (Śukadeva Gosvāmī); śiṣyāṇām — of the disciples; akramam — the offense; gurau — unto the spiritual master.

Translation
Mahārāja Parīkṣit inquired from Śukadeva Gosvāmī: O great sage, why did the spiritual master of the demigods, Bṛhaspati, reject the demigods, who were his own disciples? What offense did the demigods commit against their spiritual master? Please describe to me this incident.

Texts 2-8
श्रीबादरायणिरुवाच
इन्द्रस्त्रिभुवनैश्वर्यमदोल्लङ्घितसत्पथ: ।
मरुद्भ‍िर्वसुभी रुद्रैरादित्यैर्ऋभुभिर्नृप ॥ २ ॥
विश्वेदेवैश्च साध्यैश्च नासत्याभ्यां परिश्रित: ।
सिद्धचारणगन्धर्वैर्मुनिभिर्ब्रह्मवादिभि: ॥ ३ ॥
विद्याधराप्सरोभिश्च किन्नरै: पतगोरगै: ।
निषेव्यमाणो मघवान्स्तूयमानश्च भारत ॥ ४ ॥
उपगीयमानो ललितमास्थानाध्यासनाश्रित: ।
पाण्डुरेणातपत्रेण चन्द्रमण्डलचारुणा ॥ ५ ॥
युक्तश्चान्यै: पारमेष्ठ्यैश्चामरव्यजनादिभि: ।
विराजमान: पौलम्या सहार्धासनया भृशम् ॥ ६ ॥
स यदा परमाचार्यं देवानामात्मनश्च ह ।
नाभ्यनन्दत सम्प्राप्तं प्रत्युत्थानासनादिभि: ॥ ७ ॥
वाचस्पतिं मुनिवरं सुरासुरनमस्कृतम् ।
नोच्चचालासनादिन्द्र: पश्यन्नपि सभागतम् ॥ ८ ॥
śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca
indras tribhuvanaiśvarya-
madollaṅghita-satpathaḥ
marudbhir vasubhī rudrair
ādityair ṛbhubhir nṛpa
viśvedevaiś ca sādhyaiś ca
nāsatyābhyāṁ pariśritaḥ
siddha-cāraṇa-gandharvair
munibhir brahmavādibhiḥ
vidyādharāpsarobhiś ca
kinnaraiḥ patagoragaiḥ
niṣevyamāṇo maghavān
stūyamānaś ca bhārata
upagīyamāno lalitam
āsthānādhyāsanāśritaḥ
pāṇḍureṇātapatreṇa
candra-maṇḍala-cāruṇā
yuktaś cānyaiḥ pārameṣṭhyaiś
cāmara-vyajanādibhiḥ
virājamānaḥ paulamyā
sahārdhāsanayā bhṛśam
sa yadā paramācāryaṁ
devānām ātmanaś ca ha
nābhyanandata samprāptaṁ
pratyutthānāsanādibhiḥ
vācaspatiṁ muni-varaṁ
surāsura-namaskṛtam
noccacālāsanād indraḥ
paśyann api sabhāgatam
Synonyms
śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied; indraḥ — King Indra; tri-bhuvana-aiśvarya — because of possessing all the material opulences of the three worlds; mada — due to pride; ullaṅghita — who has transgressed; sat-pathaḥ — the path of Vedic civilization; marudbhiḥ — by the wind demigods, known as the Maruts; vasubhiḥ — by the eight Vasus; rudraiḥ — by the eleven Rudras; ādityaiḥ — by the Ādityas; ṛbhubhiḥ — by the Ṛbhus; nṛpa — O King; viśvedevaiḥ ca — and by the Viśvadevas; sādhyaiḥ — by the Sādhyas; ca — also; nāsatyābhyām — by the two Aśvinī-kumāras; pariśritaḥ — surrounded; siddha — by the inhabitants of Siddhaloka; cāraṇa — the Cāraṇas; gandharvaiḥ — and the Gandharvas; munibhiḥ — by the great sages; brahmavādibhiḥ — by greatly learned impersonalist scholars; vidyādhara-apsarobhiḥ ca — and by the Vidyādharas and Apsarās; kinnaraiḥ — by the Kinnaras; pataga-uragaiḥ — by the Patagas (birds) and Uragas (snakes); niṣevyamāṇaḥ — being served; maghavān — King Indra; stūyamānaḥ ca — and being offered prayers; bhārata — O Mahārāja Parīkṣit; upagīyamānaḥ — being sung before; lalitam — very sweetly; āsthāna — in his assembly; adhyāsana-āśritaḥ — situated on the throne; pāṇḍureṇa — white; ātapatreṇa — with an umbrella over the head; candra-maṇḍala-cāruṇā — as beautiful as the circle of the moon; yuktaḥ — endowed; ca anyaiḥ — and by other; pārameṣṭhyaiḥ — symptoms of an exalted king; cāmara — by yak-tail; vyajana-ādibhiḥ — fans and other paraphernalia; virājamānaḥ — shining; paulamyā — his wife, Śacī; saha — with; ardha-āsanayā — who occupied half the throne; bhṛśam — greatly; saḥ — he (Indra); yadā — when; parama-ācāryam — the most exalted ācārya, spiritual master; devānām — of all the demigods; ātmanaḥ — of himself; ca — and; ha — indeed; na — not; abhyanandata — welcomed; samprāptam — having appeared in the assembly; pratyutthāna — by getting up from the throne; āsana-ādibhiḥ — and by a seat and other greetings; vācaspatim — the priest of the demigods, Bṛhaspati; muni-varam — the best of all the sages; sura-asura-namaskṛtam — who is respected by both the demigods and the asuras; na — not; uccacāla — did get up; āsanāt — from the throne; indraḥ — Indra; paśyan api — although seeing; sabhā-āgatam — entering the assembly.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, once upon a time, the King of heaven, Indra, being extremely proud because of his great opulence of the three worlds, transgressed the law of Vedic etiquette. Seated on his throne, he was surrounded by the Maruts, Vasus, Rudras, Ādityas, Ṛbhus, Viśvadevas, Sādhyas, Aśvinī-kumāras, Siddhas, Cāraṇas and Gandharvas and by great saintly persons. Also surrounding him were the Vidyādharas, Apsarās, Kinnaras, Patagas [birds] and Uragas [snakes]. All of them were offering Indra their respects and services, and the Apsarās and Gandharvas were dancing and singing with very sweet musical instruments. Over Indra’s head was a white umbrella as effulgent as the full moon. Fanned by yak-tail whisks and served with all the paraphernalia of a great king, Indra was sitting with his wife, Śacīdevī, who occupied half the throne, when the great sage Bṛhaspati appeared in that assembly. Bṛhaspati, the best of the sages, was the spiritual master of Indra and the demigods and was respected by the demigods and demons alike. Nevertheless, although Indra saw his spiritual master before him, he did not rise from his own seat or offer a seat to his spiritual master, nor did Indra offer him a respectful welcome. Indra did nothing to show him respect.

Text 9
ततो निर्गत्य सहसा कविराङ्गिरस: प्रभु: ।
आययौ स्वगृहं तूष्णीं विद्वान्श्रीमदविक्रियाम् ॥ ९ ॥
tato nirgatya sahasā
kavir āṅgirasaḥ prabhuḥ
āyayau sva-gṛhaṁ tūṣṇīṁ
vidvān śrī-mada-vikriyām
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; nirgatya — going out; sahasā — suddenly; kaviḥ — the great learned sage; āṅgirasaḥ — Bṛhaspati; prabhuḥ — the master of the demigods; āyayau — returned; sva-gṛham — to his home; tūṣṇīm — being silent; vidvān — having known; śrī-mada-vikriyām — deterioration because of madness due to opulence.

Translation
Bṛhaspati knew everything that would happen in the future. Seeing Indra’s transgression of etiquette, he completely understood that Indra was puffed up by his material opulence. Although able to curse Indra, he did not do so. Instead, he left the assembly and in silence returned to his home.

Text 10
तर्ह्येव प्रतिबुध्येन्द्रो गुरुहेलनमात्मन: ।
गर्हयामास सदसि स्वयमात्मानमात्मना ॥ १० ॥
tarhy eva pratibudhyendro
guru-helanam ātmanaḥ
garhayām āsa sadasi
svayam ātmānam ātmanā
Synonyms
tarhi — then, immediately; eva — indeed; pratibudhya — realizing; indraḥ — King Indra; guru-helanam — disrespect to the spiritual master; ātmanaḥ — his own; garhayām āsa — reproached; sadasi — in that assembly; svayam — personally; ātmānam — himself; ātmanā — by himself.

Translation
Indra, the King of heaven, could immediately understand his mistake. Realizing he had disrespected his spiritual master, he condemned himself in the presence of all the members of the assembly.

Text 11
अहो बत मयासाधु कृतं वै दभ्रबुद्धिना ।
यन्मयैश्वर्यमत्तेन गुरु: सदसि कात्कृत: ॥ ११ ॥
aho bata mayāsādhu
kṛtaṁ vai dabhra-buddhinā
yan mayaiśvarya-mattena
guruḥ sadasi kātkṛtaḥ
Synonyms
aho — alas; bata — indeed; mayā — by me; asādhu — disrespectful; kṛtam — the action done; vai — certainly; dabhra-buddhinā — being of less intelligence; yat — because; mayā — by me; aiśvarya-mattena — being very proud of material opulence; guruḥ — the spiritual master; sadasi — in this assembly; kāt-kṛtaḥ — mistreated.

Translation
Alas, what a regrettable deed I have committed because of my lack of intelligence and my pride in my material opulences. I failed to show respect to my spiritual master when he entered this assembly, and thus I have insulted him.

Text 12
को गृध्येत्पण्डितो लक्ष्मीं त्रिपिष्टपपतेरपि ।
ययाहमासुरं भावं नीतोऽद्य विबुधेश्वर: ॥ १२ ॥
ko gṛdhyet paṇḍito lakṣmīṁ
tripiṣṭapa-pater api
yayāham āsuraṁ bhāvaṁ
nīto ’dya vibudheśvaraḥ
Synonyms
kaḥ — who; gṛdhyet — would accept; paṇḍitaḥ — a learned man; lakṣmīm — opulences; tri-piṣṭa-pa-pateḥ api — although I am the King of the demigods; yayā — by which; aham — I; āsuram — demoniac; bhāvam — mentality; nītaḥ — carried to; adya — now; vibudha — of the demigods, who are in the mode of goodness; īśvaraḥ — the King.

Translation
Although I am King of the demigods, who are situated in the mode of goodness, I was proud of a little opulence and polluted by false ego. Under the circumstances, who in this world would accept such riches at the risk of falling down? Alas! I condemn my wealth and opulence.

Text 13
य: पारमेष्ठ्यं धिषणमधितिष्ठन्न कञ्चन ।
प्रत्युत्तिष्ठेदिति ब्रूयुर्धर्मं ते न परं विदु: ॥ १३ ॥
yaḥ pārameṣṭhyaṁ dhiṣaṇam
adhitiṣṭhan na kañcana
pratyuttiṣṭhed iti brūyur
dharmaṁ te na paraṁ viduḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — anyone who; pārameṣṭhyam — royal; dhiṣaṇam — throne; adhitiṣṭhan — sitting on; na — not; kañcana — anyone; pratyuttiṣṭhet — should rise before; iti — thus; brūyuḥ — those who say; dharmam — the codes of religion; te — they; na — not; param — higher; viduḥ — know.

Translation
If a person says, “One who is situated on the exalted throne of a king should not stand up to show respect to another king or a brāhmaṇa,” it is to be understood that he does not know the superior religious principles.

Text 14
तेषां कुपथदेष्टृणां पततां तमसि ह्यध: ।
ये श्रद्दध्युर्वचस्ते वै मज्जन्त्यश्मप्लवा इव ॥ १४ ॥
teṣāṁ kupatha-deṣṭṝṇāṁ
patatāṁ tamasi hy adhaḥ
ye śraddadhyur vacas te vai
majjanty aśma-plavā iva
Synonyms
teṣām — of them (the misleaders); ku-patha-deṣṭṝṇām — who show the path of danger; patatām — themselves falling; tamasi — in darkness; hi — indeed; adhaḥ — down; ye — anyone who; śraddadhyuḥ — place faith in; vacaḥ — the words; te — they; vai — indeed; majjanti — sink; aśma-plavāḥ — boats made of stone; iva — like.

Translation
Leaders who have fallen into ignorance and who mislead people by directing them to the path of destruction [as described in the previous verse] are, in effect, boarding a stone boat, and so too are those who blindly follow them. A stone boat would be unable to float and would sink in the water with its passengers. Similarly, those who mislead people go to hell, and their followers go with them.

Text 15
अथाहममराचार्यमगाधधिषणं द्विजम् ।
प्रसादयिष्ये निशठ: शीर्ष्णा तच्चरणं स्पृशन् ॥ १५ ॥
athāham amarācāryam
agādha-dhiṣaṇaṁ dvijam
prasādayiṣye niśaṭhaḥ
śīrṣṇā tac-caraṇaṁ spṛśan
Synonyms
atha — therefore; aham — I; amara-ācāryam — the spiritual master of the demigods; agādha-dhiṣaṇam — whose spiritual knowledge is deep; dvijam — the perfect brāhmaṇa; prasādayiṣye — I shall please; niśaṭhaḥ — without duplicity; śīrṣṇā — with my head; tat-caraṇam — his lotus feet; spṛśan — touching.

Translation
King Indra said: Therefore with great frankness and without duplicity I shall now bow my head at the lotus feet of Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the demigods. Because he is in the mode of goodness, he is fully aware of all knowledge and is the best of the brāhmaṇas. Now I shall touch his lotus feet and offer my obeisances unto him to try to satisfy him.

Text 16
एवं चिन्तयतस्तस्य मघोनो भगवान् गृहात् ।
बृहस्पतिर्गतोऽद‍ृष्टां गतिमध्यात्ममायया ॥ १६ ॥
evaṁ cintayatas tasya
maghono bhagavān gṛhāt
bṛhaspatir gato ’dṛṣṭāṁ
gatim adhyātma-māyayā
Synonyms
evam — thus; cintayataḥ — while thinking very seriously; tasya — he; maghonaḥ — Indra; bhagavān — the most powerful; gṛhāt — from his home; bṛhaspatiḥ — Bṛhaspati; gataḥ — went; adṛṣṭām — invisible; gatim — to a state; adhyātma — due to being highly elevated in spiritual consciousness; māyayā — by his potency.

Translation
While Indra, the King of the demigods, thought in this way and repented in his own assembly, Bṛhaspati, the most powerful spiritual master, understood his mind. Thus he became invisible to Indra and left home, for Bṛhaspati was spiritually more powerful than King Indra.

Text 17
गुरोर्नाधिगत: संज्ञां परीक्षन् भगवान् स्वराट् ।
ध्यायन् धिया सुरैर्युक्त: शर्म नालभतात्मन: ॥ १७ ॥
guror nādhigataḥ saṁjñāṁ
parīkṣan bhagavān svarāṭ
dhyāyan dhiyā surair yuktaḥ
śarma nālabhatātmanaḥ
Synonyms
guroḥ — of his spiritual master; na — not; adhigataḥ — finding; saṁjñām — trace; parīkṣan — searching vigorously all around; bhagavān — the most powerful Indra; svarāṭ — independent; dhyāyan — meditating; dhiyā — by wisdom; suraiḥ — by the demigods; yuktaḥ — surrounded; śarma — peace; na — not; alabhata — obtained; ātmanaḥ — of the mind.

Translation
Although Indra searched vigorously with the assistance of the other demigods, he could not find Bṛhaspati. Then Indra thought, “Alas, my spiritual master has become dissatisfied with me, and now I have no means of achieving good fortune.” Although Indra was surrounded by demigods, he could not find peace of mind.

Text 18
तच्छ्रुत्वैवासुरा: सर्व आश्रित्यौशनसं मतम् ।
देवान् प्रत्युद्यमं चक्रुर्दुर्मदा आततायिन: ॥ १८ ॥
tac chrutvaivāsurāḥ sarva
āśrityauśanasaṁ matam
devān pratyudyamaṁ cakrur
durmadā ātatāyinaḥ
Synonyms
tat śrutvā — hearing that news; eva — indeed; asurāḥ — the demons; sarve — all; āśritya — taking shelter of; auśanasam — of Śukrācārya; matam — the instruction; devān — the demigods; pratyudyamam — action against; cakruḥ — performed; durmadāḥ — not very intelligent; ātatāyinaḥ — equipped with arms for fighting.

Translation
Hearing of the pitiable condition of King Indra, the demons, following the instructions of their guru, Śukrācārya, equipped themselves with weapons and declared war against the demigods.

Text 19
तैर्विसृष्टेषुभिस्तीक्ष्णैर्निर्भिन्नाङ्गोरुबाहव: ।
ब्रह्माणं शरणं जग्मु: सहेन्द्रा नतकन्धरा: ॥ १९ ॥
tair visṛṣṭeṣubhis tīkṣṇair
nirbhinnāṅgoru-bāhavaḥ
brahmāṇaṁ śaraṇaṁ jagmuḥ
sahendrā nata-kandharāḥ
Synonyms
taiḥ — by them (the demons); visṛṣṭa — thrown; iṣubhiḥ — by the arrows; tīkṣṇaiḥ — very sharp; nirbhinna — pierced all over; aṅga — bodies; uru — thighs; bāhavaḥ — and arms; brahmāṇam — of Lord Brahmā; śaraṇam — the shelter; jagmuḥ — approached; saha-indrāḥ — with King Indra; nata-kandharāḥ — their heads bent downward.

Translation
The demigods’ heads, thighs and arms and the other parts of their bodies were injured by the sharp arrows of the demons. The demigods, headed by Indra, saw no other course than to immediately approach Lord Brahmā with bowed heads for shelter and proper instruction.

Text 20
तांस्तथाभ्यर्दितान्वीक्ष्य भगवानात्मभूरज: ।
कृपया परया देव उवाच परिसान्त्वयन् ॥ २० ॥
tāṁs tathābhyarditān vīkṣya
bhagavān ātmabhūr ajaḥ
kṛpayā parayā deva
uvāca parisāntvayan
Synonyms
tān — them (the demigods); tathā — in that way; abhyarditān — afflicted by the weapons of the demons; vīkṣya — seeing; bhagavān — the most powerful; ātma-bhūḥ — Lord Brahmā; ajaḥ — who was not born like an ordinary human being; kṛpayā — out of causeless mercy; parayā — great; devaḥ — Lord Brahmā; uvāca — said; parisāntvayan — pacifying them.

Translation
When the most powerful Lord Brahmā saw the demigods coming toward him, their bodies gravely injured by the arrows of the demons, he pacified them by his great causeless mercy and spoke as follows.

Text 21
श्रीब्रह्मोवाच
अहो बत सुरश्रेष्ठा ह्यभद्रं व: कृतं महत् ।
ब्रह्मिष्ठं ब्राह्मणं दान्तमैश्वर्यान्नाभ्यनन्दत ॥ २१ ॥
śrī-brahmovāca
aho bata sura-śreṣṭhā
hy abhadraṁ vaḥ kṛtaṁ mahat
brahmiṣṭhaṁ brāhmaṇaṁ dāntam
aiśvaryān nābhyanandata
Synonyms
śrī-brahmā uvāca — Lord Brahmā said; aho — alas; bata — it is very astonishing; sura-śreṣṭhāḥ — O best of the demigods; hi — indeed; abhadram — injustice; vaḥ — by you; kṛtam — done; mahat — great; brahmiṣṭham — a person fully obedient to the Supreme Brahman; brāhmaṇam — a brāhmaṇa; dāntam — who has fully controlled the mind and senses; aiśvaryāt — because of your material opulence; na — not; abhyanandata — welcomed properly.

Translation
Lord Brahmā said: O best of the demigods, unfortunately, because of madness resulting from your material opulence, you failed to receive Bṛhaspati properly when he came to your assembly. Because he is aware of the Supreme Brahman and fully in control of his senses, he is the best of the brāhmaṇas. Therefore it is very astonishing that you have acted impudently toward him.

Text 22
तस्यायमनयस्यासीत् परेभ्यो व: पराभव: ।
प्रक्षीणेभ्य: स्ववैरिभ्य: समृद्धानां च यत्सुरा: ॥ २२ ॥
tasyāyam anayasyāsīt
parebhyo vaḥ parābhavaḥ
prakṣīṇebhyaḥ sva-vairibhyaḥ
samṛddhānāṁ ca yat surāḥ
Synonyms
tasya — that; ayam — this; anayasya — of your ungrateful activity; āsīt — was; parebhyaḥ — by others; vaḥ — of all of you; parābhavaḥ — the defeat; prakṣīṇebhyaḥ — although they were weak; sva-vairibhyaḥ — by your own enemies, who were previously defeated by you; samṛddhānām — being yourselves very opulent; ca — and; yat — which; surāḥ — O demigods.

Translation
Because of your misbehavior toward Bṛhaspati, you have been defeated by the demons. My dear demigods, since the demons were weak, having been defeated by you several times, how else could you, who were so advanced in opulence, be defeated by them?

Text 23
मघवन् द्विषत: पश्य प्रक्षीणान् गुर्वतिक्रमात् ।
सम्प्रत्युपचितान् भूय: काव्यमाराध्य भक्तित: ।
आददीरन्निलयनं ममापि भृगुदेवता: ॥ २३ ॥
maghavan dviṣataḥ paśya
prakṣīṇān gurv-atikramāt
sampraty upacitān bhūyaḥ
kāvyam ārādhya bhaktitaḥ
ādadīran nilayanaṁ
mamāpi bhṛgu-devatāḥ
Synonyms
maghavan — O Indra; dviṣataḥ — your enemies; paśya — just see; prakṣīṇān — being very weak (formerly); guru-atikramāt — because of disrespecting their guru, Śukrācārya; samprati — at the present moment; upacitān — powerful; bhūyaḥ — again; kāvyam — their spiritual master, Śukrācārya; ārādhya — worshiping; bhaktitaḥ — with great devotion; ādadīran — may take away; nilayanam — the abode, Satyaloka; mama — my; api — even; bhṛgu-devatāḥ — who are now strong devotees of Śukrācārya, the disciple of Bhṛgu.

Translation
O Indra, your enemies, the demons, were extremely weak because of their disrespect toward Śukrācārya, but since they have now worshiped Śukrācārya with great devotion, they have again become powerful. By their devotion to Śukrācārya, they have increased their strength so much that now they are even able to easily seize my abode from me.

Text 24
त्रिपिष्टपं किं गणयन्त्यभेद्य-
मन्त्रा भृगूणामनुशिक्षितार्था: ।
न विप्रगोविन्दगवीश्वराणां
भवन्त्यभद्राणि नरेश्वराणाम् ॥ २४ ॥
tripiṣṭapaṁ kiṁ gaṇayanty abhedya-
mantrā bhṛgūṇām anuśikṣitārthāḥ
na vipra-govinda-gav-īśvarāṇāṁ
bhavanty abhadrāṇi nareśvarāṇām
Synonyms
tri-piṣṭa-pam — all the demigods, including Lord Brahmā; kim — what; gaṇayanti — they care for; abhedya-mantrāḥ — whose determination to carry out the orders of the spiritual master is unbreakable; bhṛgūṇām — of the disciples of Bhṛgu Muni like Śukrācārya; anuśikṣita-arthāḥ — deciding to follow the instructions; na — not; vipra — the brāhmaṇas; govinda — the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa; go — the cows; īśvarāṇām — of persons favoring or considering worshipable; bhavanti — are; abhadrāṇi — any misfortunes; nara-īśvarāṇām — or of kings who follow this principle.

Translation
Because of their firm determination to follow the instructions of Śukrācārya, his disciples, the demons, are now unconcerned about the demigods. In fact, kings or others who have determined faith in the mercy of brāhmaṇas, cows and the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, and who always worship these three are always strong in their position.

Text 25
तद्विश्वरूपं भजताशु विप्रं
तपस्विनं त्वाष्ट्रमथात्मवन्तम् ।
सभाजितोऽर्थान् स विधास्यते वो
यदि क्षमिष्यध्वमुतास्य कर्म ॥ २५ ॥
tad viśvarūpaṁ bhajatāśu vipraṁ
tapasvinaṁ tvāṣṭram athātmavantam
sabhājito ’rthān sa vidhāsyate vo
yadi kṣamiṣyadhvam utāsya karma
Synonyms
tat — therefore; viśvarūpam — Viśvarūpa; bhajata — just worship as guru; āśu — immediately; vipram — who is a perfect brāhmaṇa; tapasvinam — undergoing great austerities and penances; tvāṣṭram — the son of Tvaṣṭā; atha — as well as; ātma-vantam — very independent; sabhājitaḥ — being worshiped; arthān — the interests; saḥ — he; vidhāsyate — will execute; vaḥ — of all of you; yadi — if; kṣamiṣyadhvam — you tolerate; uta — indeed; asya — his; karma — activities (to support the Daityas).

Translation
O demigods, I instruct you to approach Viśvarūpa, the son of Tvaṣṭā, and accept him as your guru. He is a pure and very powerful brāhmaṇa undergoing austerity and penances. Pleased by your worship, he will fulfill your desires, provided that you tolerate his being inclined to side with the demons.

Text 26
श्रीशुक उवाच
त एवमुदिता राजन् ब्रह्मणा विगतज्वरा: ।
ऋषिं त्वाष्ट्रमुपव्रज्य परिष्वज्येदमब्रुवन् ॥ २६ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
ta evam uditā rājan
brahmaṇā vigata-jvarāḥ
ṛṣiṁ tvāṣṭram upavrajya
pariṣvajyedam abruvan
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; te — all the demigods; evam — thus; uditāḥ — being advised; rājan — O King Parīkṣit; brahmaṇā — by Lord Brahmā; vigata-jvarāḥ — being relieved from the aggrievement caused by the demons; ṛṣim — the great sage; tvāṣṭram — to the son of Tvaṣṭā; upavrajya — going; pariṣvajya — embracing; idam — this; abruvan — spoke.

Translation
Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: Thus advised by Lord Brahmā and relieved of their anxiety, all the demigods went to the sage Viśvarūpa, the son of Tvaṣṭā. My dear King, they embraced him and spoke as follows.

Text 27
श्रीदेवा ऊचु:
वयं तेऽतिथय: प्राप्ता आश्रमं भद्रमस्तु ते ।
काम: सम्पाद्यतां तात पितृणां समयोचित: ॥ २७ ॥
śrī-devā ūcuḥ
vayaṁ te ’tithayaḥ prāptā
āśramaṁ bhadram astu te
kāmaḥ sampādyatāṁ tāta
pitṝṇāṁ samayocitaḥ
Synonyms
śrī-devāḥ ūcuḥ — the demigods said; vayam — we; te — your; atithayaḥ — guests; prāptāḥ — arrived at; āśramam — your abode; bhadram — good fortune; astu — let there be; te — unto you; kāmaḥ — the desire; sampādyatām — let it be executed; tāta — O darling; pitṝṇām — of us, who are just like your fathers; samayocitaḥ — suitable to the present time.

Translation
The demigods said: Beloved Viśvarūpa, may there be all good fortune for you. We, the demigods, have come to your āśrama as your guests. Please try to fulfill our desires according to the time, since we are on the level of your parents.

Text 28
पुत्राणां हि परो धर्म: पितृशुश्रूषणं सताम् ।
अपि पुत्रवतां ब्रह्मन् किमुत ब्रह्मचारिणाम् ॥ २८ ॥
putrāṇāṁ hi paro dharmaḥ
pitṛ-śuśrūṣaṇaṁ satām
api putravatāṁ brahman
kim uta brahmacāriṇām
Synonyms
putrāṇām — of sons; hi — indeed; paraḥ — superior; dharmaḥ — religious principle; pitṛ-śuśrūṣaṇam — the service of the parents; satām — good; api — even; putra-vatām — of those who have sons; brahman — O dear brāhmaṇa; kim uta — what to speak; brahmacāriṇām — of brahmacārīs.

Translation
O brāhmaṇa, the highest duty of a son, even though he has sons of his own, is to serve his parents, and what to speak of a son who is a brahmacārī?

Texts 29-30
आचार्यो ब्रह्मणो मूर्ति: पिता मूर्ति: प्रजापते: ।
भ्राता मरुत्पतेर्मूर्तिर्माता साक्षात् क्षितेस्तनु: ॥ २९ ॥
दयाया भगिनी मूर्तिर्धर्मस्यात्मातिथि: स्वयम् ।
अग्नेरभ्यागतो मूर्ति: सर्वभूतानि चात्मन: ॥ ३० ॥
ācāryo brahmaṇo mūrtiḥ
pitā mūrtiḥ prajāpateḥ
bhrātā marutpater mūrtir
mātā sākṣāt kṣites tanuḥ
dayāyā bhaginī mūrtir
dharmasyātmātithiḥ svayam
agner abhyāgato mūrtiḥ
sarva-bhūtāni cātmanaḥ
Synonyms
ācāryaḥ — the teacher or spiritual master who instructs Vedic knowledge by his personal behavior; brahmaṇaḥ — of all the Vedas; mūrtiḥ — the personification; pitā — the father; mūrtiḥ — the personification; prajāpateḥ — of Lord Brahmā; bhrātā — the brother; marut-pateḥ mūrtiḥ — the personification of Indra; mātā — the mother; sākṣāt — directly; kṣiteḥ — of the earth; tanuḥ — the body; dayāyāḥ — of mercy; bhaginī — the sister; mūrtiḥ — the personification; dharmasya — of religious principles; ātma — the self; atithiḥ — the guest; svayam — personally; agneḥ — of the fire-god; abhyāgataḥ — the invited guest; mūrtiḥ — the personification; sarva-bhūtāni — all living entities; ca — and; ātmanaḥ — of the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu.

Translation
The ācārya, the spiritual master who teaches all the Vedic knowledge and gives initiation by offering the sacred thread, is the personification of all the Vedas. Similarly, a father personifies Lord Brahmā; a brother, King Indra; a mother, the planet earth; and a sister, mercy. A guest personifies religious principles, an invited guest personifies the demigod Agni, and all living entities personify Lord Viṣṇu, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 31
तस्मात् पितृणामार्तानामार्तिं परपराभवम् ।
तपसापनयंस्तात सन्देशं कर्तुमर्हसि ॥ ३१ ॥
tasmāt pitṝṇām ārtānām
ārtiṁ para-parābhavam
tapasāpanayaṁs tāta
sandeśaṁ kartum arhasi
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; pitṝṇām — of the parents; ārtānām — who are in distress; ārtim — the grief; para-parābhavam — being defeated by the enemies; tapasā — by the strength of your austerities; apanayan — taking away; tāta — O dear son; sandeśam — our desire; kartum arhasi — you deserve to execute.

Translation
Dear son, we have been defeated by our enemies, and therefore we are very much aggrieved. Please mercifully fulfill our desires by relieving our distress through the strength of your austerities. Please fulfill our prayers.

Text 32
वृणीमहे त्वोपाध्यायं ब्रह्मिष्ठं ब्राह्मणं गुरुम् ।
यथाञ्जसा विजेष्याम: सपत्नांस्तव तेजसा ॥ ३२ ॥
vṛṇīmahe tvopādhyāyaṁ
brahmiṣṭhaṁ brāhmaṇaṁ gurum
yathāñjasā vijeṣyāmaḥ
sapatnāṁs tava tejasā
Synonyms
vṛṇīmahe — we choose; tvā — you; upādhyāyam — as teacher and spiritual master; brahmiṣṭham — being perfectly aware of the Supreme Brahman; brāhmaṇam — a qualified brāhmaṇa; gurum — the perfect spiritual master; yathā — so that; añjasā — very easily; vijeṣyāmaḥ — we shall defeat; sapatnān — our rivals; tava — your; tejasā — by the power of austerity.

Translation
Since you are completely aware of the Supreme Brahman, you are a perfect brāhmaṇa, and therefore you are the spiritual master of all orders of life. We accept you as our spiritual master and director so that by the power of your austerity we may easily defeat the enemies who have conquered us.

Text 33
न गर्हयन्ति ह्यर्थेषु यविष्ठाङ्‌घ्य्रभिवादनम् ।
छन्दोभ्योऽन्यत्र न ब्रह्मन् वयो ज्यैष्ठ्यस्य कारणम् ॥ ३३ ॥
na garhayanti hy artheṣu
yaviṣṭhāṅghry-abhivādanam
chandobhyo ’nyatra na brahman
vayo jyaiṣṭhyasya kāraṇam
Synonyms
na — not; garhayanti — forbid; hi — indeed; artheṣu — in acquiring interests; yaviṣṭha-aṅghri — at the lotus feet of a junior; abhivādanam — offering obeisances; chandobhyaḥ — the Vedic mantras; anyatra — apart from; na — not; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; vayaḥ — age; jyaiṣṭhyasya — of seniority; kāraṇam — the cause.

Translation
The demigods continued: Do not fear criticism for being younger than us. Such etiquette does not apply in regard to Vedic mantras. Except in relationship to Vedic mantras, seniority is determined by age, but one may offer respectful obeisances even to a younger person who is advanced in chanting Vedic mantras. Therefore although you are junior in relationship to us, you may become our priest without hesitation.

Text 34
श्रीऋषिरुवाच
अभ्यर्थित: सुरगणै: पौरहित्ये महातपा: ।
स विश्वरूपस्तानाह प्रसन्न: श्लक्ष्णया गिरा ॥ ३४ ॥
śrī-ṛṣir uvāca
abhyarthitaḥ sura-gaṇaiḥ
paurahitye mahā-tapāḥ
sa viśvarūpas tān āha
prasannaḥ ślakṣṇayā girā
Synonyms
śrī-ṛṣiḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued to speak; abhyarthitaḥ — being requested; sura-gaṇaiḥ — by the demigods; paurahitye — in accepting the priesthood; mahā-tapāḥ — highly advanced in austerity and penances; saḥ — he; viśvarūpaḥ — Viśvarūpa; tān — to the demigods; āha — spoke; prasannaḥ — being satisfied; ślakṣṇayā — sweet; girā — with words.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: When all the demigods requested the great Viśvarūpa to be their priest, Viśvarūpa, who was advanced in austerities, was very pleased. He replied to them as follows.

Text 35
श्रीविश्‍वरूप उवाच
विगर्हितं धर्मशीलैर्ब्रह्मवर्चउपव्ययम् ।
कथं नु मद्विधो नाथा लोकेशैरभियाचितम् ।
प्रत्याख्यास्यति तच्छिष्य: स एव स्वार्थ उच्यते ॥ ३५ ॥
śrī-viśvarūpa uvāca
vigarhitaṁ dharma-śīlair
brahmavarca-upavyayam
kathaṁ nu mad-vidho nāthā
lokeśair abhiyācitam
pratyākhyāsyati tac-chiṣyaḥ
sa eva svārtha ucyate
Synonyms
śrī-viśvarūpaḥ uvāca — Śrī Viśvarūpa said; vigarhitam — condemned; dharma-śīlaiḥ — by persons respectful to the religious principles; brahma-varcaḥ — of brahminical strength or power; upavyayam — causes loss; katham — how; nu — indeed; mat-vidhaḥ — a person like me; nāthāḥ — O lords; loka-īśaiḥ — by the ruling powers of different planets; abhiyācitam — request; pratyākhyāsyati — will refuse; tat-śiṣyaḥ — who is on the level of their disciple; saḥ — that; eva — indeed; sva-arthaḥ — real interest; ucyate — is described as.

Translation
Śrī Viśvarūpa said: O demigods, although the acceptance of priesthood is decried as causing the loss of previously acquired brahminical power, how can someone like me refuse to accept your personal request? You are all exalted commanders of the entire universe. I am your disciple and must take many lessons from you. Therefore I cannot refuse you. I must agree for my own benefit.

Text 36
अकिञ्चनानां हि धनं शिलोञ्छनं
तेनेह निर्वर्तितसाधुसत्क्रिय: ।
कथं विगर्ह्यं नु करोम्यधीश्वरा:
पौरोधसं हृष्यति येन दुर्मति: ॥ ३६ ॥
akiñcanānāṁ hi dhanaṁ śiloñchanaṁ
teneha nirvartita-sādhu-satkriyaḥ
kathaṁ vigarhyaṁ nu karomy adhīśvarāḥ
paurodhasaṁ hṛṣyati yena durmatiḥ
Synonyms
akiñcanānām — of persons who have taken to austerities and penances to become detached from worldly possessions; hi — certainly; dhanam — the wealth; śila — the collecting of grains left in the field; uñchanam — and the collecting of grains left in the wholesale marketplace; tena — by that means; iha — here; nirvartita — accomplishing; sādhu — of the exalted devotees; sat-kriyaḥ — all the pious activities; katham — how; vigarhyam — reproachable; nu — indeed; karomi — I shall execute; adhīśvarāḥ — O great governors of the planetary systems; paurodhasam — the duty of priesthood; hṛṣyati — is pleased; yena — by which; durmatiḥ — one who is less intelligent.

Translation
O exalted governors of various planets, the true brāhmaṇa, who has no material possessions, maintains himself by the profession of accepting śiloñchana. In other words, he picks up grains left in the field and on the ground in the wholesale marketplace. By this means, householder brāhmaṇas who actually abide by the principles of austerity and penance maintain themselves and their families and perform all necessary pious activities. A brāhmaṇa who desires to achieve happiness by gaining wealth through professional priesthood must certainly have a very low mind. How shall I accept such priesthood?

Text 37
तथापि न प्रतिब्रूयां गुरुभि: प्रार्थितं कियत् ।
भवतां प्रार्थितं सर्वं प्राणैरर्थैश्च साधये ॥ ३७ ॥
tathāpi na pratibrūyāṁ
gurubhiḥ prārthitaṁ kiyat
bhavatāṁ prārthitaṁ sarvaṁ
prāṇair arthaiś ca sādhaye
Synonyms
tathā api — still; na — not; pratibrūyām — I may refuse; gurubhiḥ — by persons on the level of my spiritual master; prārthitam — request; kiyat — of small value; bhavatām — of all of you; prārthitam — the desire; sarvam — whole; prāṇaiḥ — by my life; arthaiḥ — by my possessions; ca — also; sādhaye — I shall execute.

Translation
All of you are my superiors. Therefore although accepting priesthood is sometimes reproachable, I cannot refuse even a small request from you. I agree to be your priest. I shall fulfill your request by dedicating my life and possessions.

Text 38
श्रीबादरायणिरुवाच
तेभ्य एवं प्रतिश्रुत्य विश्वरूपो महातपा: ।
पौरहित्यं वृतश्चक्रे परमेण समाधिना ॥ ३८ ॥
śrī-bādarāyaṇir uvāca
tebhya evaṁ pratiśrutya
viśvarūpo mahā-tapāḥ
paurahityaṁ vṛtaś cakre
parameṇa samādhinā
Synonyms
śrī-bādarāyaṇiḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; tebhyaḥ — unto them (the demigods); evam — thus; pratiśrutya — promising; viśvarūpaḥ — Viśvarūpa; mahā-tapāḥ — the most exalted personality; paurahityam — the priesthood; vṛtaḥ — surrounded by them; cakre — executed; parameṇa — supreme; samādhinā — with attention.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī continued: O King, after making this promise to the demigods, the exalted Viśvarūpa, surrounded by the demigods, performed the necessary priestly activities with great enthusiasm and attention.

Text 39
सुरद्विषां श्रियं गुप्तामौशनस्यापि विद्यया ।
आच्छिद्यादान्महेन्द्राय वैष्णव्या विद्यया विभु: ॥ ३९ ॥
sura-dviṣāṁ śriyaṁ guptām
auśanasyāpi vidyayā
ācchidyādān mahendrāya
vaiṣṇavyā vidyayā vibhuḥ
Synonyms
sura-dviṣām — of the enemies of the demigods; śriyam — the opulence; guptām — protected; auśanasya — of Śukrācārya; api — although; vidyayā — by the talents; ācchidya — collecting; adāt — delivered; mahā-indrāya — unto King Indra; vaiṣṇavyā — of Lord Viṣṇu; vidyayā — by a prayer; vibhuḥ — the most powerful Viśvarūpa.

Translation
The opulence of the demons, who are generally known as the enemies of the demigods, was protected by the talents and tactics of Śukrācārya, but Viśvarūpa, who was most powerful, composed a protective prayer known as the Nārāyaṇa-kavaca. By this intelligent mantra, he took away the opulence of the demons and gave it to Mahendra, the King of heaven.

Text 40
यया गुप्त: सहस्राक्षो जिग्येऽसुरचमूर्विभु: ।
तां प्राह स महेन्द्राय विश्वरूप उदारधी: ॥ ४० ॥
yayā guptaḥ sahasrākṣo
jigye ’sura-camūr vibhuḥ
tāṁ prāha sa mahendrāya
viśvarūpa udāra-dhīḥ
Synonyms
yayā — by which; guptaḥ — protected; sahasra-akṣaḥ — the thousand-eyed demigod, Indra; jigye — conquered; asura — of the demons; camūḥ — military power; vibhuḥ — becoming very powerful; tām — that; prāha — spoke; saḥ — he; mahendrāya — unto the King of heaven, Mahendra; viśvarūpaḥ — Viśvarūpa; udāra-dhīḥ — very broad-minded.

Translation
Viśvarūpa, who was most liberal, spoke to King Indra [Sahasrākṣa] the secret hymn that protected Indra and conquered the military power of the demons.