Text 1
शौनक उवाच
हत्वा स्वरिक्थस्पृध आततायिनो
युधिष्ठिरो धर्मभृतां वरिष्ठ: ।
सहानुजै: प्रत्यवरुद्धभोजन:
कथं प्रवृत्त: किमकारषीत्तत: ॥ १ ॥
śaunaka uvāca
hatvā svariktha-spṛdha ātatāyino
yudhiṣṭhiro dharma-bhṛtāṁ variṣṭhaḥ
sahānujaiḥ pratyavaruddha-bhojanaḥ
kathaṁ pravṛttaḥ kim akāraṣīt tataḥ
Synonyms
śaunakaḥ uvāca — Śaunaka inquired; hatvā — after killing; svariktha — the legal inheritance; spṛdhaḥ — desiring to usurp; ātatāyinaḥ — the aggressor; yudhiṣṭhiraḥ — King Yudhiṣṭhira; dharma-bhṛtām — of those who strictly follow religious principles; variṣṭhaḥ — greatest; saha-anujaiḥ — with his younger brothers; pratyavaruddha — restricted; bhojanaḥ — acceptance of necessities; katham — how; pravṛttaḥ — engaged; kim — what; akāraṣīt — executed; tataḥ — thereafter.

Translation
Śaunaka Muni asked: After killing his enemies who desired to usurp his rightful inheritance, how did the greatest of all religious men, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, assisted by his brothers, rule his subjects? Surely he could not freely enjoy his kingdom with unrestricted consciousness.

Text 2
सूत उवाच
वंशं कुरोर्वंशदवाग्निनिर्हृतं
संरोहयित्वा भवभावनो हरि: ।
निवेशयित्वा निजराज्य ईश्वरो
युधिष्ठिरं प्रीतमना बभूव ह ॥ २ ॥
sūta uvāca
vaṁśaṁ kuror vaṁśa-davāgni-nirhṛtaṁ
saṁrohayitvā bhava-bhāvano hariḥ
niveśayitvā nija-rājya īśvaro
yudhiṣṭhiraṁ prīta-manā babhūva ha
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Sūta Gosvāmī replied; vaṁśam — dynasty; kuroḥ — of King Kuru; vaṁśa-dava-agni — a forest fire set by the bamboos; nirhṛtam — exhausted; saṁrohayitvā — seedling of the dynasty; bhava-bhāvanaḥ — the maintainer of creation; hariḥ — the Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa; niveśayitvā — having reestablished; nija-rājye — in his own kingdom; īśvaraḥ — the Supreme Lord; yudhiṣṭhiram — unto Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira; prīta-manāḥ — pleased in His mind; babhūva ha — became.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī said: Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who is the maintainer of the world, became pleased after reestablishing Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira in his own kingdom and after restoring the Kuru dynasty, which had been exhausted by the bamboo fire of anger.

Text 3
निशम्य भीष्मोक्तमथाच्युतोक्तं
प्रवृत्तविज्ञानविधूतविभ्रम: ।
शशास गामिन्द्र इवाजिताश्रय:
परिध्युपान्तामनुजानुवर्तित: ॥ ३ ॥
niśamya bhīṣmoktam athācyutoktaṁ
pravṛtta-vijñāna-vidhūta-vibhramaḥ
śaśāsa gām indra ivājitāśrayaḥ
paridhyupāntām anujānuvartitaḥ
Synonyms
niśamya — after listening; bhīṣma-uktam — what was spoken by Bhīṣmadeva; atha — as also; acyuta-uktam — what was spoken by the infallible Lord Kṛṣṇa; pravṛtta — being engaged in; vijñāna — perfect knowledge; vidhūta — completely washed; vibhramaḥ — all misgivings; śaśāsa — ruled over; gām — the earth; indra — the king of the heavenly planet; iva — like; ajita-āśrayaḥ — protected by the invincible Lord; paridhi-upāntām — including the seas; anuja — the younger brothers; anuvartitaḥ — being followed by them.

Translation
Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, after being enlightened by what was spoken by Bhīṣmadeva and Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the infallible, engaged himself in matters of perfect knowledge because all his misgivings were eradicated. Thus he ruled over the earth and seas and was followed by his younger brothers.

Text 4
कामं ववर्ष पर्जन्य: सर्वकामदुघा मही ।
सिषिचु: स्म व्रजान् गाव: पयसोधस्वतीर्मुदा ॥ ४ ॥
kāmaṁ vavarṣa parjanyaḥ
sarva-kāma-dughā mahī
siṣicuḥ sma vrajān gāvaḥ
payasodhasvatīr mudā
Synonyms
kāmam — everything needed; vavarṣa — was showered; parjanyaḥ — rains; sarva — everything; kāma — necessities; dughā — producer; mahī — the land; siṣicuḥ sma — moisten; vrajān — pasturing grounds; gāvaḥ — the cow; payasā udhasvatīḥ — due to swollen milk bags; mudā — because of a joyful attitude.

Translation
During the reign of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, the clouds showered all the water that people needed, and the earth produced all the necessities of man in profusion. Due to its fatty milk bag and cheerful attitude, the cow used to moisten the grazing ground with milk.

Text 5
नद्य: समुद्रा गिरय: सवनस्पतिवीरुध: ।
फलन्त्योषधय: सर्वा: काममन्वृतु तस्य वै ॥ ५ ॥
nadyaḥ samudrā girayaḥ
savanaspati-vīrudhaḥ
phalanty oṣadhayaḥ sarvāḥ
kāmam anvṛtu tasya vai
Synonyms
nadyaḥ — rivers; samudrāḥ — oceans; girayaḥ — hills and mountains; savanaspati — vegetables; vīrudhaḥ — creepers; phalanti — active; oṣadhayaḥ — drugs; sarvāḥ — all; kāmam — necessities; anvṛtu — seasonal; tasya — for the King; vai — certainly.

Translation
The rivers, oceans, hills, mountains, forests, creepers and active drugs, in every season, paid their tax quota to the King in profusion.

Text 6
नाधयो व्याधय: क्लेशा दैवभूतात्महेतव: ।
अजातशत्रावभवन् जन्तूनां राज्ञि कर्हिचित् ॥ ६ ॥
nādhayo vyādhayaḥ kleśā
daiva-bhūtātma-hetavaḥ
ajāta-śatrāv abhavan
jantūnāṁ rājñi karhicit
Synonyms
na — never; ādhayaḥ — anxieties; vyādhayaḥ — diseases; kleśāḥ — trouble due to excessive heat and cold; daiva-bhūta-ātma — all due to the body, supernatural power and other living beings; hetavaḥ — due to the cause of; ajāta-śatrau — unto one who has no enemy; abhavan — happened; jantūnām — of the living beings; rājñi — unto the King; karhicit — at any time.

Translation
Because of the King’s having no enemy, the living beings were not at any time disturbed by mental agonies, diseases, or excessive heat or cold.

Text 7
उषित्वा हास्तिनपुरे मासान् कतिपयान् हरि: ।
सुहृदां च विशोकाय स्वसुश्च प्रियकाम्यया ॥ ७ ॥
uṣitvā hāstinapure
māsān katipayān hariḥ
suhṛdāṁ ca viśokāya
svasuś ca priya-kāmyayā
Synonyms
uṣitvā — staying; hāstinapure — in the city of Hastināpura; māsān — months; katipayān — a few; hariḥ — Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; suhṛdām — relatives; ca — also; viśokāya — for pacifying them; svasuḥ — the sister; ca — and; priya-kāmyayā — for pleasing.

Translation
Śrī Hari, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, resided at Hastināpura for a few months to pacify His relatives and please His own sister [Subhadrā].

Text 8
आमन्‍त्र्य चाभ्यनुज्ञात: परिष्वज्याभिवाद्य तम् ।
आरुरोह रथं कैश्चित्परिष्वक्तोऽभिवादित: ॥ ८ ॥
āmantrya cābhyanujñātaḥ
pariṣvajyābhivādya tam
āruroha rathaṁ kaiścit
pariṣvakto ’bhivāditaḥ
Synonyms
āmantrya — taking permission; ca — and; abhyanujñātaḥ — being permitted; pariṣvajya — embracing; abhivādya — bowing down at the feet; tam — unto Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira; āruroha — ascended; ratham — the chariot; kaiścit — by someone; pariṣvaktaḥ — being embraced; abhivāditaḥ — being offered obeisances.

Translation
Afterwards, when the Lord asked permission to depart and the King gave it, the Lord offered His respects to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira by bowing down at his feet, and the King embraced Him. After this the Lord, being embraced by others and receiving their obeisances, got into His chariot.

Texts 9-10
सुभद्रा द्रौपदी कुन्ती विराटतनया तथा ।
गान्धारी धृतराष्ट्रश्च युयुत्सुर्गौतमो यमौ ॥ ९ ॥
वृकोदरश्च धौम्यश्च स्त्रियो मत्स्यसुतादय: ।
न सेहिरे विमुह्यन्तो विरहं शार्ङ्गधन्वन: ॥ १० ॥
subhadrā draupadī kuntī
virāṭa-tanayā tathā
gāndhārī dhṛtarāṣṭraś ca
yuyutsur gautamo yamau
vṛkodaraś ca dhaumyaś ca
striyo matsya-sutādayaḥ
na sehire vimuhyanto
virahaṁ śārṅga-dhanvanaḥ
Synonyms
subhadrā — the sister of Kṛṣṇa; draupadī — the wife of the Pāṇḍavas; kuntī — the mother of the Pāṇḍavas; virāṭa-tanayā — the daughter of Virāṭa (Uttarā); tathā — also; gāndhārī — the mother of Duryodhana; dhṛtarāṣṭraḥ — the father of Duryodhana; ca — and; yuyutsuḥ — the son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra by his vaiśya wife; gautamaḥ — Kṛpācārya; yamau — the twin brothers Nakula and Sahadeva; vṛkodaraḥ — Bhīma; ca — and; dhaumyaḥ — Dhaumya; ca — and; striyaḥ — also other ladies of the palace; matsya-sutā-ādayaḥ — the daughter of a fisherman (Satyavatī, Bhīṣma’s stepmother); na — could not; sehire — tolerate; vimuhyantaḥ — almost fainting; viraham — separation; śārṅga-dhanvanaḥ — of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who bears a conch in His hand.

Translation
At that time Subhadrā, Draupadī, Kuntī, Uttarā, Gāndhārī, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Yuyutsu, Kṛpācārya, Nakula, Sahadeva, Bhīmasena, Dhaumya and Satyavatī all nearly fainted because it was impossible for them to bear separation from Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Texts 11-12
सत्सङ्गान्मुक्तदु:सङ्गो हातुं नोत्सहते बुध: ।
कीर्त्यमानं यशो यस्य सकृदाकर्ण्य रोचनम् ॥ ११ ॥
तस्मिन्न्यस्तधिय: पार्था: सहेरन् विरहं कथम् ।
दर्शनस्पर्शसंलापशयनासनभोजनै: ॥ १२ ॥
sat-saṅgān mukta-duḥsaṅgo
hātuṁ notsahate budhaḥ
kīrtyamānaṁ yaśo yasya
sakṛd ākarṇya rocanam
tasmin nyasta-dhiyaḥ pārthāḥ
saheran virahaṁ katham
darśana-sparśa-saṁlāpa-
śayanāsana-bhojanaiḥ
Synonyms
sat-saṅgāt — by the association of pure devotees; mukta-duḥsaṅgaḥ — freed from bad materialistic association; hātum — to give up; na utsahate — never attempts; budhaḥ — one who has understood the Lord; kīrtyamānam — glorifying; yaśaḥ — fame; yasya — whose; sakṛt — once only; ākarṇya — hearing only; rocanam — pleasing; tasmin — unto Him; nyasta-dhiyaḥ — one who has given his mind unto Him; pārthāḥ — the sons of Pṛthā; saheran — can tolerate; viraham — separation; katham — how; darśana — seeing face to face; sparśa — touching; saṁlāpa — conversing; śayana — sleeping; āsana — sitting; bhojanaiḥ — dining together.

Translation
The intelligent, who have understood the Supreme Lord in association with pure devotees and have become freed from bad materialistic association, can never avoid hearing the glories of the Lord, even though they have heard them only once. How then could the Pāṇḍavas tolerate His separation, for they had been intimately associated with His person, seeing Him face to face, touching Him, conversing with Him, and sleeping, sitting and dining with Him?

Text 13
सर्वे तेऽनिमिषैरक्षैस्तमनुद्रुतचेतस: ।
वीक्षन्त: स्‍नेहसम्बद्धा विचेलुस्तत्र तत्र ह ॥ १३ ॥
sarve te ’nimiṣair akṣais
tam anu druta-cetasaḥ
vīkṣantaḥ sneha-sambaddhā
vicelus tatra tatra ha
Synonyms
sarve — all; te — they; animiṣaiḥ — without twinkling of the eyes; akṣaiḥ — by the eye; tam anu — after Him; druta-cetasaḥ — melted heart; vīkṣantaḥ — looking upon Him; sneha-sambaddhāḥ — bound by pure affection; viceluḥ — began to move; tatra tatra — here and there; ha — so they did.

Translation
All their hearts were melting for Him on the pot of attraction. They looked at Him without blinking their eyes, and they moved hither and thither in perplexity.

Text 14
न्यरुन्धन्नुद्गलद्बाष्पमौत्कण्ठ्याद्देवकीसुते ।
निर्यात्यगारान्नोऽभद्रमिति स्याद्ब‍ान्धवस्त्रिय: ॥ १४ ॥
nyarundhann udgalad bāṣpam
autkaṇṭhyād devakī-sute
niryāty agārān no ’bhadram
iti syād bāndhava-striyaḥ
Synonyms
nyarundhan — checking with great difficulty; udgalat — overflowing; bāṣpam — tears; autkaṇṭhyāt — because of great anxiety; devakī-sute — unto the son of Devakī; niryāti — having come out; agārāt — from the palace; naḥ — not; abhadram — inauspiciousness; iti — thus; syāt — may happen; bāndhava — relative; striyaḥ — ladies.

Translation
The female relatives, whose eyes were flooded with tears out of anxiety for Kṛṣṇa, came out of the palace. They could stop their tears only with great difficulty. They feared that tears would cause misfortune at the time of departure.

Text 15
मृदङ्गशङ्खभेर्यश्च वीणापणवगोमुखा: ।
धुन्धुर्यानकघण्टाद्या नेदुर्दुन्दुभयस्तथा ॥ १५ ॥
mṛdaṅga-śaṅkha-bheryaś ca
vīṇā-paṇava-gomukhāḥ
dhundhury-ānaka-ghaṇṭādyā
nedur dundubhayas tathā
Synonyms
mṛdaṅga — sweet-sounding drum; śaṅkha — conchshell; bheryaḥ — brass band; ca — and; vīṇā — string band; paṇava — a kind of flute; gomukhāḥ — another flute; dhundhurī — another drum; ānaka — kettle; ghaṇṭā — bell; ādyāḥ — others; neduḥ — sounded; dundubhayaḥ — other different types of drums; tathā — at that time.

Translation
While the Lord was departing from the palace of Hastināpura, different types of drums — like the mṛdaṅga, dhola, nagra, dhundhurī and dundubhi — and flutes of different types, the vīṇā, gomukha and bherī, all sounded together to show Him honor.

Text 16
प्रासादशिखरारूढा: कुरुनार्यो दिद‍ृक्षया ।
ववृषु: कुसुमै: कृष्णं प्रेमव्रीडास्मितेक्षणा: ॥ १६ ॥
prāsāda-śikharārūḍhāḥ
kuru-nāryo didṛkṣayā
vavṛṣuḥ kusumaiḥ kṛṣṇaṁ
prema-vrīḍā-smitekṣaṇāḥ
Synonyms
prāsāda — palace; śikhara — the roof; ārūḍhāḥ — ascending; kuru-nāryaḥ — the ladies of the Kuru royalty; didṛkṣayā — seeing; vavṛṣuḥ — showered; kusumaiḥ — by flowers; kṛṣṇam — upon Lord Kṛṣṇa; prema — out of affection and love; vrīḍā-smita-īkṣaṇāḥ — glancing with shy smiles.

Translation
Out of a loving desire to see the Lord, the royal ladies of the Kurus got up on top of the palace, and smiling with affection and shyness, they showered flowers upon the Lord.

Text 17
सितातपत्रं जग्राह मुक्तादामविभूषितम् ।
रत्नदण्डं गुडाकेश: प्रिय: प्रियतमस्य ह ॥ १७ ॥
sitātapatraṁ jagrāha
muktādāma-vibhūṣitam
ratna-daṇḍaṁ guḍākeśaḥ
priyaḥ priyatamasya ha
Synonyms
sita-ātapatram — soothing umbrella; jagrāha — took up; muktā-dāma — decorated with laces and pearls; vibhūṣitam — embroidered; ratna-daṇḍam — with a handle of jewels; guḍākeśaḥ — Arjuna, the expert warrior, or one who has conquered sleep; priyaḥ — most beloved; priyatamasya — of the most beloved; ha — so he did.

Translation
At that time Arjuna, the great warrior and conqueror of sleep, who is the intimate friend of the most beloved Supreme Lord, took up an umbrella which had a handle of jewels and was embroidered with lace and pearls.

Text 18
उद्धव: सात्यकिश्चैव व्यजने परमाद्भुते ।
विकीर्यमाण: कुसुमै रेजे मधुपति: पथि ॥ १८ ॥
uddhavaḥ sātyakiś caiva
vyajane paramādbhute
vikīryamāṇaḥ kusumai
reje madhu-patiḥ pathi
Synonyms
uddhavaḥ — a cousin-brother of Kṛṣṇa’s; sātyakiḥ — His driver; ca — and; eva — certainly; vyajane — engaged in fanning; parama-adbhute — decorative; vikīryamāṇaḥ — seated on scattered; kusumaiḥ — flowers all around; reje — commanded; madhu-patiḥ — the master of Madhu (Kṛṣṇa); pathi — on the road.

Translation
Uddhava and Sātyaki began to fan the Lord with decorated fans, and the Lord, as the master of Madhu, seated on scattered flowers, commanded them along the road.

Text 19
अश्रूयन्ताशिष: सत्यास्तत्र तत्र द्विजेरिता: ।
नानुरूपानुरूपाश्च निर्गुणस्य गुणात्मन: ॥ १९ ॥
aśrūyantāśiṣaḥ satyās
tatra tatra dvijeritāḥ
nānurūpānurūpāś ca
nirguṇasya guṇātmanaḥ
Synonyms
aśrūyanta — being heard; āśiṣaḥ — benediction; satyāḥ — all truths; tatra — here; tatra — there; dvija-īritāḥ — sounded by learned brāhmaṇas; na — not; anurūpa — befitting; anurūpāḥ — fitting; ca — also; nirguṇasya — of the Absolute; guṇa-ātmanaḥ — playing the role of a human being.

Translation
It was being heard here and there that the benedictions being paid to Kṛṣṇa were neither befitting nor unbefitting because they were all for the Absolute, who was now playing the part of a human being.

Text 20
अन्योन्यमासीत्सञ्जल्प उत्तमश्लोकचेतसाम् ।
कौरवेन्द्रपुरस्त्रीणां सर्वश्रुतिमनोहर: ॥ २० ॥
anyonyam āsīt sañjalpa
uttama-śloka-cetasām
kauravendra-pura-strīṇāṁ
sarva-śruti-mano-haraḥ
Synonyms
anyonyam — among each other; āsīt — there was; sañjalpaḥ — talking; uttama-śloka — the Supreme, who is praised by selected poetry; cetasām — of those whose hearts are absorbed in that way; kaurava-indra — the king of the Kurus; pura — capital; strīṇām — all the ladies; sarva — all; śruti — the Vedas; manaḥ-haraḥ — attractive to the mind.

Translation
Absorbed in the thought of the transcendental qualities of the Lord, who is sung in select poetry, the ladies on the roofs of all the houses of Hastināpura began to talk of Him. This talk was more attractive than the hymns of the Vedas.

Text 21
स वै किलायं पुरुष: पुरातनो
य एक आसीदविशेष आत्मनि ।
अग्रे गुणेभ्यो जगदात्मनीश्वरे
निमीलितात्मन्निशि सुप्तशक्तिषु ॥ २१ ॥
sa vai kilāyaṁ puruṣaḥ purātano
ya eka āsīd aviśeṣa ātmani
agre guṇebhyo jagad-ātmanīśvare
nimīlitātman niśi supta-śaktiṣu
Synonyms
saḥ — He (Kṛṣṇa); vai — as I remember; kila — definitely; ayam — this; puruṣaḥ — Personality of Godhead; purātanaḥ — the original; yaḥ — who; ekaḥ — only one; āsīt — existed; aviśeṣaḥ — materially unmanifested; ātmani — own self; agre — before creation; guṇebhyaḥ — of the modes of nature; jagat-ātmani — unto the Supersoul; īśvare — unto the Supreme Lord; nimīlita — merged into; ātman — the living entity; niśi supta — inactive at night; śaktiṣu — of the energies.

Translation
They said: Here He is, the original Personality of Godhead as we definitely remember Him. He alone existed before the manifested creation of the modes of nature, and in Him only, because He is the Supreme Lord, all living beings merge, as if sleeping at night, their energy suspended.

Text 22
स एव भूयो निजवीर्यचोदितां
स्वजीवमायां प्रकृतिं सिसृक्षतीम् ।
अनामरूपात्मनि रूपनामनी
विधित्समानोऽनुससार शास्त्रकृत् ॥ २२ ॥
sa eva bhūyo nija-vīrya-coditāṁ
sva-jīva-māyāṁ prakṛtiṁ sisṛkṣatīm
anāma-rūpātmani rūpa-nāmanī
vidhitsamāno ’nusasāra śāstra-kṛt
Synonyms
saḥ — He; eva — thus; bhūyaḥ — again; nija — own personal; vīrya — potency; coditām — performance of; sva — own; jīva — living being; māyām — external energy; prakṛtim — unto material nature; sisṛkṣatīm — while re-creating; anāma — without mundane designation; rūpa-ātmani — forms of the soul; rūpa-nāmanī — forms and names; vidhitsamānaḥ — desiring to award; anusasāra — entrusted; śāstra-kṛt — the compiler of revealed scripture.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead, again desiring to give names and forms to His parts and parcels, the living entities, placed them under the guidance of material nature. By His own potency, material nature is empowered to re-create.

Text 23
स वा अयं यत्पदमत्र सूरयो
जितेन्द्रिया निर्जितमातरिश्वन: ।
पश्यन्ति भक्त्युत्कलितामलात्मना
नन्वेष सत्त्वं परिमार्ष्टुमर्हति ॥ २३ ॥
sa vā ayaṁ yat padam atra sūrayo
jitendriyā nirjita-mātariśvanaḥ
paśyanti bhakty-utkalitāmalātmanā
nanv eṣa sattvaṁ parimārṣṭum arhati
Synonyms
saḥ — He; vai — by providence; ayam — this; yat — that which; padam atra — here is the same Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa; sūrayaḥ — great devotees; jita-indriyāḥ — who have overcome the influence of the senses; nirjita — thoroughly controlled; mātariśvanaḥ — life; paśyanti — can see; bhakti — by dint of devotional service; utkalita — developed; amala-ātmanā — those whose minds are thoroughly cleansed; nanu eṣaḥ — certainly by this only; sattvam — existence; parimārṣṭum — for purifying the mind completely; arhati — deserve.

Translation
Here is the same Supreme Personality of Godhead whose transcendental form is experienced by the great devotees who are completely cleansed of material consciousness by dint of rigid devotional service and full control of life and the senses. And that is the only way to purify existence.

Text 24
स वा अयं सख्यनुगीतसत्कथो
वेदेषु गुह्येषु च गुह्यवादिभि: ।
य एक ईशो जगदात्मलीलया
सृजत्यवत्यत्ति न तत्र सज्जते ॥ २४ ॥
sa vā ayaṁ sakhy anugīta-sat-katho
vedeṣu guhyeṣu ca guhya-vādibhiḥ
ya eka īśo jagad-ātma-līlayā
sṛjaty avaty atti na tatra sajjate
Synonyms
saḥ — He; vai — also; ayam — this; sakhi — O my friend; anugīta — described; sat-kathaḥ — the excellent pastimes; vedeṣu — in the Vedic literatures; guhyeṣu — confidentially; ca — as also; guhya-vādibhiḥ — by the confidential devotees; yaḥ — one who; ekaḥ — one only; īśaḥ — the supreme controller; jagat — of the complete creation; ātma — Supersoul; līlayā — by manifestation of pastimes; sṛjati — creates; avati atti — also maintains and annihilates; na — never; tatra — there; sajjate — becomes attached to it.

Translation
O dear friends, here is that very Personality of Godhead whose attractive and confidential pastimes are described in the confidential parts of Vedic literature by His great devotees. It is He only who creates, maintains and annihilates the material world and yet remains unaffected.

Text 25
यदा ह्यधर्मेण तमोधियो नृपा
जीवन्ति तत्रैष हि सत्त्वत: किल ।
धत्ते भगं सत्यमृतं दयां यशो
भवाय रूपाणि दधद्युगे युगे ॥ २५ ॥
yadā hy adharmeṇa tamo-dhiyo nṛpā
jīvanti tatraiṣa hi sattvataḥ kila
dhatte bhagaṁ satyam ṛtaṁ dayāṁ yaśo
bhavāya rūpāṇi dadhad yuge yuge
Synonyms
yadā — whenever; hi — assuredly; adharmeṇa — against the principles of God’s will; tamaḥ-dhiyaḥ — persons in the lowest material modes; nṛpāḥ — kings and administrators; jīvanti — live like animals; tatra — thereupon; eṣaḥ — He; hi — only; sattvataḥ — transcendental; kila — certainly; dhatte — is manifested; bhagam — supreme power; satyam — truth; ṛtam — positiveness; dayām — mercy; yaśaḥ — wonderful activities; bhavāya — for the maintenance; rūpāṇi — in various forms; dadhat — manifested; yuge — different periods; yuge — and ages.

Translation
Whenever there are kings and administrators living like animals in the lowest modes of existence, the Lord in His transcendental form manifests His supreme power, the Truth Positive, shows special mercy to the faithful, performs wonderful activities and manifests various transcendental forms as is necessary in different periods and ages.

Text 26
अहो अलं श्लाघ्यतमं यदो: कुल-
महो अलं पुण्यतमं मधोर्वनम् ।
यदेष पुंसामृषभ: श्रिय: पति:
स्वजन्मना चङ्‍क्रमणेन चाञ्चति ॥ २६ ॥
aho alaṁ ślāghyatamaṁ yadoḥ kulam
aho alaṁ puṇyatamaṁ madhor vanam
yad eṣa puṁsām ṛṣabhaḥ śriyaḥ patiḥ
sva-janmanā caṅkramaṇena cāñcati
Synonyms
aho — oh; alam — verily; ślāghya-tamam — supremely glorified; yadoḥ — of King Yadu; kulam — dynasty; aho — oh; alam — verily; puṇya-tamam — supremely virtuous; madhoḥ vanam — the land of Mathurā; yat — because; eṣaḥ — this; puṁsām — of all the living beings; ṛṣabhaḥ — supreme leader; śriyaḥ — of the goddess of fortune; patiḥ — husband; sva-janmanā — by His appearance; caṅkramaṇena — by crawling; ca añcati — glories.

Translation
Oh, how supremely glorified is the dynasty of King Yadu, and how virtuous is the land of Mathurā, where the supreme leader of all living beings, the husband of the goddess of fortune, has taken His birth and wandered in His childhood.

Text 27
अहो बत स्वर्यशसस्तिरस्करी
कुशस्थली पुण्ययशस्करी भुव: ।
पश्यन्ति नित्यं यदनुग्रहेषितं
स्मितावलोकं स्वपतिं स्म यत्प्रजा: ॥ २७ ॥
aho bata svar-yaśasas tiraskarī
kuśasthalī puṇya-yaśaskarī bhuvaḥ
paśyanti nityaṁ yad anugraheṣitaṁ
smitāvalokaṁ sva-patiṁ sma yat-prajāḥ
Synonyms
aho bata — how wonderful this is; svaḥ-yaśasaḥ — the glories of the heavenly planets; tiraskarī — that which defeats; kuśasthalī — Dvārakā; puṇya — virtue; yaśaskarī — famous; bhuvaḥ — the planet earth; paśyanti — see; nityam — constantly; yat — that which; anugraha-iṣitam — to bestow benediction; smita-avalokam — glance with the favor of sweet smiling; sva-patim — unto the soul of the living being (Kṛṣṇa); sma — used to; yat-prajāḥ — the inhabitants of the place.

Translation
Undoubtedly it is wonderful that Dvārakā has defeated the glories of the heavenly planets and has enhanced the celebrity of the earth. The inhabitants of Dvārakā are always seeing the soul of all living beings [Kṛṣṇa] in His loving feature. He glances at them and favors them with sweet smiles.

Text 28
नूनं व्रतस्‍नानहुतादिनेश्वर:
समर्चितो ह्यस्य गृहीतपाणिभि: ।
पिबन्ति या: सख्यधरामृतं मुहु-
र्व्रजस्त्रिय: सम्मुमुहुर्यदाशया: ॥ २८ ॥
nūnaṁ vrata-snāna-hutādineśvaraḥ
samarcito hy asya gṛhīta-pāṇibhiḥ
pibanti yāḥ sakhy adharāmṛtaṁ muhur
vraja-striyaḥ sammumuhur yad-āśayāḥ
Synonyms
nūnam — certainly in the previous birth; vrata — vow; snāna — bath; huta — sacrifice in the fire; ādinā — by all these; īśvaraḥ — the Personality of Godhead; samarcitaḥ — perfectly worshiped; hi — certainly; asya — His; gṛhīta-pāṇibhiḥ — by the married wives; pibanti — relishes; yāḥ — those who; sakhi — O friend; adhara-amṛtam — the nectar from His lips; muhuḥ — again and again; vraja-striyaḥ — the damsels of Vrajabhūmi; sammumuhuḥ — often fainted; yat-āśayāḥ — expecting to be favored in that way.

Translation
O friends, just think of His wives, whose hands He has accepted. How they must have undergone vows, baths, fire sacrifices and perfect worship of the Lord of the universe to constantly relish now the nectar from His lips [by kissing]. The damsels of Vrajabhūmi would often faint just by expecting such favors.

Text 29
या वीर्यशुल्केन हृता: स्वयंवरे
प्रमथ्य चैद्यप्रमुखान् हि शुष्मिण: ।
प्रद्युम्नसाम्बाम्बसुतादयोऽपरा
याश्चाहृता भौमवधे सहस्रश: ॥ २९ ॥
yā vīrya-śulkena hṛtāḥ svayaṁvare
pramathya caidya-pramukhān hi śuṣmiṇaḥ
pradyumna-sāmbāmba-sutādayo ’parā
yāś cāhṛtā bhauma-vadhe sahasraśaḥ
Synonyms
yā — the lady; vīrya — prowess; śulkena — by payment of the price; hṛtāḥ — taken away by force; svayaṁvare — in the open selection of the bridegroom; pramathya — harassing; caidya — King Śiśupāla; pramukhān — headed by; hi — positively; śuṣmiṇaḥ — all very powerful; pradyumna — Pradyumna (Kṛṣṇa’s son); sāmba — Sāmba; amba — Amba; suta-ādayaḥ — children; aparāḥ — other ladies; yāḥ — those; ca — also; āhṛtāḥ — similarly brought; bhauma-vadhe — after killing kings; sahasraśaḥ — by the thousands.

Translation
The children of these ladies are Pradyumna, Sāmba, Amba, etc. Ladies like Rukmiṇī, Satyabhāmā and Jāmbavatī were forcibly taken away by Him from their svayaṁvara ceremonies after He defeated many powerful kings, headed by Śiśupāla. And other ladies were also forcibly taken away by Him after He killed Bhaumāsura and thousands of his assistants. All of these ladies are glorious.

Text 30
एता: परं स्त्रीत्वमपास्तपेशलं
निरस्तशौचं बत साधु कुर्वते ।
यासां गृहात्पुष्करलोचन: पति-
र्न जात्वपैत्याहृतिभिर्हृदि स्पृशन् ॥ ३० ॥
etāḥ paraṁ strītvam apāstapeśalaṁ
nirasta-śaucaṁ bata sādhu kurvate
yāsāṁ gṛhāt puṣkara-locanaḥ patir
na jātv apaity āhṛtibhir hṛdi spṛśan
Synonyms
etāḥ — all these women; param — highest; strītvam — womanhood; apāstapeśalam — without individuality; nirasta — without; śaucam — purity; bata sādhu — auspiciously glorified; kurvate — do they make; yāsām — from whose; gṛhāt — homes; puṣkara-locanaḥ — the lotus-eyed; patiḥ — husband; na jātu — never at any time; apaiti — goes away; āhṛtibhiḥ — by presentation; hṛdi — in the heart; spṛśan — endeared.

Translation
All these women auspiciously glorified their lives despite their being without individuality and without purity. Their husband, the lotus-eyed Personality of Godhead, never left them alone at home. He always pleased their hearts by making valuable presentations.

Text 31
एवंविधा गदन्तीनां स गिर: पुरयोषिताम् ।
निरीक्षणेनाभिनन्दन् सस्मितेन ययौ हरि: ॥ ३१ ॥
evaṁvidhā gadantīnāṁ
sa giraḥ pura-yoṣitām
nirīkṣaṇenābhinandan
sasmitena yayau hariḥ
Synonyms
evaṁvidhāḥ — in this way; gadantīnām — thus praying and talking about Him; saḥ — He (the Lord); giraḥ — of words; pura-yoṣitām — of the ladies of the capital; nirīkṣaṇena — by His grace of glancing over them; abhinandan — and greeting them; sa-smitena — with a smiling face; yayau — departed; hariḥ — the Personality of Godhead.

Translation
While the ladies of the capital [Hastināpura] were greeting Him and talking in this way, the Lord, smiling, accepted their good greetings, and casting the grace of His glance over them, He departed from the city.

Text 32
अजातशत्रु: पृतनां गोपीथाय मधुद्विष: ।
परेभ्य: शङ्कित: स्‍नेहात्प्रायुङ्क्त चतुरङ्गिणीम् ॥ ३२ ॥
ajāta-śatruḥ pṛtanāṁ
gopīthāya madhu-dviṣaḥ
parebhyaḥ śaṅkitaḥ snehāt
prāyuṅkta catur-aṅgiṇīm
Synonyms
ajāta-śatruḥ — Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, who was no one’s enemy; pṛtanām — defensive forces; gopīthāya — for giving protection; madhu-dviṣaḥ — of the enemy of Madhu (Śrī Kṛṣṇa); parebhyaḥ — from others (enemies); śaṅkitaḥ — being afraid of; snehāt — out of affection; prāyuṅkta — engaged; catuḥ-aṅginīm — four defensive divisions.

Translation
Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, although no one’s enemy, engaged four divisions of defense [horse, elephant, chariot and army] to accompany Lord Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of the asuras [demons]. The Mahārāja did this because of the enemy, and also out of affection for the Lord.

Text 33
अथ दूरागतान् शौरि: कौरवान् विरहातुरान् ।
सन्निवर्त्य द‍ृढं स्‍निग्धान् प्रायात्स्वनगरीं प्रियै: ॥ ३३ ॥
atha dūrāgatān śauriḥ
kauravān virahāturān
sannivartya dṛḍhaṁ snigdhān
prāyāt sva-nagarīṁ priyaiḥ
Synonyms
atha — thus; dūrāgatān — having accompanied Him for a long distance; śauriḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; kauravān — the Pāṇḍavas; virahāturān — overwhelmed by a sense of separation; sannivartya — politely persuaded; dṛḍham — determined; snigdhān — full of affection; prāyāt — proceeded; sva-nagarīm — towards His own city (Dvārakā); priyaiḥ — with dear companions.

Translation
Out of profound affection for Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Pāṇḍavas, who were of the Kuru dynasty, accompanied Him a considerable distance to see Him off. They were overwhelmed with the thought of future separation. The Lord, however, persuaded them to return home, and He proceeded towards Dvārakā with His dear companions.

Texts 34-35
कुरुजाङ्गलपाञ्चालान् शूरसेनान् सयामुनान् ।
ब्रह्मावर्तं कुरुक्षेत्रं मत्स्यान् सारस्वतानथ ॥ ३४ ॥
मरुधन्वमतिक्रम्य सौवीराभीरयो: परान् ।
आनर्तान् भार्गवोपागाच्छ्रान्तवाहो मनाग्विभु: ॥ ३५ ॥
kuru-jāṅgala-pāñcālān
śūrasenān sayāmunān
brahmāvartaṁ kurukṣetraṁ
matsyān sārasvatān atha
maru-dhanvam atikramya
sauvīrābhīrayoḥ parān
ānartān bhārgavopāgāc
chrāntavāho manāg vibhuḥ
Synonyms
kuru-jāṅgala — the province of Delhi; pāñcālān — part of the province Pānjab; śūrasenān — part of the province of Uttar Pradesh; sa — with; yāmunān — the districts on the bank of the Yamunā; brahmāvartam — part of northern Uttar Pradesh; kurukṣetram — the place where the battle was fought; matsyān — the province Matsya; sārasvatān — part of Punjab; atha — and so on; maru — Rajasthan, the land of deserts; dhanvam — Madhya Pradesh, where water is very scanty; ati-kramya — after passing; sauvīra — Saurastra; ābhīrayoḥ — part of Gujarat; parān — western side; ānartān — the province of Dvārakā; bhārgava — O Śaunaka; upāgāt — overtaken by; śrānta — fatigue; vāhaḥ — the horses; manāk vibhuḥ — slightly, because of the long journey.

Translation
O Śaunaka, the Lord then proceeded towards Kurujāṅgala, Pāñcālā, Śūrasenā, the land on the bank of the river Yamunā, Brahmāvarta, Kurukṣetra, Matsya, Sārasvata, the province of the desert and the land of scanty water. After crossing these provinces He gradually reached the Sauvīra and Ābhīra provinces, then, west of these, reached Dvārakā at last.

Text 36
तत्र तत्र ह तत्रत्यैर्हरि: प्रत्युद्यतार्हण: ।
सायं भेजे दिशं पश्चाद्गविष्ठो गां गतस्तदा ॥ ३६ ॥
tatra tatra ha tatratyair
hariḥ pratyudyatārhaṇaḥ
sāyaṁ bheje diśaṁ paścād
gaviṣṭho gāṁ gatas tadā
Synonyms
tatra tatra — at different places; ha — it so happened; tatratyaiḥ — by local inhabitants; hariḥ — the Personality of Godhead; pratyudyata-arhaṇaḥ — being offered presentations and worshipful regards; sāyam — the evening; bheje — having overtaken; diśam — direction; paścāt — western; gaviṣthaḥ — the sun in the sky; gām — to the ocean; gataḥ — having gone; tadā — at that time.

Translation
On His journey through these provinces He was welcomed, worshiped and given various presentations. In the evening, in all places, the Lord suspended His journey to perform evening rites. This was regularly observed after sunset.