Text 1
शौनक उवाच
अश्वत्थाम्नोपसृष्टेन ब्रह्मशीर्ष्णोरुतेजसा ।
उत्तराया हतो गर्भ ईशेनाजीवित: पुन: ॥ १ ॥
śaunaka uvāca
aśvatthāmnopasṛṣṭena
brahma-śīrṣṇoru-tejasā
uttarāyā hato garbha
īśenājīvitaḥ punaḥ
Synonyms
śaunakaḥ uvāca — the sage Śaunaka said; aśvatthāmna — of Aśvatthāmā (the son of Droṇa); upasṛṣṭena — by release of; brahma-śīrṣṇā — the invincible weapon, brahmāstra; uru-tejasā — by high temperature; uttarāyāḥ — of Uttarā (mother of Parīkṣit); hataḥ — being spoiled; garbhaḥ — womb; īśena — by the Supreme Lord; ājīvitaḥ — brought to life; punaḥ — again.

Translation
The sage Śaunaka said: The womb of Uttarā, mother of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, was spoiled by the dreadful and invincible brahmāstra weapon released by Aśvatthāmā. But Mahārāja Parīkṣit was saved by the Supreme Lord.

Text 2
तस्य जन्म महाबुद्धे: कर्माणि च महात्मन: ।
निधनं च यथैवासीत्स प्रेत्य गतवान् यथा ॥ २ ॥
tasya janma mahā-buddheḥ
karmāṇi ca mahātmanaḥ
nidhanaṁ ca yathaivāsīt
sa pretya gatavān yathā
Synonyms
tasya — his (of Mahārāja Parīkṣit); janma — birth; mahā-buddheḥ — of great intelligence; karmāṇi — activities; ca — also; mahā-ātmanaḥ — of the great devotee; nidhanam — demise; ca — also; yathā — as it was; eva — of course; āsīt — happened; saḥ — he; pretya — destination after death; gatavān — achieved; yathā — as it were.

Translation
How was the great emperor Parīkṣit, who was a highly intelligent and great devotee, born in that womb? How did his death take place, and what did he achieve after his death?

Text 3
तदिदं श्रोतुमिच्छामो गदितुं यदि मन्यसे ।
ब्रूहि न: श्रद्दधानानां यस्य ज्ञानमदाच्छुक: ॥ ३ ॥
tad idaṁ śrotum icchāmo
gadituṁ yadi manyase
brūhi naḥ śraddadhānānāṁ
yasya jñānam adāc chukaḥ
Synonyms
tat — all; idam — this; śrotum — to hear; icchāmaḥ — all willing; gaditum — to narrate; yadi — if; manyase — you think; brūhi — please speak; naḥ — we; śraddadhānānām — who are very much respectful; yasya — whose; jñānam — transcendental knowledge; adāt — delivered; śukaḥ — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī.

Translation
We all respectfully want to hear about him [Mahārāja Parīkṣit] to whom Śukadeva Gosvāmī imparted transcendental knowledge. Please speak on this matter.

Text 4
सूत उवाच
अपीपलद्धर्मराज: पितृवद् रञ्जयन् प्रजा: ।
नि:स्पृह: सर्वकामेभ्य: कृष्णपादानुसेवया ॥ ४ ॥
sūta uvāca
apīpalad dharma-rājaḥ
pitṛvad rañjayan prajāḥ
niḥspṛhaḥ sarva-kāmebhyaḥ
kṛṣṇa-pādānusevayā
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said; apīpalat — administered prosperity; dharma-rājaḥ — King Yudhiṣṭhira; pitṛ-vat — exactly like his father; rañjayan — pleasing; prajāḥ — all those who took birth; niḥspṛhaḥ — without personal ambition; sarva — all; kāmebhyaḥ — from sense gratification; kṛṣṇa-pāda — the lotus feet of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; anusevayā — by dint of rendering continuous service.

Translation
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said: Emperor Yudhiṣṭhira administered generously to everyone during his reign. He was exactly like his father. He had no personal ambition and was freed from all sorts of sense gratification because of his continuous service unto the lotus feet of the Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Text 5
सम्पद: क्रतवो लोका महिषी भ्रातरो मही ।
जम्बूद्वीपाधिपत्यं च यशश्च त्रिदिवं गतम् ॥ ५ ॥
sampadaḥ kratavo lokā
mahiṣī bhrātaro mahī
jambudvīpādhipatyaṁ ca
yaśaś ca tri-divaṁ gatam
Synonyms
sampadaḥ — opulence; kratavaḥ — sacrifices; lokāḥ — future destination; mahiṣī — the queens; bhrātaraḥ — the brothers; mahī — the earth; jambu-dvīpa — the globe or planet of our residence; ādhipatyam — sovereignty; ca — also; yaśaḥ — fame; ca — and; tri-divam — celestial planets; gatam — spread over.

Translation
News even reached the celestial planets about Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira’s worldly possessions, the sacrifices by which he would attain a better destination, his queen, his stalwart brothers, his extensive land, his sovereignty over the planet earth, his fame, etc.

Text 6
किं ते कामा: सुरस्पार्हा मुकुन्दमनसो द्विजा: ।
अधिजह्रुर्मुदं राज्ञ: क्षुधितस्य यथेतरे ॥ ६ ॥
kiṁ te kāmāḥ sura-spārhā
mukunda-manaso dvijāḥ
adhijahrur mudaṁ rājñaḥ
kṣudhitasya yathetare
Synonyms
kim — what for; te — all those; kāmāḥ — objects of sense enjoyment; sura — of the denizens of heaven; spārhāḥ — aspirations; mukunda-manasaḥ — of one who is already God conscious; dvijāḥ — O brāhmaṇas; adhijahruḥ — could satisfy; mudam — pleasure; rājñaḥ — of the king; kṣudhitasya — of the hungry; yathā — as it is; itare — in other things.

Translation
O brāhmaṇas, the opulence of the King was so enchanting that the denizens of heaven aspired for it. But because he was absorbed in the service of the Lord, nothing could satisfy him except the Lord’s service.

Text 7
मातुर्गर्भगतो वीर: स तदा भृगुनन्दन ।
ददर्श पुरुषं कञ्चिद्दह्यमानोऽस्त्रतेजसा ॥ ७ ॥
mātur garbha-gato vīraḥ
sa tadā bhṛgu-nandana
dadarśa puruṣaṁ kañcid
dahyamāno ’stra-tejasā
Synonyms
mātuḥ — mother; garbha — womb; gataḥ — being situated there; vīraḥ — the great fighter; saḥ — child Parīkṣit; tadā — at that time; bhṛgu-nandana — O son of Bhṛgu; dadarśa — could see; puruṣam — the Supreme Lord; kañcit — as someone else; dahyamānaḥ — suffering from being burned; astra — the brahmāstra; tejasā — temperature.

Translation
O son of Bhṛgu [Śaunaka], when the child Parīkṣit, the great fighter, was in the womb of his mother, Uttarā, and was suffering from the burning heat of the brahmāstra [thrown by Aśvatthāmā], he could observe the Supreme Lord coming to him.

Text 8
अङ्गुष्ठमात्रममलं स्फुरत्पुरटमौलिनम् ।
अपीव्यदर्शनं श्यामं तडिद्वाससमच्युतम् ॥ ८ ॥
aṅguṣṭha-mātram amalaṁ
sphurat-puraṭa-maulinam
apīvya-darśanaṁ śyāmaṁ
taḍid vāsasam acyutam
Synonyms
aṅguṣṭha — by the measure of a thumb; mātram — only; amalam — transcendental; sphurat — blazing; puraṭa — gold; maulinam — helmet; apīvya — very beautiful; darśanam — to look at; śyāmam — blackish; taḍit — lightning; vāsasam — clothing; acyutam — the Infallible (the Lord).

Translation
He [the Lord] was only thumb high, but He was all transcendental. He had a very beautiful, blackish, infallible body, and He wore a dress of lightning yellow and a helmet of blazing gold. Thus He was seen by the child.

Text 9
श्रीमद्दीर्घचतुर्बाहुं तप्तकाञ्चनकुण्डलम् ।
क्षतजाक्षं गदापाणिमात्मन: सर्वतोदिशम् ।
परिभ्रमन्तमुल्काभां भ्रामयन्तं गदां मुहु: ॥ ९ ॥
śrīmad-dīrgha-catur-bāhuṁ
tapta-kāñcana-kuṇḍalam
kṣatajākṣaṁ gadā-pāṇim
ātmanaḥ sarvato diśam
paribhramantam ulkābhāṁ
bhrāmayantaṁ gadāṁ muhuḥ
Synonyms
śrīmat — enriched; dīrgha — prolonged; catuḥ-bāhum — four-handed; tapta-kāñcana — molten gold; kuṇḍalam — earrings; kṣataja-akṣam — eyes with the redness of blood; gadā-pāṇim — hand with a club; ātmanaḥ — own; sarvataḥ — all; diśam — around; paribhramantam — loitering; ulkābhām — like shooting stars; bhrāmayantam — encircling; gadām — the club; muhuḥ — constantly.

Translation
The Lord was enriched with four hands, earrings of molten gold and eyes blood red with fury. As He loitered about, His club constantly encircled Him like a shooting star.

Text 10
अस्त्रतेज: स्वगदया नीहारमिव गोपति: ।
विधमन्तं सन्निकर्षे पर्यैक्षत क इत्यसौ ॥ १० ॥
astra-tejaḥ sva-gadayā
nīhāram iva gopatiḥ
vidhamantaṁ sannikarṣe
paryaikṣata ka ity asau
Synonyms
astra-tejaḥ — radiation of the brahmāstra; sva-gadayā — by means of His own club; nīhāram — drops of dew; iva — like; gopatiḥ — the sun; vidhamantam — the act of vanishing; sannikarṣe — nearby; paryaikṣata — observing; kaḥ — who; iti asau — this body.

Translation
The Lord was thus engaged in vanquishing the radiation of the brahmāstra, just as the sun evaporates a drop of dew. He was observed by the child, who thought about who He was.

Text 11
विधूय तदमेयात्मा भगवान्धर्मगुब् विभु: ।
मिषतो दशमासस्य तत्रैवान्तर्दधे हरि: ॥ ११ ॥
vidhūya tad ameyātmā
bhagavān dharma-gub vibhuḥ
miṣato daśamāsasya
tatraivāntardadhe hariḥ
Synonyms
vidhūya — having completely washed off; tat — that; ameyātmā — the all-pervading Supersoul; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; dharma-gup — the protector of righteousness; vibhuḥ — the Supreme; miṣataḥ — while observing; daśamāsasya — of one who is dressed by all directions; tatra eva — then and there; antaḥ — out of sight; dadhe — became; hariḥ — the Lord.

Translation
While thus being observed by the child, the Supreme Lord Personality of Godhead, the Supersoul of everyone and the protector of the righteous, who stretches in all directions and who is unlimited by time and space, disappeared at once.

Text 12
तत: सर्वगुणोदर्के सानुकूलग्रहोदये ।
जज्ञे वंशधर: पाण्डोर्भूय: पाण्डुरिवौजसा ॥ १२ ॥
tataḥ sarva-guṇodarke
sānukūla-grahodaye
jajñe vaṁśa-dharaḥ pāṇḍor
bhūyaḥ pāṇḍur ivaujasā
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereupon; sarva — all; guṇa — good signs; udarke — having gradually evolved; sa-anukūla — all favorable; grahodaye — constellation of stellar influence; jajñe — took birth; vaṁśa-dharaḥ — heir apparent; pāṇḍoḥ — of Pāṇḍu; bhūyaḥ — being; pāṇḍuḥ iva — exactly like Pāṇḍu; ojasā — by prowess.

Translation
Thereupon, when all the good signs of the zodiac gradually evolved, the heir apparent of Pāṇḍu, who would be exactly like him in prowess, took birth.

Text 13
तस्य प्रीतमना राजा विप्रैर्धौम्यकृपादिभि: ।
जातकं कारयामास वाचयित्वा च मङ्गलम् ॥ १३ ॥
tasya prīta-manā rājā
viprair dhaumya-kṛpādibhiḥ
jātakaṁ kārayām āsa
vācayitvā ca maṅgalam
Synonyms
tasya — his; prīta-manāḥ — satisfied; rājā — King Yudhiṣṭhira; vipraiḥ — by the learned brāhmaṇas; dhaumya — Dhaumya; kṛpa — Kṛpa; ādibhiḥ — and others also; jātakam — one of the purificatory processes performed just after the birth of a child; kārayām āsa — had them performed; vācayitvā — by recitation; ca — also; maṅgalam — auspicious.

Translation
King Yudhiṣṭhira, who was very satisfied with the birth of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, had the purificatory process of birth performed. Learned brāhmaṇas, headed by Dhaumya and Kṛpa, recited auspicious hymns.

Text 14
हिरण्यं गां महीं ग्रामान् हस्त्यश्वान्नृपतिर्वरान् ।
प्रादात्स्वन्नं च विप्रेभ्य: प्रजातीर्थे स तीर्थवित् ॥ १४ ॥
hiraṇyaṁ gāṁ mahīṁ grāmān
hasty-aśvān nṛpatir varān
prādāt svannaṁ ca viprebhyaḥ
prajā-tīrthe sa tīrthavit
Synonyms
hiraṇyam — gold; gām — cows; mahīm — land; grāmān — villages; hasti — elephants; aśvān — horses; nṛpatiḥ — the King; varān — rewards; prādāt — gave in charity; su-annam — good food grains; ca — and; viprebhyaḥ — unto the brāhmaṇas; prajā-tīrthe — on the occasion of giving in charity on the birthday of a son; saḥ — he; tīrtha-vit — one who knows how, when and where charity is to be given.

Translation
Upon the birth of a son, the King, who knew how, where and when charity should be given, gave gold, land, villages, elephants, horses and good food grains to the brāhmaṇas.

Text 15
तमूचुर्ब्राह्मणास्तुष्टा राजानं प्रश्रयान्वितम् ।
एष ह्यस्मिन् प्रजातन्तौ पुरूणां पौरवर्षभ ॥ १५ ॥
tam ūcur brāhmaṇās tuṣṭā
rājānaṁ praśrayānvitam
eṣa hy asmin prajā-tantau
purūṇāṁ pauravarṣabha
Synonyms
tam — unto him; ūcuḥ — addressed; brāhmaṇāḥ — the learned brāhmaṇas; tuṣṭāḥ — very much satisfied; rājānam — unto the King; praśraya-anvitam — very much obliging; eṣaḥ — this; hi — certainly; asmin — in the chain of; prajā-tantau — descending line; purūṇām — of the Pūrus; paurava-ṛṣabha — the chief among the Pūrus.

Translation
The learned brāhmaṇas, who were very satisfied with the charities of the King, addressed him as the chief amongst the Pūrus and informed him that his son was certainly in the line of descent from the Pūrus.

Text 16
दैवेनाप्रतिघातेन शुक्ले संस्थामुपेयुषि ।
रातो वोऽनुग्रहार्थाय विष्णुना प्रभविष्णुना ॥ १६ ॥
daivenāpratighātena
śukle saṁsthām upeyuṣi
rāto vo ’nugrahārthāya
viṣṇunā prabhaviṣṇunā
Synonyms
daivena — by supernatural power; apratighātena — by what is irresistible; śukle — unto the pure; saṁsthām — destruction; upeyuṣi — having been enforced; rātaḥ — restored; vaḥ — for you; anugraha-arthāya — for the sake of obliging; viṣṇunā — by the all-pervasive Lord; prabhaviṣṇunā — by the all-powerful.

Translation
The brāhmaṇas said: This spotless son has been restored by the all-powerful and all-pervasive Lord Viṣṇu, the Personality of Godhead, in order to oblige you. He was saved when he was doomed to be destroyed by an irresistible supernatural weapon.

Text 17
तस्मान्नाम्ना विष्णुरात इति लोके भविष्यति ।
न सन्देहो महाभाग महाभागवतो महान् ॥ १७ ॥
tasmān nāmnā viṣṇu-rāta
iti loke bhaviṣyati
na sandeho mahā-bhāga
mahā-bhāgavato mahān
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; nāmnā — by the name; viṣṇu-rātaḥ — protected by Viṣṇu, the Personality of Godhead; iti — thus; loke — in all the planets; bhaviṣyati — shall become well known; na — no; sandehaḥ — doubts; mahā-bhāga — most fortunate; mahā-bhāgavataḥ — the first-class devotee of the Lord; mahān — qualified by all good qualities.

Translation
For this reason this child will be well known in the world as one who is protected by the Personality of Godhead. O most fortunate one, there is no doubt that this child will become a first-class devotee and will be qualified with all good qualities.

Text 18
श्रीराजोवाच
अप्येष वंश्यान् राजर्षीन् पुण्यश्लोकान् महात्मन: ।
अनुवर्तिता स्विद्यशसा साधुवादेन सत्तमा: ॥ १८ ॥
śrī-rājovāca
apy eṣa vaṁśyān rājarṣīn
puṇya-ślokān mahātmanaḥ
anuvartitā svid yaśasā
sādhu-vādena sattamāḥ
Synonyms
śrī-rājā — the all-good king (Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira); uvāca — said; api — whether; eṣaḥ — this; vaṁśyān — family; rāja-ṛṣīn — of saintly kings; puṇya-ślokān — pious by the very name; mahā-ātmanaḥ — all great souls; anuvartitā — follower; svit — will it be; yaśasā — by achievements; sādhu-vādena — by glorification; sat-tamāḥ — O great souls.

Translation
The good King [Yudhiṣṭhira] inquired: O great souls, will he become as saintly a king, as pious in his very name and as famous and glorified in his achievements, as others who appeared in this great royal family?

Text 19
ब्राह्मणा ऊचु:
पार्थ प्रजाविता साक्षादिक्ष्वाकुरिव मानव: ।
ब्रह्मण्य: सत्यसन्धश्च रामो दाशरथिर्यथा ॥ १९ ॥
brāhmaṇā ūcuḥ
pārtha prajāvitā sākṣād
ikṣvākur iva mānavaḥ
brahmaṇyaḥ satya-sandhaś ca
rāmo dāśarathir yathā
Synonyms
brāhmaṇāḥ — the good brāhmaṇas; ūcuḥ — said; pārtha — O son of Pṛthā (Kuntī); prajā — those who are born; avitā — maintainer; sākṣāt — directly; ikṣvākuḥ iva — exactly like King Ikṣvāku; mānavaḥ — son of Manu; brahmaṇyaḥ — followers and respectful to the brāhmaṇas; satya-sandhaḥ — truthful by promise; ca — also; rāmaḥ — the Personality of Godhead Rāma; dāśarathiḥ — the son of Mahārāja Daśaratha; yathā — like Him.

Translation
The learned brāhmaṇas said: O son of Pṛthā, this child shall be exactly like King Ikṣvāku, son of Manu, in maintaining all those who are born. And as for following the brahminical principles, especially in being true to his promise, he shall be exactly like Rāma, the Personality of Godhead, the son of Mahārāja Daśaratha.

Text 20
एष दाता शरण्यश्च यथा ह्यौशीनर: शिबि: ।
यशो वितनिता स्वानां दौष्यन्तिरिव यज्वनाम् ॥ २० ॥
eṣa dātā śaraṇyaś ca
yathā hy auśīnaraḥ śibiḥ
yaśo vitanitā svānāṁ
dauṣyantir iva yajvanām
Synonyms
eṣaḥ — this child; dātā — donor in charity; śaraṇyaḥ — protector of the surrendered; ca — and; yathā — as; hi — certainly; auśīnaraḥ — the country named Uśīnara; śibiḥ — Śibi; yaśaḥ — fame; vitanitā — disseminator; svānām — of the kinsmen; dauṣyantih iva — like Bharata, the son of Duṣyanta; yajvanām — of those who have performed many sacrifices.

Translation
This child will be a munificent donor of charity and protector of the surrendered, like the famous King Śibi of the Uśīnara country. And he will expand the name and fame of his family like Bharata, the son of Mahārāja Duṣyanta.

Text 21
धन्विनामग्रणीरेष तुल्यश्चार्जुनयोर्द्वयो: ।
हुताश इव दुर्धर्ष: समुद्र इव दुस्तर: ॥ २१ ॥
dhanvinām agraṇīr eṣa
tulyaś cārjunayor dvayoḥ
hutāśa iva durdharṣaḥ
samudra iva dustaraḥ
Synonyms
dhanvinām — of the great bowmen; agraṇīḥ — the foreman; eṣaḥ — this child; tulyaḥ — equally good; ca — and; arjunayoḥ — of the Arjunas; dvayoḥ — of the two; hutāśaḥ — fire; iva — like; durdharṣaḥ — irresistible; samudraḥ — ocean; iva — like; dustaraḥ — unsurpassable.

Translation
Amongst great bowmen, this child will be as good as Arjuna. He will be as irresistible as fire and as unsurpassable as the ocean.

Text 22
मृगेन्द्र इव विक्रान्तो निषेव्यो हिमवानिव ।
तितिक्षुर्वसुधेवासौ सहिष्णु: पितराविव ॥ २२ ॥
mṛgendra iva vikrānto
niṣevyo himavān iva
titikṣur vasudhevāsau
sahiṣṇuḥ pitarāv iva
Synonyms
mṛgendraḥ — the lion; iva — like; vikrāntaḥ — powerful; niṣevyaḥ — worthy of taking shelter; himavān — the Himālaya Mountains; iva — like; titikṣuḥ — forbearance; vasudhā iva — like the earth; asau — the child; sahiṣṇuḥ — tolerant; pitarau — parents; iva — like.

Translation
This child will be as strong as a lion, and as worthy a shelter as the Himālaya Mountains. He will be forbearing like the earth, and as tolerant as his parents.

Text 23
पितामहसम: साम्ये प्रसादे गिरिशोपम: ।
आश्रय: सर्वभूतानां यथा देवो रमाश्रय: ॥ २३ ॥
pitāmaha-samaḥ sāmye
prasāde giriśopamaḥ
āśrayaḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ
yathā devo ramāśrayaḥ
Synonyms
pitāmaha — the grandfather, or Brahmā; samaḥ — equally good; sāmye — in the matter; prasāde — in charity or in munificence; giriśa — Lord Śiva; upamaḥ — comparison of equilibrium; āśrayaḥ — resort; sarva — all; bhūtānām — of the living beings; yathā — as; devaḥ — the Supreme Lord; ramā-āśrayaḥ — the Personality of Godhead.

Translation
This child will be like his grandfather Yudhiṣṭhira or Brahmā in equanimity of mind. He will be munificent like the lord of the Kailāsa Hill, Śiva. And he will be the resort of everyone, like the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa, who is even the shelter of the goddess of fortune.

Text 24
सर्वसद्गुणमाहात्म्ये एष कृष्णमनुव्रत: ।
रन्तिदेव इवोदारो ययातिरिव धार्मिक: ॥ २४ ॥
sarva-sad-guṇa-māhātmye
eṣa kṛṣṇam anuvrataḥ
rantideva ivodāro
yayātir iva dhārmikaḥ
Synonyms
sarva-sat-guṇa-māhātmye — glorified by all godly attributes; eṣaḥ — this child; kṛṣṇam — like Lord Kṛṣṇa; anuvrataḥ — a follower in His footsteps; rantidevaḥ — Rantideva; iva — like; udāraḥ — in the matter of magnanimity; yayātiḥ — Yayāti; iva — like; dhārmikaḥ — concerning religion.

Translation
This child will be almost as good as Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa by following in His footsteps. In magnanimity he will become as great as King Rantideva. And in religion he will be like Mahārāja Yayāti.

Text 25
धृत्या बलिसम: कृष्णे प्रह्राद इव सद्ग्रह: ।
आहर्तैषोऽश्वमेधानां वृद्धानां पर्युपासक: ॥ २५ ॥
dhṛtyā bali-samaḥ kṛṣṇe
prahrāda iva sad-grahaḥ
āhartaiṣo ’śvamedhānāṁ
vṛddhānāṁ paryupāsakaḥ
Synonyms
dhṛtyā — by patience; bali-samaḥ — like Bali Mahārāja; kṛṣṇe — unto Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; prahrāda — Prahlāda Mahārāja; iva — like; sat-grahaḥ — devotee of; āhartā — performer; eṣaḥ — this child; aśvamedhānām — of Aśvamedha sacrifices; vṛddhānām — of the old and experienced men; paryupāsakaḥ — follower.

Translation
This child will be like Bali Mahārāja in patience, a staunch devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa like Prahlāda Mahārāja, a performer of many aśvamedha [horse] sacrifices and a follower of the old and experienced men.

Text 26
राजर्षीणां जनयिता शास्ता चोत्पथगामिनाम् ।
निग्रहीता कलेरेष भुवो धर्मस्य कारणात् ॥ २६ ॥
rājarṣīṇāṁ janayitā
śāstā cotpatha-gāminām
nigrahītā kaler eṣa
bhuvo dharmasya kāraṇāt
Synonyms
rāja-ṛṣīṇām — of kings as good as sages; janayitā — producer; śāstā — chastiser; ca — and; utpatha-gāminām — of the upstarts; nigrahītā — molester; kaleḥ — of the quarrelsome; eṣaḥ — this; bhuvaḥ — of the world; dharmasya — of religion; kāraṇāt — on account of.

Translation
This child will be the father of kings who will be like sages. For world peace and for the sake of religion, he will be the chastiser of the upstarts and the quarrelsome.

Text 27
तक्षकादात्मनो मृत्युं द्विजपुत्रोपसर्जितात् ।
प्रपत्स्यत उपश्रुत्य मुक्तसङ्ग: पदं हरे: ॥ २७ ॥
takṣakād ātmano mṛtyuṁ
dvija-putropasarjitāt
prapatsyata upaśrutya
mukta-saṅgaḥ padaṁ hareḥ
Synonyms
takṣakāt — by the snakebird; ātmanaḥ — of his personal self; mṛtyum — death; dvija-putra — the son of a brāhmaṇa; upasarjitāt — being sent by; prapatsyate — having taken shelter of; upaśrutya — after hearing; mukta-saṅgaḥ — freed from all attachment; padam — position; hareḥ — of the Lord.

Translation
After hearing about his death, which will be caused by the bite of a snakebird sent by a son of a brāhmaṇa, he will get himself freed from all material attachment and surrender unto the Personality of Godhead, taking shelter of Him.

Text 28
जिज्ञासितात्मयाथार्थ्यो मुनेर्व्याससुतादसौ ।
हित्वेदं नृप गङ्गायां यास्यत्यद्धाकुतोभयम् ॥ २८ ॥
jijñāsitātma-yāthārthyo
muner vyāsa-sutād asau
hitvedaṁ nṛpa gaṅgāyāṁ
yāsyaty addhākutobhayam
Synonyms
jijñāsita — having inquired of; ātma-yāthārthyaḥ — right knowledge of one’s own self; muneḥ — from the learned philosopher; vyāsa-sutāt — the son of Vyāsa; asau — he; hitvā — quitting; idam — this material attachment; nṛpa — O King; gaṅgāyām — on the bank of the Ganges; yāsyati — will go; addhā — directly; akutaḥ-bhayam — the life of fearlessness.

Translation
After inquiring about proper self-knowledge from the son of Vyāsadeva, who will be a great philosopher, he will renounce all material attachment and achieve a life of fearlessness.

Text 29
इति राज्ञ उपादिश्य विप्रा जातककोविदा: ।
लब्धापचितय: सर्वे प्रतिजग्मु: स्वकान् गृहान् ॥ २९ ॥
iti rājña upādiśya
viprā jātaka-kovidāḥ
labdhāpacitayaḥ sarve
pratijagmuḥ svakān gṛhān
Synonyms
iti — thus; rājñe — unto the King; upādiśya — having advised; viprāḥ — persons well versed in the Vedas; jātaka-kovidāḥ — persons expert in astrology and in the performance of birth ceremonies; labdha-apacitayaḥ — those who had received sumptuously as remuneration; sarve — all of them; pratijagmuḥ — went back; svakān — their own; gṛhān — houses.

Translation
Thus those who were expert in astrological knowledge and in performance of the birth ceremony instructed King Yudhiṣṭhira about the future history of his child. Then, being sumptuously remunerated, they all returned to their respective homes.

Text 30
स एष लोके विख्यात: परीक्षिदिति यत्प्रभु: ।
पूर्वं द‍ृष्टमनुध्यायन् परीक्षेत नरेष्विह ॥ ३० ॥
sa eṣa loke vikhyātaḥ
parīkṣid iti yat prabhuḥ
pūrvaṁ dṛṣṭam anudhyāyan
parīkṣeta nareṣv iha
Synonyms
saḥ — he; eṣaḥ — in this; loke — world; vikhyātaḥ — famous; parīkṣit — one who examines; iti — thus; yat — what; prabhuḥ — O my King; pūrvam — before; dṛṣṭam — seen; anudhyāyan — constantly contemplating; parīkṣeta — shall examine; nareṣu — unto every man; iha — here.

Translation
So his son would become famous in the world as Parīkṣit [examiner] because he would come to examine all human beings in his search after that personality whom he saw before his birth. Thus he would come to constantly contemplate Him.

Text 31
स राजपुत्रो ववृधे आशु शुक्ल इवोडुप: ।
आपूर्यमाण: पितृभि: काष्ठाभिरिव सोऽन्वहम् ॥ ३१ ॥
sa rāja-putro vavṛdhe
āśu śukla ivoḍupaḥ
āpūryamāṇaḥ pitṛbhiḥ
kāṣṭhābhir iva so ’nvaham
Synonyms
saḥ — that; rāja-putraḥ — the royal prince; vavṛdhe — grew up; āśu — very soon; śukle — waxing moon; iva — like; uḍupaḥ — the moon; āpūryamāṇaḥ — luxuriantly; pitṛbhiḥ — by the parental guardians; kāṣṭhābhiḥ — plenary development; iva — like; saḥ — he; anvaham — day after day.

Translation
As the moon, in its waxing fortnight, develops day after day, so the royal prince [Parīkṣit] very soon developed luxuriantly under the care and full facilities of his guardian grandfathers.

Text 32
यक्ष्यमाणोऽश्वमेधेन ज्ञातिद्रोहजिहासया ।
राजा लब्धधनो दध्यौ नान्यत्र करदण्डयो: ॥ ३२ ॥
yakṣyamāṇo ’śvamedhena
jñāti-droha-jihāsayā
rājā labdha-dhano dadhyau
nānyatra kara-daṇḍayoḥ
Synonyms
yakṣyamāṇaḥ — desiring to perform; aśvamedhena — by the horse sacrifice ceremony; jñāti-droha — fighting with kinsmen; jihāsayā — for getting free; rājā — King Yudhiṣṭhira; labdha-dhanaḥ — for getting some wealth; dadhyau — thought about it; na anyatra — not otherwise; kara-daṇḍayoḥ — taxes and fines.

Translation
Just at this time, King Yudhiṣṭhira was considering performing a horse sacrifice to get freed from sins incurred from fighting with kinsmen. But he became anxious to get some wealth, for there were no surplus funds outside of fines and tax collection.

Text 33
तदभिप्रेतमालक्ष्य भ्रातरोऽच्युतचोदिता: ।
धनं प्रहीणमाजह्रुरुदीच्यां दिशि भूरिश: ॥ ३३ ॥
tad abhipretam ālakṣya
bhrātaro ’cyuta-coditāḥ
dhanaṁ prahīṇam ājahrur
udīcyāṁ diśi bhūriśaḥ
Synonyms
tat — his; abhipretam — wishes of the mind; ālakṣya — observing; bhrātaraḥ — his brothers; acyuta — the infallible (Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa); coditāḥ — being advised by; dhanam — riches; prahīṇam — to collect; ājahruḥ — brought about; udīcyām — northern; diśi — direction; bhūriśaḥ — sufficient.

Translation
Understanding the hearty wishes of the King, his brothers, as advised by the infallible Lord Kṛṣṇa, collected sufficient riches from the north [left by King Marutta].

Text 34
तेन सम्भृतसम्भारो धर्मपुत्रो युधिष्ठिर: ।
वाजिमेधैस्त्रिभिर्भीतो यज्ञै: समयजद्धरिम् ॥ ३४ ॥
tena sambhṛta-sambhāro
dharma-putro yudhiṣṭhiraḥ
vājimedhais tribhir bhīto
yajñaiḥ samayajad dharim
Synonyms
tena — with that wealth; sambhṛta — collected; sambhāraḥ — ingredients; dharma-putraḥ — the pious king; yudhiṣṭhiraḥ — Yudhiṣṭhira; vājimedhaiḥ — by horse sacrifices; tribhiḥ — three times; bhītaḥ — being greatly afraid after the Battle of Kurukṣetra; yajñaiḥ — sacrifices; samayajat — perfectly worshiped; harim — the Personality of Godhead.

Translation
By those riches, the King could procure the ingredients for three horse sacrifices. Thus the pious King Yudhiṣṭhira, who was very fearful after the Battle of Kurukṣetra, pleased Lord Hari, the Personality of Godhead.

Text 35
आहूतो भगवान् राज्ञा याजयित्वा द्विजैर्नृपम् ।
उवास कतिचिन्मासान् सुहृदां प्रियकाम्यया ॥ ३५ ॥
āhūto bhagavān rājñā
yājayitvā dvijair nṛpam
uvāsa katicin māsān
suhṛdāṁ priya-kāmyayā
Synonyms
āhūtaḥ — being called by; bhagavān — Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead; rājñā — by the King; yājayitvā — causing to be performed; dvijaiḥ — by the learned brāhmaṇas; nṛpam — on behalf of the King; uvāsa — resided; katicit — a few; māsān — months; suhṛdām — for the sake of the relatives; priya-kāmyayā — for the pleasure.

Translation
Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, being invited to the sacrifices by Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, saw to it that they were performed by qualified [twice-born] brāhmaṇas. After that, for the pleasure of the relatives, the Lord remained a few months.

Text 36
ततो राज्ञाभ्यनुज्ञात: कृष्णया सह बन्धुभि: ।
ययौ द्वारवतीं ब्रह्मन् सार्जुनो यदुभिर्वृत: ॥ ३६ ॥
tato rājñābhyanujñātaḥ
kṛṣṇayā saha-bandhubhiḥ
yayau dvāravatīṁ brahman
sārjuno yadubhir vṛtaḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; rājñā — by the King; abhyanujñātaḥ — being permitted; kṛṣṇayā — as well as by Draupadī; saha — along with; bandhubhiḥ — other relatives; yayau — went to; dvāravatīm — Dvārakā-dhāma; brahman — O brāhmaṇas; sa-arjunaḥ — along with Arjuna; yadubhiḥ — by the members of the Yadu dynasty; vṛtaḥ — surrounded.

Translation
O Śaunaka, thereafter the Lord, having bade farewell to King Yudhiṣṭhira, Draupadī and other relatives, started for the city of Dvārakā, accompanied by Arjuna and other members of the Yadu dynasty.