Text 1
सूत उवाच
विदुरस्तीर्थयात्रायां मैत्रेयादात्मनो गतिम् ।
ज्ञात्वागाद्धास्तिनपुरं तयावाप्तविवित्सित: ॥ १ ॥
sūta uvāca
viduras tīrtha-yātrāyāṁ
maitreyād ātmano gatim
jñātvāgād dhāstinapuraṁ
tayāvāpta-vivitsitaḥ
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said; viduraḥ — Vidura; tīrtha-yātrāyām — while traveling to different places of pilgrimage; maitreyāt — from the great sage Maitreya; ātmanaḥ — of the self; gatim — destination; jñātvā — by knowing it; āgāt — went back; hāstinapuram — the city of Hastināpura; tayā — by that knowledge; avāpta — sufficiently a gainer; vivitsitaḥ — being well versed in everything knowable.

Translation
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said: While traveling on a pilgrimage, Vidura received knowledge of the destination of the self from the great sage Maitreya and then returned to Hastināpura. He became as well versed in the subject as he desired.

Text 2
यावत: कृतवान् प्रश्नान् क्षत्ता कौषारवाग्रत: ।
जातैकभक्तिर्गोविन्दे तेभ्यश्चोपरराम ह ॥ २ ॥
yāvataḥ kṛtavān praśnān
kṣattā kauṣāravāgrataḥ
jātaika-bhaktir govinde
tebhyaś copararāma ha
Synonyms
yāvataḥ — all that; kṛtavān — did he put; praśnān — questions; kṣattā — a name of Vidura; kauṣārava — a name of Maitreya; agrataḥ — in the presence of; jāta — having grown up; eka — one; bhaktiḥ — transcendental loving service; govinde — unto Lord Kṛṣṇa; tebhyaḥ — regarding further questions; ca — and; upararāma — retired from; ha — in the past.

Translation
After asking various questions and becoming established in the transcendental loving service of Lord Kṛṣṇa, Vidura retired from putting questions to Maitreya Muni.

Texts 3-4
तं बन्धुमागतं द‍ृष्ट्वा धर्मपुत्र: सहानुज: ।
धृतराष्ट्रो युयुत्सुश्च सूत: शारद्वत: पृथा ॥ ३ ॥
गान्धारी द्रौपदी ब्रह्मन् सुभद्रा चोत्तरा कृपी ।
अन्याश्च जामय: पाण्डोर्ज्ञातय: ससुता: स्त्रिय: ॥ ४ ॥
taṁ bandhum āgataṁ dṛṣṭvā
dharma-putraḥ sahānujaḥ
dhṛtarāṣṭro yuyutsuś ca
sūtaḥ śāradvataḥ pṛthā
gāndhārī draupadī brahman
subhadrā cottarā kṛpī
anyāś ca jāmayaḥ pāṇḍor
jñātayaḥ sasutāḥ striyaḥ
Synonyms
tam — him; bandhum — relative; āgatam — having arrived there; dṛṣṭvā — by seeing it; dharma-putraḥ — Yudhiṣṭhira; saha-anujaḥ — along with his younger brothers; dhṛtarāṣṭraḥ — Dhṛtarāṣṭra; yuyutsuḥ — Sātyaki; ca — and; sūtaḥ — Sañjaya; śāradvataḥ — Kṛpācārya; pṛthā — Kuntī; gāndhārī — Gāndhārī; draupadī — Draupadī; brahman — O brāhmaṇas; subhadrā — Subhadrā; ca — and; uttarā — Uttarā; kṛpī — Kṛpī; anyāḥ — others; ca — and; jāmayaḥ — wives of other family members; pāṇḍoḥ — of the Pāṇḍavas; jñātayaḥ — family members; sa-sutāḥ — along with their sons; striyaḥ — the ladies.

Translation
When they saw Vidura return to the palace, all the inhabitants — Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, his younger brothers, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Sātyaki, Sañjaya, Kṛpācārya, Kuntī, Gāndhārī, Draupadī, Subhadrā, Uttarā, Kṛpī, many other wives of the Kauravas, and other ladies with children — all hurried to him in great delight. It so appeared that they had regained their consciousness after a long period.

Text 5
प्रत्युज्जग्मु: प्रहर्षेण प्राणं तन्व इवागतम् ।
अभिसङ्गम्य विधिवत् परिष्वङ्गाभिवादनै: ॥ ५ ॥
pratyujjagmuḥ praharṣeṇa
prāṇaṁ tanva ivāgatam
abhisaṅgamya vidhivat
pariṣvaṅgābhivādanaiḥ
Synonyms
prati — towards; ujjagmuḥ — went; praharṣeṇa — with great delight; prāṇam — life; tanvaḥ — of the body; iva — like; āgatam — returned; abhisaṅgamya — approaching; vidhi-vat — in due form; pariṣvaṅga — embracing; abhivādanaiḥ — by obeisances.

Translation
With great delight they all approached him, as if life had returned to their bodies. They exchanged obeisances and welcomed each other with embraces.

Text 6
मुमुचु: प्रेमबाष्पौघं विरहौत्कण्ठ्यकातरा: ।
राजा तमर्हयाञ्चक्रे कृतासनपरिग्रहम् ॥ ६ ॥
mumucuḥ prema-bāṣpaughaṁ
virahautkaṇṭhya-kātarāḥ
rājā tam arhayāṁ cakre
kṛtāsana-parigraham
Synonyms
mumucuḥ — emanated; prema — affectionate; bāṣpa-ogham — emotional tears; viraha — separation; autkaṇṭhya — anxiousness; kātarāḥ — being aggrieved; rājā — King Yudhiṣṭhira; tam — unto him (Vidura); arhayām cakre — offered; kṛta — performance of; āsana — sitting accommodations; parigraham — arrangement of.

Translation
Due to anxieties and long separation, they all cried out of affection. King Yudhiṣṭhira then arranged to offer sitting accommodations and a reception.

Text 7
तं भुक्तवन्तं विश्रान्तमासीनं सुखमासने ।
प्रश्रयावनतो राजा प्राह तेषां च श‍ृण्वताम् ॥ ७ ॥
taṁ bhuktavantaṁ viśrāntam
āsīnaṁ sukham āsane
praśrayāvanato rājā
prāha teṣāṁ ca śṛṇvatām
Synonyms
tam — him (Vidura); bhuktavantam — after feeding him sumptuously; viśrāntam — and having taken rest; āsīnam — being seated; sukham āsane — on a comfortable seat; praśraya-avanataḥ — naturally very gentle and meek; rājā — King Yudhiṣṭhira; prāha — began to speak; teṣām ca — and by them; śṛṇvatām — being heard.

Translation
After Vidura ate sumptuously and took sufficient rest, he was comfortably seated. Then the King began to speak to him, and all who were present there listened.

Text 8
युधिष्ठिर उवाच
अपि स्मरथ नो युष्मत्पक्षच्छायासमेधितान् ।
विपद्गणाद्विषाग्‍न्‍यादेर्मोचिता यत्समातृका: ॥ ८ ॥
yudhiṣṭhira uvāca
api smaratha no yuṣmat-
pakṣa-cchāyā-samedhitān
vipad-gaṇād viṣāgnyāder
mocitā yat samātṛkāḥ
Synonyms
yudhiṣṭhiraḥ uvāca — Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira said; api — whether; smaratha — you remember; naḥ — us; yuṣmat — from you; pakṣa — partiality towards us like the wings of a bird; chāyā — protection; samedhitān — we who were brought up by you; vipat-gaṇāt — from various types of calamities; viṣa — by administration of poison; agni-ādeḥ — by setting on fire; mocitāḥ — released from; yat — what you have done; sa — along with; mātṛkāḥ — our mother.

Translation
Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira said: My uncle, do you remember how you always protected us, along with our mother, from all sorts of calamities? Your partiality, like the wings of a bird, saved us from poisoning and arson.

Text 9
कया वृत्त्या वर्तितं वश्चरद्भ‍ि: क्षितिमण्डलम् ।
तीर्थानि क्षेत्रमुख्यानि सेवितानीह भूतले ॥ ९ ॥
kayā vṛttyā vartitaṁ vaś
caradbhiḥ kṣiti-maṇḍalam
tīrthāni kṣetra-mukhyāni
sevitānīha bhūtale
Synonyms
kayā — by which; vṛttyā — means; vartitam — maintained your livelihood; vaḥ — your good self; caradbhiḥ — while traveling; kṣiti-maṇḍalam — on the surface of the earth; tīrthāni — places of pilgrimage; kṣetra-mukhyāni — the principal holy places; sevitāni — served by you; iha — in this world; bhūtale — on this planet.

Translation
While traveling on the surface of the earth, how did you maintain your livelihood? At which holy places and pilgrimage sites did you render service?

Text 10
भवद्विधा भागवतास्तीर्थभूता: स्वयं विभो ।
तीर्थीकुर्वन्ति तीर्थानि स्वान्त:स्थेन गदाभृता ॥ १० ॥
bhavad-vidhā bhāgavatās
tīrtha-bhūtāḥ svayaṁ vibho
tīrthī-kurvanti tīrthāni
svāntaḥ-sthena gadābhṛtā
Synonyms
bhavat — your good self; vidhāḥ — like; bhāgavatāḥ — devotees; tīrtha — the holy places of pilgrimage; bhūtāḥ — converted into; svayam — personally; vibho — O powerful one; tīrthī-kurvanti — make into a holy place of pilgrimage; tīrthāni — the holy places; sva-antaḥ-sthena — having been situated in the heart; gadā-bhṛtā — the Personality of Godhead.

Translation
My lord, devotees like your good self are verily holy places personified. Because you carry the Personality of Godhead within your heart, you turn all places into places of pilgrimage.

Text 11
अपि न: सुहृदस्तात बान्धवा: कृष्णदेवता: ।
द‍ृष्टा: श्रुता वा यदव: स्वपुर्यां सुखमासते ॥ ११ ॥
api naḥ suhṛdas tāta
bāndhavāḥ kṛṣṇa-devatāḥ
dṛṣṭāḥ śrutā vā yadavaḥ
sva-puryāṁ sukham āsate
Synonyms
api — whether; naḥ — our; suhṛdaḥ — well-wishers; tāta — O my uncle; bāndhavāḥ — friends; kṛṣṇa-devatāḥ — those who are always rapt in the service of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; dṛṣṭāḥ — by seeing them; śrutāḥ — or by hearing about them; vā — either; yadavaḥ — the descendants of Yadu; sva-puryām — along with their residential place; sukham āsate — if they are all happy.

Translation
My uncle, you must have visited Dvārakā. In that holy place are our friends and well-wishers, the descendants of Yadu, who are always rapt in the service of the Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa. You might have seen them or heard about them. Are they all living happily in their abodes?

Text 12
इत्युक्तो धर्मराजेन सर्वं तत् समवर्णयत् ।
यथानुभूतं
क्रमशो विना यदुकुलक्षयम् ॥ १२ ॥
ity ukto dharma-rājena
sarvaṁ tat samavarṇayat
yathānubhūtaṁ kramaśo
vinā yadu-kula-kṣayam
Synonyms
iti — thus; uktaḥ — being asked; dharma-rājena — by King Yudhiṣṭhira; sarvam — all; tat — that; samavarṇayat — properly described; yathā-anubhūtam — as he experienced; kramaśaḥ — one after another; vinā — without; yadu-kula-kṣayam — annihilation of the Yadu dynasty.

Translation
Thus being questioned by Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, Mahātmā Vidura gradually described everything he had personally experienced, except news of the annihilation of the Yadu dynasty.

Text 13
नन्वप्रियं दुर्विषहं नृणां
स्वयमुपस्थितम् ।
नावेदयत् सकरुणो दु:खितान् द्रष्टुमक्षम: ॥ १३ ॥
nanv apriyaṁ durviṣahaṁ
nṛṇāṁ svayam upasthitam
nāvedayat sakaruṇo
duḥkhitān draṣṭum akṣamaḥ
Synonyms
nanu — as a matter of fact; apriyam — unpalatable; durviṣaham — unbearable; nṛṇām — of humankind; svayam — in its own way; upasthitam — appearance; na — did not; āvedayat — expressed; sakaruṇaḥ — compassionate; duḥkhitān — distressed; draṣṭum — to see; akṣamaḥ — unable.

Translation
Compassionate Mahātmā Vidura could not stand to see the Pāṇḍavas distressed at any time. Therefore he did not disclose this unpalatable and unbearable incident because calamities come of their own accord.

Text 14
कञ्चित्कालमथावात्सीत्सत्कृतो देववत्सुखम् ।
भ्रातुर्ज्येष्ठस्य श्रेयस्कृत्सर्वेषां सुखमावहन् ॥ १४ ॥
kañcit kālam athāvātsīt
sat-kṛto devavat sukham
bhrātur jyeṣṭhasya śreyas-kṛt
sarveṣāṁ sukham āvahan
Synonyms
kañcit — for a few days; kālam — time; atha — thus; avātsīt — resided; sat-kṛtaḥ — being well treated; deva-vat — just like a godly personality; sukham — amenities; bhrātuḥ — of the brother; jyeṣṭhasya — of the elder; śreyaḥ-kṛt — for doing good to him; sarveṣām — all others; sukham — happiness; āvahan — made it possible.

Translation
Thus Mahātmā Vidura, being treated just like a godly person by his kinsmen, remained there for a certain period just to rectify the mentality of his eldest brother and in this way bring happiness to all the others.

Text 15
अबिभ्रदर्यमा दण्डं यथावदघकारिषु ।
यावद्दधार शूद्रत्वं शापाद्वर्षशतं यम: ॥ १५ ॥
abibhrad aryamā daṇḍaṁ
yathāvad agha-kāriṣu
yāvad dadhāra śūdratvaṁ
śāpād varṣa-śataṁ yamaḥ
Synonyms
abibhrat — administered; aryamā — Aryamā; daṇḍam — punishment; yathāvat — as it was suitable; agha-kāriṣu — unto persons who had committed sins; yāvat — as long as; dadhāra — accepted; śūdratvam — the tabernacle of a śūdra; śāpāt — as the result of a curse; varṣa-śatam — for one hundred years; yamaḥ — Yamarāja.

Translation
As long as Vidura played the part of a śūdra, being cursed by Maṇḍūka Muni, Aryamā officiated at the post of Yamarāja to punish those who committed sinful acts.

Text 16
युधिष्ठिरो लब्धराज्यो द‍ृष्ट्वा पौत्रं कुलन्धरम् ।
भ्रातृभिर्लोकपालाभैर्मुमुदे परया श्रिया ॥ १६ ॥
yudhiṣṭhiro labdha-rājyo
dṛṣṭvā pautraṁ kulan-dharam
bhrātṛbhir loka-pālābhair
mumude parayā śriyā
Synonyms
yudhiṣṭhiraḥ — Yudhiṣṭhira; labdha-rājyaḥ — possessing his paternal kingdom; dṛṣṭvā — by seeing; pautram — the grandson; kulam-dharam — just suitable for the dynasty; bhrātṛbhiḥ — by the brothers; loka-pālābhaiḥ — who were all expert administrators; mumude — enjoyed life; parayā — uncommon; śriyā — opulence.

Translation
Having won his kingdom and observed the birth of one grandson competent to continue the noble tradition of his family, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira reigned peacefully and enjoyed uncommon opulence in cooperation with his younger brothers, who were all expert administrators to the common people.

Text 17
एवं गृहेषु सक्तानां प्रमत्तानां तदीहया ।
अत्यक्रामदविज्ञात: काल: परमदुस्तर: ॥ १७ ॥
evaṁ gṛheṣu saktānāṁ
pramattānāṁ tad-īhayā
atyakrāmad avijñātaḥ
kālaḥ parama-dustaraḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; gṛheṣu — in the family affairs; saktānām — of persons who are too attached; pramattānām — insanely attached; tat-īhayā — engrossed in such thoughts; atyakrāmat — surpassed; avijñātaḥ — imperceptibly; kālaḥ — eternal time; parama — supremely; dustaraḥ — insurmountable.

Translation
Insurmountable eternal time imperceptibly overcomes those who are too much attached to family affairs and are always engrossed in their thought.

Text 18
विदुरस्तदभिप्रेत्य धृतराष्ट्रमभाषत ।
राजन्निर्गम्यतां शीघ्रं पश्येदं भयमागतम् ॥ १८ ॥
viduras tad abhipretya
dhṛtarāṣṭram abhāṣata
rājan nirgamyatāṁ śīghraṁ
paśyedaṁ bhayam āgatam
Synonyms
viduraḥ — Mahātmā Vidura; tat — that; abhipretya — knowing it well; dhṛtarāṣṭram — unto Dhṛtarāṣṭra; abhāṣata — said; rājan — O King; nirgamyatām — please get out immediately; śīghram — without the least delay; paśya — just see; idam — this; bhayam — fear; āgatam — already arrived.

Translation
Mahātmā Vidura knew all this, and therefore he addressed Dhṛtarāṣṭra, saying: My dear King, please get out of here immediately. Do not delay. Just see how fear has overtaken you.

Text 19
प्रतिक्रिया न यस्येह कुतश्चित्कर्हिचित्प्रभो ।
स एष भगवान् काल: सर्वेषां न: समागत: ॥ १९ ॥
pratikriyā na yasyeha
kutaścit karhicit prabho
sa eṣa bhagavān kālaḥ
sarveṣāṁ naḥ samāgataḥ
Synonyms
pratikriyā — remedial measure; na — there is none; yasya — of which; iha — in this material world; kutaścit — by any means; karhicit — or by anyone; prabho — O my lord; saḥ — that; eṣaḥ — positively; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; kālaḥ — eternal time; sarveṣām — of all; naḥ — of us; samāgataḥ — arrived.

Translation
This frightful situation cannot be remedied by any person in this material world. My lord, it is the Supreme Personality of Godhead as eternal time [kāla] that has approached us all.

Text 20
येन चैवाभिपन्नोऽयं प्राणै: प्रियतमैरपि ।
जन: सद्यो वियुज्येत किमुतान्यैर्धनादिभि: ॥ २० ॥
yena caivābhipanno ’yaṁ
prāṇaiḥ priyatamair api
janaḥ sadyo viyujyeta
kim utānyair dhanādibhiḥ
Synonyms
yena — pulled by such time; ca — and; eva — certainly; abhipannaḥ — overtaken; ayam — this; prāṇaiḥ — with life; priya-tamaiḥ — which is most dear to everyone; api — even though; janaḥ — person; sadyaḥ — forthwith; viyujyeta — do give up; kim uta anyaiḥ — what to speak of any other thing; dhana-ādibhiḥ — such as wealth, honor, children, land and house.

Translation
Whoever is under the influence of supreme kāla [eternal time] must surrender his most dear life, and what to speak of other things, such as wealth, honor, children, land and home.

Text 21
पितृभ्रातृसुहृत्पुत्रा हतास्ते विगतं वयम् ।
आत्मा च जरया ग्रस्त: परगेहमुपाससे ॥ २१ ॥
pitṛ-bhrātṛ-suhṛt-putrā
hatās te vigataṁ vayam
ātmā ca jarayā grastaḥ
para-geham upāsase
Synonyms
pitṛ — father; bhrātṛ — brother; suhṛt — well-wishers; putrāḥ — sons; hatāḥ — all dead; te — yours; vigatam — expended; vayam — age; ātmā — the body; ca — also; jarayā — by invalidity; grastaḥ — overcome; para-geham — another’s home; upāsase — you do live.

Translation
Your father, brother, well-wishers and sons are all dead and passed away. You yourself have expended the major portion of your life, your body is now overtaken by invalidity, and you are living in the home of another.

Text 22
अन्ध: पुरैव वधिरो मन्दप्रज्ञाश्च साम्प्रतम् ।
विशीर्णदन्तो मन्दाग्नि: सराग: कफमुद्वहन् ॥ २२ ॥
andhaḥ puraiva vadhiro
manda-prajñāś ca sāmprataṁ
viśīrṇa-danto mandāgniḥ
sarāgaḥ kapham udvahan
Synonyms
andhaḥ — blind; purā — from the beginning; eva — certainly; vadhiraḥ — hard of hearing; manda-prajñāḥ — memory shortened; ca — and; sāmpratam — recently; viśīrṇa — loosened; dantaḥ — teeth; manda-agniḥ — liver action decreased; sa-rāgaḥ — with sound; kapham — coughing much mucus; udvahan — coming out.

Translation
You have been blind from your very birth, and recently you have become hard of hearing. Your memory is shortened, and your intelligence is disturbed. Your teeth are loose, your liver is defective, and you are coughing up mucus.

Text 23
अहो महीयसी जन्तोर्जीविताशा यथा भवान् ।
भीमापवर्जितं
पिण्डमादत्ते गृहपालवत् ॥ २३ ॥
aho mahīyasī jantor
jīvitāśā yathā bhavān
bhīmāpavarjitaṁ piṇḍam
ādatte gṛha-pālavat
Synonyms
aho — alas; mahīyasī — powerful; jantoḥ — of the living beings; jīvita-āśā — hope for life; yathā — as much as; bhavān — you are; bhīma — of Bhīmasena (a brother of Yudhiṣṭhira’s); apavarjitam — remnants; piṇḍam — foodstuff; ādatte — eaten by; gṛha-pāla-vat — like a household dog.

Translation
Alas, how powerful are the hopes of a living being to continue his life. Verily, you are living just like a household dog and are eating remnants of food given by Bhīma.

Text 24
अग्निर्निसृष्टो दत्तश्च गरो दाराश्च
दूषिता: ।
हृतं क्षेत्रं धनं येषां तद्दत्तैरसुभि: कियत् ॥ २४ ॥
agnir nisṛṣṭo dattaś ca
garo dārāś ca dūṣitāḥ
hṛtaṁ kṣetraṁ dhanaṁ yeṣāṁ
tad-dattair asubhiḥ kiyat
Synonyms
agniḥ — fire; nisṛṣṭaḥ — set; dattaḥ — given; ca — and; garaḥ — poison; dārāḥ — married wife; ca — and; dūṣitāḥ — insulted; hṛtam — usurped; kṣetram — kingdom; dhanam — wealth; yeṣām — of those; tat — their; dattaiḥ — given by; asubhiḥ — subsisting; kiyat — is unnecessary.

Translation
There is no need to live a degraded life and subsist on the charity of those whom you tried to kill by arson and poisoning. You also insulted their married wife and usurped their kingdom and wealth.

Text 25
तस्यापि तव देहोऽयं कृपणस्य जिजीविषो: ।
परैत्यनिच्छतो जीर्णो जरया वाससी इव ॥ २५ ॥
tasyāpi tava deho ’yaṁ
kṛpaṇasya jijīviṣoḥ
paraity anicchato jīrṇo
jarayā vāsasī iva
Synonyms
tasya — of this; api — in spite of; tava — your; dehaḥ — body; ayam — this; kṛpaṇasya — of one who is miserly; jijīviṣoḥ — of you who desire life; paraiti — will dwindle; anicchataḥ — even unwilling; jīrṇaḥ — deteriorated; jarayā — old; vāsasī — garments; iva — like.

Translation
Despite your unwillingness to die and your desire to live even at the cost of honor and prestige, your miserly body will certainly dwindle and deteriorate like an old garment.

Text 26
गतस्वार्थमिमं देहं विरक्तो मुक्तबन्धन: ।
अविज्ञातगतिर्जह्यात् स वै धीर उदाहृत: ॥ २६ ॥
gata-svārtham imaṁ dehaṁ
virakto mukta-bandhanaḥ
avijñāta-gatir jahyāt
sa vai dhīra udāhṛtaḥ
Synonyms
gata-sva-artham — without being properly utilized; imam — this; deham — material body; viraktaḥ — indifferently; mukta — being freed; bandhanaḥ — from all obligations; avijñāta-gatiḥ — unknown destination; jahyāt — one should give up this body; saḥ — such a person; vai — certainly; dhīraḥ — undisturbed; udāhṛtaḥ — is said to be so.

Translation
He is called undisturbed who goes to an unknown, remote place and, freed from all obligations, quits his material body when it has become useless.

Text 27
य: स्वकात्परतो वेह जातनिर्वेद आत्मवान् ।
हृदि कृत्वा हरिं गेहात्प्रव्रजेत्स नरोत्तम: ॥ २७ ॥
yaḥ svakāt parato veha
jāta-nirveda ātmavān
hṛdi kṛtvā hariṁ gehāt
pravrajet sa narottamaḥ
Synonyms
yaḥ — anyone who; svakāt — by his own awakening; parataḥ vā — or by hearing from another; iha — here in this world; jāta — becomes; nirvedaḥ — indifferent to material attachment; ātmavān — consciousness; hṛdi — within the heart; kṛtvā — having been taken by; harim — the Personality of Godhead; gehāt — from home; pravrajet — goes away; saḥ — he is; nara-uttamaḥ — the first-class human being.

Translation
He is certainly a first-class man who awakens and understands, either by himself or from others, the falsity and misery of this material world and thus leaves home and depends fully on the Personality of Godhead residing within his heart.

Text 28
अथोदीचीं दिशं यातु स्वैरज्ञातगतिर्भवान् ।
इतोऽर्वाक्प्रायश: काल: पुंसां गुणविकर्षण: ॥ २८ ॥
athodīcīṁ diśaṁ yātu
svair ajñāta-gatir bhavān
ito ’rvāk prāyaśaḥ kālaḥ
puṁsāṁ guṇa-vikarṣaṇaḥ
Synonyms
atha — therefore; udīcīm — northern side; diśam — direction; yātu — please go away; svaiḥ — by your relatives; ajñāta — without knowledge; gatiḥ — movements; bhavān — of yourself; itaḥ — after this; arvāk — will usher in; prāyaśaḥ — generally; kālaḥ — time; puṁsām — of men; guṇa — qualities; vikarṣaṇaḥ — diminishing.

Translation
Please, therefore, leave for the North immediately, without letting your relatives know, for soon that time will approach which will diminish the good qualities of men.

Text 29
एवं राजा विदुरेणानुजेन
प्रज्ञाचक्षुर्बोधित आजमीढ: ।
छित्त्वा स्वेषु स्‍नेहपाशान्द्रढिम्नो
निश्चक्राम भ्रातृसन्दर्शिताध्वा ॥ २९ ॥
evaṁ rājā vidureṇānujena
prajñā-cakṣur bodhita ājamīḍhaḥ
chittvā sveṣu sneha-pāśān draḍhimno
niścakrāma bhrātṛ-sandarśitādhvā
Synonyms
evam — thus; rājā — King Dhṛtarāṣṭra; vidureṇa anujena — by his younger brother Vidura; prajñā — introspective knowledge; cakṣuḥ — eyes; bodhitaḥ — being understood; ājamīḍhaḥ — Dhṛtarāṣṭra, scion of the family of Ajamīḍha; chittvā — by breaking; sveṣu — regarding kinsmen; sneha-pāśān — strong network of affection; draḍhimnaḥ — because of steadfastness; niścakrāma — got out; bhrātṛ — by his brother; sandarśita — direction to; adhvā — the path of liberation.

Translation
Thus Mahārāja Dhṛtarāṣṭra, the scion of the family of Ajamīḍha, firmly convinced by introspective knowledge [prajñā], broke at once the strong network of familial affection by his resolute determination. Thus he immediately left home to set out on the path of liberation, as directed by his younger brother Vidura.

Text 30
पतिं प्रयान्तं सुबलस्य पुत्री
पतिव्रता चानुजगाम साध्वी ।
हिमालयं न्यस्तदण्डप्रहर्षं
मनस्विनामिव सत्सम्प्रहार: ॥ ३० ॥
patiṁ prayāntaṁ subalasya putrī
pati-vratā cānujagāma sādhvī
himālayaṁ nyasta-daṇḍa-praharṣaṁ
manasvinām iva sat samprahāraḥ
Synonyms
patim — her husband; prayāntam — while leaving home; subalasya — of King Subala; putrī — the worthy daughter; pati-vratā — devoted to her husband; ca — also; anujagāma — followed; sādhvī — the chaste; himālayam — towards the Himālaya Mountains; nyasta-daṇḍa — one who has accepted the rod of the renounced order; praharṣam — object of delight; manasvinām — of the great fighters; iva — like; sat — legitimate; samprahāraḥ — good lashing.

Translation
The gentle and chaste Gāndhārī, who was the daughter of King Subala of Kandahar [or Gāndhāra], followed her husband, seeing that he was going to the Himālaya Mountains, which are the delight of those who have accepted the staff of the renounced order like fighters who have accepted a good lashing from the enemy.

Text 31
अजातशत्रु: कृतमैत्रो हुताग्नि-
र्विप्रान्नत्वा
तिलगोभूमिरुक्‍मै: ।
गृहं प्रविष्टो गुरुवन्दनाय
न चापश्यत्पितरौ
सौबलीं च ॥ ३१ ॥
ajāta-śatruḥ kṛta-maitro hutāgnir
viprān natvā tila-go-bhūmi-rukmaiḥ
gṛhaṁ praviṣṭo guru-vandanāya
na cāpaśyat pitarau saubalīṁ ca
Synonyms
ajāta — never born; śatruḥ — enemy; kṛta — having performed; maitraḥ — worshiping the demigods; huta-agniḥ — and offering fuel in the fire; viprān — the brāhmaṇas; natvā — offering obeisances; tila-go-bhūmi-rukmaiḥ — along with grains, cows, land and gold; gṛham — within the palace; praviṣṭaḥ — having entered into; guru-vandanāya — for offering respect to the elderly members; na — did not; ca — also; apaśyat — see; pitarau — his uncles; saubalīm — Gāndhārī; ca — also.

Translation
Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, whose enemy was never born, performed his daily morning duties by praying, offering fire sacrifice to the sun-god, and offering obeisances, grains, cows, land and gold to the brāhmaṇas. He then entered the palace to pay respects to the elderly. However, he could not find his uncles or aunt, the daughter of King Subala.

Text 32
तत्र सञ्जयमासीनं पप्रच्छोद्विग्नमानस: ।
गावल्गणे क्‍व नस्तातो वृद्धो हीनश्च नेत्रयो: ॥ ३२ ॥
tatra sañjayam āsīnaṁ
papracchodvigna-mānasaḥ
gāvalgaṇe kva nas tāto
vṛddho hīnaś ca netrayoḥ
Synonyms
tatra — there; sañjayam — unto Sañjaya; āsīnam — seated; papraccha — he inquired from; udvigna-mānasaḥ — filled with anxiety; gāvalgaṇe — the son of Gavalgaṇa, Sañjaya; kva — where is; naḥ — our; tātaḥ — uncle; vṛddhaḥ — old; hīnaḥ ca — and bereft of; netrayoḥ — the eyes.

Translation
Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, full of anxiety, turned to Sañjaya, who was sitting there, and said: O Sañjaya, where is our uncle, who is old and blind?

Text 33
अम्बा च हतपुत्रार्ता पितृव्य: क्‍व गत: सुहृत् ।
अपि मय्यकृतप्रज्ञे हतबन्धु: स भार्यया ।
आशंसमान: शमलं गङ्गायां दु:खितोऽपतत् ॥ ३३ ॥
ambā ca hata-putrārtā
pitṛvyaḥ kva gataḥ suhṛt
api mayy akṛta-prajñe
hata-bandhuḥ sa bhāryayā
āśaṁsamānaḥ śamalaṁ
gaṅgāyāṁ duḥkhito ’patat
Synonyms
ambā — mother-aunt; ca — and; hata-putrā — who had lost all her sons; ārtā — in a sorry plight; pitṛvyaḥ — uncle Vidura; kva — where; gataḥ — gone; suhṛt — well-wisher; api — whether; mayi — unto me; akṛta-prajñe — ungrateful; hata-bandhuḥ — one who has lost all his sons; saḥ — Dhṛtarāṣṭra; bhāryayā — with his wife; āśaṁsamānaḥ — in doubtful mind; śamalam — offenses; gaṅgāyām — in the Ganges water; duḥkhitaḥ — in distressed mind; apatat — fell down.

Translation
Where is my well-wisher, uncle Vidura, and mother Gāndhārī, who is very afflicted due to all her sons’ demise? My uncle Dhṛtarāṣṭra was also very mortified due to the death of all his sons and grandsons. Undoubtedly I am very ungrateful. Did he, therefore, take my offenses very seriously and, along with his wife, drown himself in the Ganges?

Text 34
पितर्युपरते पाण्डौ सर्वान्न: सुहृद: शिशून् ।
अरक्षतां व्यसनत: पितृव्यौ क्‍व गतावित: ॥ ३४ ॥
pitary uparate pāṇḍau
sarvān naḥ suhṛdaḥ śiśūn
arakṣatāṁ vyasanataḥ
pitṛvyau kva gatāv itaḥ
Synonyms
pitari — upon my father; uparate — falling down; pāṇḍau — Mahārāja Pāṇḍu; sarvān — all; naḥ — of us; suhṛdaḥ — well-wishers; śiśūn — small children; arakṣatām — protected; vyasanataḥ — from all kinds of dangers; pitṛvyau — uncles; kva — where; gatau — have departed; itaḥ — from this place.

Translation
When my father, Pāṇḍu, fell down and we were all small children, these two uncles gave us protection from all kinds of calamities. They were always our good well-wishers. Alas, where have they gone from here?

Text 35
सूत उवाच
कृपया स्नेडहवैक्लव्यात्सूतो विरहकर्शित: ।
आत्मेश्वरमचक्षाणो न प्रत्याहातिपीडित: ॥ ३५ ॥
sūta uvāca
kṛpayā sneha-vaiklavyāt
sūto viraha-karśitaḥ
ātmeśvaram acakṣāṇo
na pratyāhātipīḍitaḥ
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Sūta Gosvāmī said; kṛpayā — out of full compassion; sneha-vaiklavyāt — mental derangement due to profound affection; sūtaḥ — Sañjaya; viraha-karśitaḥ — distressed by separation; ātma-īśvaram — his master; acakṣāṇaḥ — having not seen; na — did not; pratyāha — replied; ati-pīḍitaḥ — being too aggrieved.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī said: Because of compassion and mental agitation, Sañjaya, not having seen his own master, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, was aggrieved and could not properly reply to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira.

Text 36
विमृज्याश्रूणि पाणिभ्यां
विष्टभ्यात्मानमात्मना ।
अजातशत्रुं प्रत्यूचे प्रभो: पादावनुस्मरन् ॥ ३६ ॥
vimṛjyāśrūṇi pāṇibhyāṁ
viṣṭabhyātmānam ātmanā
ajāta-śatruṁ pratyūce
prabhoḥ pādāv anusmaran
Synonyms
vimṛjya — smearing; aśrūṇi — tears of the eyes; pāṇibhyām — with his hands; viṣṭabhya — situated; ātmānam — the mind; ātmanā — by intelligence; ajāta-śatrum — unto Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira; pratyūce — began to reply; prabhoḥ — of his master; pādau — feet; anusmaran — thinking after.

Translation
First he slowly pacified his mind by intelligence, and wiping away his tears and thinking of the feet of his master, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, he began to reply to Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira.

Text 37
सञ्जय उवाच
नाहं वेद व्यवसितं पित्रोर्व: कुलनन्दन ।
गान्धार्या
वा महाबाहो मुषितोऽस्मि महात्मभि: ॥ ३७ ॥
sañjaya uvāca
nāhaṁ veda vyavasitaṁ
pitror vaḥ kula-nandana
gāndhāryā vā mahā-bāho
muṣito ’smi mahātmabhiḥ
Synonyms
sañjayaḥ uvāca — Sañjaya said; na — not; aham — I; veda — know; vyavasitam — determination; pitroḥ — of your uncles; vaḥ — your; kula-nandana — O descendant of the Kuru dynasty; gāndhāryāḥ — of Gāndhārī; vā — or; mahā-bāho — O great King; muṣitaḥ — cheated; asmi — I have been; mahā-ātmabhiḥ — by those great souls.

Translation
Sañjaya said: My dear descendant of the Kuru dynasty, I have no information of the determination of your two uncles and Gāndhārī. O King, I have been cheated by those great souls.

Text 38
अथाजगाम भगवान् नारद: सहतुम्बुरु: ।
प्रत्युत्थायाभिवाद्याह सानुजोऽभ्यर्चयन्मुनिम् ॥ ३८ ॥
athājagāma bhagavān
nāradaḥ saha-tumburuḥ
pratyutthāyābhivādyāha
sānujo ’bhyarcayan munim
Synonyms
atha — thereafter; ājagāma — arrived; bhagavān — the godly personality; nāradaḥ — Nārada; saha-tumburuḥ — along with his tumburu (musical instrument); pratyutthāya — having gotten up from their seats; abhivādya — offering their due obeisances; āha — said; sa-anujaḥ — along with younger brothers; abhyarcayan — thus while receiving in a proper mood; munim — the sage.

Translation
While Sañjaya was thus speaking, Śrī Nārada, the powerful devotee of the Lord, appeared on the scene carrying his tumburu. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira and his brothers received him properly by getting up from their seats and offering obeisances.

Text 39
युधिष्ठिर उवाच
नाहं वेद गतिं पित्रोर्भगवन् क्‍व
गतावित: ।
अम्बा वा हतपुत्रार्ता क्‍व गता च तपस्विनी ॥ ३९ ॥
yudhiṣṭhira uvāca
nāhaṁ veda gatiṁ pitror
bhagavan kva gatāv itaḥ
ambā vā hata-putrārtā
kva gatā ca tapasvinī
Synonyms
yudhiṣṭhiraḥ uvāca — Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira said; na — do not; aham — myself; veda — know it; gatim — departure; pitroḥ — of the uncles; bhagavan — O godly personality; kva — where; gatau — gone; itaḥ — from this place; ambā — mother-aunt; vā — either; hata-putrā — bereft of her sons; ārtā — aggrieved; kva — where; gatā — gone; ca — also; tapasvinī — ascetic.

Translation
Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira said: O godly personality, I do not know where my two uncles have gone. Nor can I find my ascetic aunt who is griefstricken by the loss of all her sons.

Text 40
कर्णधार इवापारे भगवान् पारदर्शक: ।
अथाबभाषे
भगवान् नारदो मुनिसत्तम: ॥ ४० ॥
karṇadhāra ivāpāre
bhagavān pāra-darśakaḥ
athābabhāṣe bhagavān
nārado muni-sattamaḥ
Synonyms
karṇa-dhāraḥ — captain of the ship; iva — like; apāre — in the extensive oceans; bhagavān — representative of the Lord; pāra-darśakaḥ — one who can give directions to the other side; atha — thus; ābabhāṣe — began to say; bhagavān — the godly personality; nāradaḥ — the great sage Nārada; muni-sat-tamaḥ — the greatest among the devotee philosophers.

Translation
You are like a captain of a ship in a great ocean and you can direct us to our destination. Thus addressed, the godly personality, Devarṣi Nārada, greatest of the philosopher devotees, began to speak.

Text 41
नारद उवाच
मा कञ्चन शुचो राजन् यदीश्वरवशं जगत् ।
लोका: सपाला यस्येमे वहन्ति बलिमीशितु: ।
स संयुनक्ति भूतानि स एव वियुनक्ति च ॥ ४१ ॥
nārada uvāca
mā kañcana śuco rājan
yad īśvara-vaśaṁ jagat
lokāḥ sapālā yasyeme
vahanti balim īśituḥ
sa saṁyunakti bhūtāni
sa eva viyunakti ca
Synonyms
nāradaḥ uvāca — Nārada said; mā — never; kañcana — by all means; śucaḥ — do you lament; rājan — O King; yat — because; īśvara-vaśam — under the control of the Supreme Lord; jagat — world; lokāḥ — all living beings; sa-pālāḥ — including their leaders; yasya — whose; ime — all these; vahanti — do bear; balim — means of worship; īśituḥ — for being protected; saḥ — He; saṁyunakti — gets together; bhūtāni — all living beings; saḥ — He; eva — also; viyunakti — disperses; ca — and.

Translation
Śrī Nārada said: O pious King, do not lament for anyone, for everyone is under the control of the Supreme Lord. Therefore all living beings and their leaders carry on worship to be well protected. It is He only who brings them together and disperses them.

Text 42
यथा गावो नसि प्रोतास्तन्त्यां बद्धाश्च दामभि: ।
वाक्तन्त्यां नामभिर्बद्धा वहन्ति बलिमीशितु: ॥ ४२ ॥
yathā gāvo nasi protās
tantyāṁ baddhāś ca dāmabhiḥ
vāk-tantyāṁ nāmabhir baddhā
vahanti balim īśituḥ
Synonyms
yathā — as much as; gāvaḥ — cow; nasi — by the nose; protāḥ — strung; tantyām — by the thread; baddhāḥ — bound by; ca — also; dāmabhiḥ — by ropes; vāk-tantyām — in the network of Vedic hymns; nāmabhiḥ — by nomenclatures; baddhāḥ — conditioned; vahanti — carry on; balim — orders; īśituḥ — for being controlled by the Supreme Lord.

Translation
As a cow, bound through the nose by a long rope, is conditioned, so also human beings are bound by different Vedic injunctions and are conditioned to obey the orders of the Supreme.

Text 43
यथा क्रीडोपस्कराणां संयोगविगमाविह ।
इच्छया क्रीडितु: स्यातां तथैवेशेच्छया नृणाम् ॥ ४३ ॥
yathā krīḍopaskarāṇāṁ
saṁyoga-vigamāv iha
icchayā krīḍituḥ syātāṁ
tathaiveśecchayā nṛṇām
Synonyms
yathā — as much as; krīḍa-upaskarāṇām — playthings; saṁyoga — union; vigamau — disunion; iha — in this world; icchayā — by the will of; krīḍituḥ — just to play a part; syātām — takes place; tathā — so also; eva — certainly; īśa — the Supreme Lord; icchayā — by the will of; nṛṇām — of the human beings.

Translation
As a player sets up and disperses his playthings according to his own sweet will, so the supreme will of the Lord brings men together and separates them.

Text 44
यन्मन्यसे ध्रुवं लोकमध्रुवं वा न चोभयम् ।
सर्वथा न हि शोच्यास्ते स्‍नेहादन्यत्र मोहजात् ॥ ४४ ॥
yan manyase dhruvaṁ lokam
adhruvaṁ vā na cobhayam
sarvathā na hi śocyās te
snehād anyatra mohajāt
Synonyms
yat — even though; manyase — you think; dhruvam — Absolute Truth; lokam — persons; adhruvam — nonreality; vā — either; na — or not; ca — also; ubhayam — or bothwise; sarvathā — in all circumstances; na — never; hi — certainly; śocyāḥ — subject for lamentation; te — they; snehāt — due to affection; anyatra — or otherwise; moha-jāt — due to bewilderment.

Translation
O King, in all circumstances, whether you consider the soul to be an eternal principle, or the material body to be perishable, or everything to exist in the impersonal Absolute Truth, or everything to be an inexplicable combination of matter and spirit, feelings of separation are due only to illusory affection and nothing more.

Text 45
तस्माज्जह्यङ्ग वैक्लव्यमज्ञानकृतमात्मन: ।
कथं त्वनाथा: कृपणा वर्तेरंस्ते च मां विना ॥ ४५ ॥
tasmāj jahy aṅga vaiklavyam
ajñāna-kṛtam ātmanaḥ
kathaṁ tv anāthāḥ kṛpaṇā
varteraṁs te ca māṁ vinā
Synonyms
tasmāt — therefore; jahi — give up; aṅga — O King; vaiklavyam — mental disparity; ajñāna — ignorance; kṛtam — due to; ātmanaḥ — of yourself; katham — how; tu — but; anāthāḥ — helpless; kṛpaṇāḥ — poor creatures; varteran — be able to survive; te — they; ca — also; mām — me; vinā — without.

Translation
Therefore give up your anxiety due to ignorance of the self. You are now thinking of how they, who are helpless poor creatures, will exist without you.

Text 46
कालकर्मगुणाधीनो देहोऽयं पाञ्चभौतिक: ।
कथमन्यांस्तु गोपायेत्सर्पग्रस्तो यथा परम् ॥ ४६ ॥
kāla-karma-guṇādhīno
deho ’yaṁ pāñca-bhautikaḥ
katham anyāṁs tu gopāyet
sarpa-grasto yathā param
Synonyms
kāla — eternal time; karma — action; guṇa — modes of nature; adhīnaḥ — under the control of; dehaḥ — material body and mind; ayam — this; pāñca-bhautikaḥ — made of the five elements; katham — how; anyān — others; tu — but; gopāyet — give protection; sarpa-grastaḥ — one who is bitten by the snake; yathā — as much as; param — others.

Translation
This gross material body made of five elements is already under the control of eternal time [kāla], action [karma] and the modes of material nature [guṇa]. How then can it, being already in the jaws of the serpent, protect others?

Text 47
अहस्तानि सहस्तानामपदानि चतुष्पदाम् ।
फल्गूनि तत्र महतां जीवो जीवस्य जीवनम् ॥ ४७ ॥
ahastāni sahastānām
apadāni catuṣ-padām
phalgūni tatra mahatāṁ
jīvo jīvasya jīvanam
Synonyms
ahastāni — those who are devoid of hands; sa-hastānām — of those who are endowed with hands; apadāni — those who are devoid of legs; catuḥ-padām — of those who have four legs; phalgūni — those who are weak; tatra — there; mahatām — of the powerful; jīvaḥ — the living being; jīvasya — of the living being; jīvanam — subsistence.

Translation
Those who are devoid of hands are prey for those who have hands; those devoid of legs are prey for the four-legged. The weak are the subsistence of the strong, and the general rule holds that one living being is food for another.

Text 48
तदिदं भगवान् राजन्नेक आत्मात्मनां स्वद‍ृक् ।
अन्तरोऽनन्तरो भाति पश्य तं माययोरुधा ॥ ४८ ॥
tad idaṁ bhagavān rājann
eka ātmātmanāṁ sva-dṛk
antaro ’nantaro bhāti
paśya taṁ māyayorudhā
Synonyms
tat — therefore; idam — this manifestation; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; rājan — O King; ekaḥ — one without a second; ātmā — the Supersoul; ātmanām — by His energies; sva-dṛk — qualitatively like Him; antaraḥ — without; anantaraḥ — within and by Himself; bhāti — so manifests; paśya — look; tam — unto Him only; māyayā — by manifestations of different energies; urudhā — appears to be many.

Translation
Therefore, O King, you should look to the Supreme Lord only, who is one without a second and who manifests Himself by different energies and is both within and without.

Text 49
सोऽयमद्य महाराज भगवान् भूतभावन: ।
कालरूपोऽवतीर्णोऽस्यामभावाय सुरद्विषाम् ॥ ४९ ॥
so ’yam adya mahārāja
bhagavān bhūta-bhāvanaḥ
kāla-rūpo ’vatīrṇo ’syām
abhāvāya sura-dviṣām
Synonyms
saḥ — that Supreme Lord; ayam — the Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; adya — at present; mahārāja — O King; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; bhūta-bhāvanaḥ — the creator or the father of everything created; kāla-rūpaḥ — in the disguise of all-devouring time; avatīrṇaḥ — descended; asyām — upon the world; abhāvāya — for eliminating; sura-dviṣām — those who are against the will of the Lord.

Translation
That Supreme Personality of Godhead, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, in the guise of all-devouring time [kāla-rūpa] has now descended to the earth to eliminate the envious from the world.

Text 50
निष्पादितं देवकृत्यमवशेषं प्रतीक्षते ।
तावद् यूयमवेक्षध्वं भवेद् यावदिहेश्वर: ॥ ५० ॥
niṣpāditaṁ deva-kṛtyam
avaśeṣaṁ pratīkṣate
tāvad yūyam avekṣadhvaṁ
bhaved yāvad iheśvaraḥ
Synonyms
niṣpāditam — performed; deva-kṛtyam — what was to be done on behalf of the demigods; avaśeṣam — the rest; pratīkṣate — being awaited; tāvat — up to that time; yūyam — all of you Pāṇḍavas; avekṣadhvam — observe and wait; bhavet — may; yāvat — as long as; iha — in this world; īśvaraḥ — the Supreme Lord.

Translation
The Lord has already performed His duties to help the demigods, and He is awaiting the rest. You Pāṇḍavas may wait as long as the Lord is here on earth.

Text 51
धृतराष्ट्र: सह भ्रात्रा गान्धार्या च स्वभार्यया ।
दक्षिणेन हिमवत ऋषीणामाश्रमं गत: ॥ ५१ ॥
dhṛtarāṣṭraḥ saha bhrātrā
gāndhāryā ca sva-bhāryayā
dakṣiṇena himavata
ṛṣīṇām āśramaṁ gataḥ
Synonyms
dhṛtarāṣṭraḥ — Dhṛtarāṣṭra; saha — along with; bhrātrā — his brother Vidura; gāndhāryā — Gāndhārī also; ca — and; sva-bhāryayā — his own wife; dakṣiṇena — by the southern side; himavataḥ — of the Himālaya Mountains; ṛṣīṇām — of the ṛṣis; āśramam — in shelter; gataḥ — he has gone.

Translation
O King, your uncle Dhṛtarāṣṭra, his brother Vidura and his wife Gāndhārī have gone to the southern side of the Himālaya Mountains, where there are shelters of the great sages.

Text 52
स्रोतोभि: सप्तभिर्या वै स्वर्धुनी सप्तधा व्यधात् ।
सप्तानां प्रीतये नाना सप्तस्रोत: प्रचक्षते ॥ ५२ ॥
srotobhiḥ saptabhir yā vai
svardhunī saptadhā vyadhāt
saptānāṁ prītaye nānā
sapta-srotaḥ pracakṣate
Synonyms
srotobhiḥ — by currents; saptabhiḥ — by seven (divisions); yā — the river; vai — certainly; svardhunī — the sacred Ganges; saptadhā — seven branches; vyadhāt — created; saptānām — of the seven; prītaye — for the satisfaction of; nānā — various; sapta-srotaḥ — seven sources; pracakṣate — known by name.

Translation
The place is called Saptasrota [“divided by seven”] because there the waters of the sacred Ganges were divided into seven branches. This was done for the satisfaction of the seven great ṛṣis.

Text 53
स्‍नात्वानुसवनं तस्मिन्हुत्वा चाग्नीन्यथाविधि ।
अब्भक्ष उपशान्तात्मा स आस्ते विगतैषण: ॥ ५३ ॥
snātvānusavanaṁ tasmin
hutvā cāgnīn yathā-vidhi
ab-bhakṣa upaśāntātmā
sa āste vigataiṣaṇaḥ
Synonyms
snātvā — by taking bath; anusavanam — regularly three times (morning, noon and evening); tasmin — in that Ganges divided into seven; hutvā — by performing the Agni-hotra sacrifice; ca — also; agnīn — in the fire; yathā-vidhi — just according to the tenets of the scripture; ap-bhakṣaḥ — fasting by drinking only water; upaśānta — completely controlled; ātmā — the gross senses and the subtle mind; saḥ — Dhṛtarāṣṭra; āste — would be situated; vigata — devoid of; eṣaṇaḥ — thoughts in relation with family welfare.

Translation
On the banks at Saptasrota, Dhṛtarāṣṭra is now engaged in beginning aṣṭāṅga-yoga by bathing three times daily, in the morning, noon and evening, by performing the Agni-hotra sacrifice with fire and by drinking only water. This helps one control the mind and the senses and frees one completely from thoughts of familial affection.

Text 54
जितासनो जितश्वास: प्रत्याहृतषडिन्द्रिय: ।
हरिभावनया ध्वस्तरज:सत्त्वतमोमल: ॥ ५४ ॥
jitāsano jita-śvāsaḥ
pratyāhṛta-ṣaḍ-indriyaḥ
hari-bhāvanayā dhvasta-
rajaḥ-sattva-tamo-malaḥ
Synonyms
jita-āsanaḥ — one who has controlled the sitting posture; jita-śvāsaḥ — one who has controlled the breathing process; pratyāhṛta — turning back; ṣaṭ — six; indriyaḥ — senses; hari — the Absolute Personality of Godhead; bhāvanayā — absorbed in; dhvasta — conquered; rajaḥ — passion; sattva — goodness; tamaḥ — ignorance; malaḥ — contaminations.

Translation
One who has controlled the sitting postures [the yogic āsanas] and the breathing process can turn the senses toward the Absolute Personality of Godhead and thus become immune to the contaminations of the modes of material nature, namely mundane goodness, passion and ignorance.

Text 55
विज्ञानात्मनि संयोज्य क्षेत्रज्ञे प्रविलाप्य तम् ।
ब्रह्मण्यात्मानमाधारे घटाम्बरमिवाम्बरे ॥ ५५ ॥
vijñānātmani saṁyojya
kṣetrajñe pravilāpya tam
brahmaṇy ātmānam ādhāre
ghaṭāmbaram ivāmbare
Synonyms
vijñāna — purified identity; ātmani — in intelligence; saṁyojya — perfectly fixing; kṣetra-jñe — in the matter of the living being; pravilāpya — merging; tam — him; brahmaṇi — in the Supreme; ātmānam — pure living being; ādhāre — in the reservoir; ghaṭa-ambaram — sky within the block; iva — like; ambare — in the supreme sky.

Translation
Dhṛtarāṣṭra will have to amalgamate his pure identity with intelligence and then merge into the Supreme Being with knowledge of his qualitative oneness, as a living entity, with the Supreme Brahman. Being freed from the blocked sky, he will have to rise to the spiritual sky.

Text 56
ध्वस्तमायागुणोदर्को निरुद्धकरणाशय: ।
निवर्तिताखिलाहार आस्ते स्थाणुरिवाचल: ।
तस्यान्तरायो मैवाभू: सन्न्यस्ताखिलकर्मण: ॥ ५६ ॥
dhvasta-māyā-guṇodarko
niruddha-karaṇāśayaḥ
nivartitākhilāhāra
āste sthāṇur ivācalaḥ
tasyāntarāyo maivābhūḥ
sannyastākhila-karmaṇaḥ
Synonyms
dhvasta — being destroyed; māyā-guṇa — the modes of material nature; udarkaḥ — aftereffects; niruddha — being suspended; karaṇa-āśayaḥ — the senses and the mind; nivartita — stopped; akhila — all; āhāraḥ — food for the senses; āste — is sitting; sthāṇuḥ — immovable; iva — like; acalaḥ — fixed; tasya — his; antarāyaḥ — hindrances; mā eva — never like that; abhūḥ — be; sannyasta — renounced; akhila — all sorts; karmaṇaḥ — material duties.

Translation
He will have to suspend all the actions of the senses, even from the outside, and will have to be impervious to interactions of the senses, which are influenced by the modes of material nature. After renouncing all material duties, he must become immovably established, beyond all sources of hindrances on the path.

Text 57
स वा अद्यतनाद् राजन् परत: पञ्चमेऽहनि ।
कलेवरं हास्यति स्वं तच्च भस्मीभविष्यति ॥ ५७ ॥
sa vā adyatanād rājan
parataḥ pañcame ’hani
kalevaraṁ hāsyati svaṁ
tac ca bhasmī-bhaviṣyati
Synonyms
saḥ — he; vā — in all probability; adya — today; tanāt — from; rājan — O King; parataḥ — ahead; pañcame — on the fifth; ahani — day; kalevaram — body; hāsyati — shall quit; svam — his own; tat — that; ca — also; bhasmī — ashes; bhaviṣyati — will turn into.

Translation
O King, he will quit his body, most probably on the fifth day from today. And his body will turn to ashes.

Text 58
दह्यमानेऽग्निभिर्देहे पत्यु: पत्नी सहोटजे ।
बहि: स्थिता पतिं साध्वी तमग्निमनु वेक्ष्यति ॥ ५८ ॥
dahyamāne ’gnibhir dehe
patyuḥ patnī sahoṭaje
bahiḥ sthitā patiṁ sādhvī
tam agnim anu vekṣyati
Synonyms
dahyamāne — while it is burning; agnibhiḥ — by the fire; dehe — the body; patyuḥ — of the husband; patnī — the wife; saha-uṭaje — along with the thatched cottage; bahiḥ — outside; sthitā — situated; patim — unto the husband; sādhvī — the chaste lady; tam — that; agnim — fire; anu vekṣyati — looking with great attention will enter the fire.

Translation
While outside observing her husband, who will burn in the fire of mystic power along with his thatched cottage, his chaste wife will enter the fire with rapt attention.

Text 59
विदुरस्तु तदाश्चर्यं निशाम्य कुरुनन्दन ।
हर्षशोकयुतस्तस्माद् गन्ता तीर्थनिषेवक: ॥ ५९ ॥
viduras tu tad āścaryaṁ
niśāmya kuru-nandana
harṣa-śoka-yutas tasmād
gantā tīrtha-niṣevakaḥ
Synonyms
viduraḥ — Vidura also; tu — but; tat — that incident; āścaryam — wonderful; niśāmya — seeing; kuru-nandana — O son of the Kuru dynasty; harṣa — delight; śoka — grief; yutaḥ — affected by; tasmāt — from that place; gantā — will go away; tīrtha — place of pilgrimage; niṣevakaḥ — for being enlivened.

Translation
Vidura, being affected with delight and grief, will then leave that place of sacred pilgrimage.

Text 60
इत्युक्त्वाथारुहत् स्वर्गं नारद: सहतुम्बुरु: ।
युधिष्ठिरो वचस्तस्य हृदि कृत्वाजहाच्छुच: ॥ ६० ॥
ity uktvāthāruhat svargaṁ
nāradaḥ saha-tumburuḥ
yudhiṣṭhiro vacas tasya
hṛdi kṛtvājahāc chucaḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus; uktvā — having addressed; atha — thereafter; āruhat — ascended; svargam — into outer space; nāradaḥ — the great sage Nārada; saha — along with; tumburuḥ — his stringed instrument; yudhiṣṭhiraḥ — Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira; vacaḥ — instructions; tasya — of his; hṛdi kṛtvā — keeping in the heart; ajahāt — gave up; śucaḥ — all lamentations.

Translation
Having spoken thus, the great sage Nārada, along with his vīṇā, ascended into outer space. Yudhiṣṭhira kept his instruction in his heart and so was able to get rid of all lamentations.