Text 1
सूत उवाच
सम्प्रस्थिते द्वारकायां जिष्णौ बन्धुदिद‍ृक्षया ।
ज्ञातुं च पुण्यश्लोकस्य कृष्णस्य च विचेष्टितम् ॥ १ ॥
sūta uvāca
samprasthite dvārakāyāṁ
jiṣṇau bandhu-didṛkṣayā
jñātuṁ ca puṇya-ślokasya
kṛṣṇasya ca viceṣṭitam
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said; samprasthite — having gone to; dvārakāyām — the city of Dvārakā; jiṣṇau — Arjuna; bandhu — friends and relatives; didṛkṣayā — for meeting them; jñātum — to know; ca — also; puṇya-ślokasya — of one whose glories are sung by Vedic hymns; kṛṣṇasya — of Lord Kṛṣṇa; ca — and; viceṣṭitam — further programs of work.

Translation
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said: Arjuna went to Dvārakā to see Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa and other friends and also to learn from the Lord of His next activities.

Text 2
व्यतीता: कतिचिन्मासास्तदा नायात्ततोऽर्जुन: ।
ददर्श घोररूपाणि निमित्तानि कुरूद्वह: ॥ २ ॥
vyatītāḥ katicin māsās
tadā nāyāt tato ’rjunaḥ
dadarśa ghora-rūpāṇi
nimittāni kurūdvahaḥ
Synonyms
vyatītāḥ — after passing; katicit — a few; māsāḥ — months; tadā — at that time; na āyāt — did not return; tataḥ — from there; arjunaḥ — Arjuna; dadarśa — observed; ghora — fearful; rūpāṇi — appearances; nimittāni — various causes; kuru-udvahaḥ — Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira.

Translation
A few months passed, and Arjuna did not return. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira then began to observe some inauspicious omens, which were fearful in themselves.

Text 3
कालस्य च गतिं रौद्रां विपर्यस्तर्तुधर्मिण: ।
पापीयसीं नृणां वार्तां क्रोधलोभानृतात्मनाम् ॥ ३ ॥
kālasya ca gatiṁ raudrāṁ
viparyastartu-dharmiṇaḥ
pāpīyasīṁ nṛṇāṁ vārtāṁ
krodha-lobhānṛtātmanām
Synonyms
kālasya — of eternal time; ca — also; gatim — direction; raudrām — fearful; viparyasta — reversed; ṛtu — seasonal; dharmiṇaḥ — regularities; pāpīyasīm — sinful; nṛṇām — of the human being; vārtām — means of livelihood; krodha — anger; lobha — greed; anṛta — falsehood; ātmanām — of the people.

Translation
He saw that the direction of eternal time had changed, and this was very fearful. There were disruptions in the seasonal regularities. The people in general had become very greedy, angry and deceitful. And he saw that they were adopting foul means of livelihood.

Text 4
जिह्मप्रायं व्यवहृतं शाठ्यमिश्रं च सौहृदम् ।
पितृमातृसुहृद्भ्रातृदम्पतीनां च कल्कनम् ॥ ४ ॥
jihma-prāyaṁ vyavahṛtaṁ
śāṭhya-miśraṁ ca sauhṛdam
pitṛ-mātṛ-suhṛd-bhrātṛ-
dam-patīnāṁ ca kalkanam
Synonyms
jihma-prāyam — cheating; vyavahṛtam — in all ordinary transactions; śāṭhya — duplicity; miśram — adulterated in; ca — and; sauhṛdam — regarding friendly well-wishers; pitṛ — father; mātṛ — regarding the mother; suhṛt — well-wishers; bhrātṛ — one’s own brother; dam-patīnām — regarding husband and wife; ca — also; kalkanam — mutual quarrel.

Translation
All ordinary transactions and dealings became polluted with cheating, even between friends. And in familial affairs, there was always misunderstanding between fathers, mothers and sons, between well-wishers, and between brothers. Even between husband and wife there was always strain and quarrel.

Text 5
निमित्तान्यत्यरिष्टानि काले त्वनुगते नृणाम् ।
लोभाद्यधर्मप्रकृतिं द‍ृष्ट्वोवाचानुजं नृप: ॥ ५ ॥
nimittāny atyariṣṭāni
kāle tv anugate nṛṇām
lobhādy-adharma-prakṛtiṁ
dṛṣṭvovācānujaṁ nṛpaḥ
Synonyms
nimittāni — causes; ati — very serious; ariṣṭāni — bad omens; kāle — in course of time; tu — but; anugate — passing away; nṛṇām — of humanity at large; lobha-ādi — such as greed; adharma — irreligious; prakṛtim — habits; dṛṣṭvā — having observed; uvāca — said; anujam — younger brother; nṛpaḥ — the King.

Translation
In course of time it came to pass that people in general became accustomed to greed, anger, pride, etc. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, observing all these omens, spoke to his younger brother.

Text 6
युधिष्ठिर उवाच
सम्प्रेषितो द्वारकायां जिष्णुर्बन्धुदिद‍ृक्षया ।
ज्ञातुं च पुण्यश्लोकस्य कृष्णस्य च विचेष्टितम् ॥ ६ ॥
yudhiṣṭhira uvāca
sampreṣito dvārakāyāṁ
jiṣṇur bandhu-didṛkṣayā
jñātuṁ ca puṇya-ślokasya
kṛṣṇasya ca viceṣṭitam
Synonyms
yudhiṣṭhiraḥ uvāca — Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira said; sampreṣitaḥ — has gone to; dvārakāyām — Dvārakā; jiṣṇuḥ — Arjuna; bandhu — friends; didṛkṣayā — for the sake of meeting; jñātum — to know; ca — also; puṇya-ślokasya — of the Personality of Godhead; kṛṣṇasya — of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; ca — and; viceṣṭitam — program of work.

Translation
Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira said to his younger brother Bhīmasena: I sent Arjuna to Dvārakā to meet his friends and to learn from the Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, of His program of work.

Text 7
गता: सप्ताधुना मासा भीमसेन तवानुज: ।
नायाति कस्य वा हेतोर्नाहं वेदेदमञ्जसा ॥ ७ ॥
gatāḥ saptādhunā māsā
bhīmasena tavānujaḥ
nāyāti kasya vā hetor
nāhaṁ vededam añjasā
Synonyms
gatāḥ — has gone; sapta — seven; adhunā — to date; māsāḥ — months; bhīmasena — O Bhīmasena; tava — your; anujaḥ — younger brother; na — does not; āyāti — come back; kasya — for what; vā — or; hetoḥ — reason; na — not; aham — I; veda — know; idam — this; añjasā — factually.

Translation
Since he departed, seven months have passed, yet he has not returned. I do not know factually how things are going there.

Text 8
अपि देवर्षिणादिष्ट: स कालोऽयमुपस्थित: ।
यदात्मनोऽङ्गमाक्रीडं भगवानुत्सिसृक्षति ॥ ८ ॥
api devarṣiṇādiṣṭaḥ
sa kālo ’yam upasthitaḥ
yadātmano ’ṅgam ākrīḍaṁ
bhagavān utsisṛkṣati
Synonyms
api — whether; deva-ṛṣiṇā — by the demigod-saint (Nārada); ādiṣṭaḥ — instructed; saḥ — that; kālaḥ — eternal time; ayam — this; upasthitaḥ — arrived; yadā — when; ātmanaḥ — of His own self; aṅgam — plenary portion; ākrīḍam — manifestation; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; utsisṛkṣati — is going to quit.

Translation
Is He going to quit His earthly pastimes, as Devarṣi Nārada indicated? Has that time already arrived?

Text 9
यस्मान्न: सम्पदो राज्यं दारा: प्राणा: कुलं प्रजा: ।
आसन्सपत्नविजयो लोकाश्च यदनुग्रहात् ॥ ९ ॥
yasmān naḥ sampado rājyaṁ
dārāḥ prāṇāḥ kulaṁ prajāḥ
āsan sapatna-vijayo
lokāś ca yad-anugrahāt
Synonyms
yasmāt — from whom; naḥ — our; sampadaḥ — opulence; rājyam — kingdom; dārāḥ — good wives; prāṇāḥ — existence of life; kulam — dynasty; prajāḥ — subjects; āsan — have become possible; sapatna — competitors; vijayaḥ — conquering; lokāḥ — future accommodation in higher planets; ca — and; yat — by whose; anugrahāt — by the mercy of.

Translation
From Him only, all our kingly opulence, good wives, lives, progeny, control over our subjects, victory over our enemies, and future accommodations in higher planets have become possible. All this is due to His causeless mercy upon us.

Text 10
पश्योत्पातान्नरव्याघ्र दिव्यान् भौमान् सदैहिकान् ।
दारुणान् शंसतोऽदूराद्भयं नो बुद्धिमोहनम् ॥ १० ॥
paśyotpātān nara-vyāghra
divyān bhaumān sadaihikān
dāruṇān śaṁsato ’dūrād
bhayaṁ no buddhi-mohanam
Synonyms
paśya — just see; utpātān — disturbances; nara-vyāghra — O man of tigerlike strength; divyān — happenings in the sky or by planetary influence; bhaumān — happenings on the earth; sa-daihikān — happenings of the body and the mind; dāruṇān — awfully dangerous; śaṁsataḥ — indicating; adūrāt — in the near future; bhayam — danger; naḥ — our; buddhi — intelligence; mohanam — deluding.

Translation
Just see, O man with a tiger’s strength, how many miseries due to celestial influences, earthly reactions and bodily pains — all very dangerous in themselves — are foreboding danger in the near future by deluding our intelligence.

Text 11
ऊर्वक्षिबाहवो मह्यं स्फुरन्त्यङ्ग पुन: पुन: ।
वेपथुश्चापि हृदये आराद्दास्यन्ति विप्रियम् ॥ ११ ॥
ūrv-akṣi-bāhavo mahyaṁ
sphuranty aṅga punaḥ punaḥ
vepathuś cāpi hṛdaye
ārād dāsyanti vipriyam
Synonyms
ūru — thighs; akṣi — eyes; bāhavaḥ — the arms; mahyam — in my; sphuranti — quivering; aṅga — left side of the body; punaḥ punaḥ — again and again; vepathuḥ — palpitations; ca — also; api — certainly; hṛdaye — in the heart; ārāt — due to fear; dāsyanti — indicating; vipriyam — undesirables.

Translation
The left side of my body — my thighs, arms and eyes — are all quivering again and again. I am having heart palpitations due to fear. All this indicates undesirable happenings.

Text 12
शिवैषोद्यन्तमादित्यमभिरौत्यनलानना ।
मामङ्ग सारमेयोऽयमभिरेभत्यभीरुवत् ॥ १२ ॥
śivaiṣodyantam ādityam
abhirauty analānanā
mām aṅga sārameyo ’yam
abhirebhaty abhīruvat
Synonyms
śivā — jackal; eṣā — this; udyantam — rising; ādityam — unto the sun; abhi — towards; rauti — crying; anala — fire; ānanā — face; mām — unto me; aṅga — O Bhīma; sārameyaḥ — dog; ayam — this; abhirebhati — barks towards; abhīru-vat — without fear.

Translation
Just see, O Bhīma, how the she-jackal cries at the rising sun and vomits fire, and how the dog barks at me fearlessly.

Text 13
शस्ता: कुर्वन्ति मां सव्यं दक्षिणं पशवोऽपरे ।
वाहांश्च पुरुषव्याघ्र लक्षये रुदतो मम ॥ १३ ॥
śastāḥ kurvanti māṁ savyaṁ
dakṣiṇaṁ paśavo ’pare
vāhāṁś ca puruṣa-vyāghra
lakṣaye rudato mama
Synonyms
śastāḥ — useful animals like the cow; kurvanti — are keeping; mām — me; savyam — on the left; dakṣiṇam — circumambulating; paśavaḥ apare — other lower animals like asses; vāhān — the horses (carriers); ca — also; puruṣa-vyāghra — O tiger among men; lakṣaye — I see; rudataḥ — weeping; mama — of mine.

Translation
O Bhīmasena, tiger amongst men, now useful animals like cows are passing me on my left side, and lower animals like the asses are circumambulating me. My horses appear to weep upon seeing me.

Text 14
मृत्युदूत: कपोतोऽयमुलूक: कम्पयन् मन: ।
प्रत्युलूकश्च कुह्वानैर्विश्वं वै शून्यमिच्छत: ॥ १४ ॥
mṛtyu-dūtaḥ kapoto ’yam
ulūkaḥ kampayan manaḥ
pratyulūkaś ca kuhvānair
viśvaṁ vai śūnyam icchataḥ
Synonyms
mṛtyu — death; dūtaḥ — messenger of; kapotaḥ — pigeon; ayam — this; ulūkaḥ — owl; kampayan — trembling; manaḥ — mind; pratyulūkaḥ — the rivals of owls (crows); ca — and; kuhvānaiḥ — shrieking scream; viśvam — the cosmos; vai — either; śūnyam — void; icchataḥ — wishing.

Translation
Just see! This pigeon is like a messenger of death. The shrieks of the owls and their rival crows make my heart tremble. It appears that they want to make a void of the whole universe.

Text 15
धूम्रा दिश: परिधय: कम्पते भू: सहाद्रिभि: ।
निर्घातश्च महांस्तात साकं च स्तनयित्नुभि: ॥ १५ ॥
dhūmrā diśaḥ paridhayaḥ
kampate bhūḥ sahādribhiḥ
nirghātaś ca mahāṁs tāta
sākaṁ ca stanayitnubhiḥ
Synonyms
dhūmrāḥ — smoky; diśaḥ — all directions; paridhayaḥ — encirclement; kampate — throbbing; bhūḥ — the earth; saha adribhiḥ — along with the hills and mountains; nirghātaḥ — bolt from the blue; ca — also; mahān — very great; tāta — O Bhīma; sākam — with; ca — also; stanayitnubhiḥ — thundering sound without any cloud.

Translation
Just see how the smoke encircles the sky. It appears that the earth and mountains are throbbing. Just hear the cloudless thunder and see the bolts from the blue.

Text 16
वायुर्वाति खरस्पर्शो रजसा विसृजंस्तम: ।
असृग् वर्षन्ति जलदा बीभत्समिव सर्वत: ॥ १६ ॥
vāyur vāti khara-sparśo
rajasā visṛjaṁs tamaḥ
asṛg varṣanti jaladā
bībhatsam iva sarvataḥ
Synonyms
vāyuḥ — wind; vāti — blowing; khara-sparśaḥ — sharply; rajasā — by the dust; visṛjan — creating; tamaḥ — darkness; asṛk — blood; varṣanti — are raining; jaladāḥ — the clouds; bībhatsam — disastrous; iva — like; sarvataḥ — everywhere.

Translation
The wind blows violently, blasting dust everywhere and creating darkness. Clouds are raining everywhere with bloody disasters.

Text 17
सूर्यं हतप्रभं पश्य ग्रहमर्दं मिथो दिवि ।
ससङ्कुलैर्भूतगणैर्ज्वलिते इव रोदसी ॥ १७ ॥
sūryaṁ hata-prabhaṁ paśya
graha-mardaṁ mitho divi
sasaṅkulair bhūta-gaṇair
jvalite iva rodasī
Synonyms
sūryam — the sun; hata-prabham — its rays declining; paśya — just see; graha-mardam — clashes of the stars; mithaḥ — among one another; divi — in the sky; sa-saṅkulaiḥ — being mixed with; bhūta-gaṇaiḥ — by the living entities; jvalite — being ignited; iva — as if; rodasī — crying.

Translation
The rays of the sun are declining, and the stars appear to be fighting amongst themselves. Confused living entities appear to be ablaze and weeping.

Text 18
नद्यो नदाश्च क्षुभिता: सरांसि च मनांसि च ।
न ज्वलत्यग्निराज्येन कालोऽयं किं विधास्यति ॥ १८ ॥
nadyo nadāś ca kṣubhitāḥ
sarāṁsi ca manāṁsi ca
na jvalaty agnir ājyena
kālo ’yaṁ kiṁ vidhāsyati
Synonyms
nadyaḥ — rivers; nadāḥ ca — and the tributaries; kṣubhitāḥ — all perturbed; sarāṁsi — reservoirs of water; ca — and; manāṁsi — the mind; ca — also; na — does not; jvalati — ignite; agniḥ — fire; ājyena — with the help of butter; kālaḥ — the time; ayam — extraordinary it is; kim — what; vidhāsyati — going to happen.

Translation
Rivers, tributaries, ponds, reservoirs and the mind are all perturbed. Butter no longer ignites fire. What is this extraordinary time? What is going to happen?

Text 19
न पिबन्ति स्तनं वत्सा न दुह्यन्ति च मातर: ।
रुदन्त्यश्रुमुखा गावो न हृष्यन्त्यृषभा व्रजे ॥ १९ ॥
na pibanti stanaṁ vatsā
na duhyanti ca mātaraḥ
rudanty aśru-mukhā gāvo
na hṛṣyanty ṛṣabhā vraje
Synonyms
na — does not; pibanti — suck; stanam — breast; vatsāḥ — the calves; na — do not; duhyanti — allow milking; ca — also; mātaraḥ — the cows; rudanti — crying; aśru-mukhāḥ — with a tearful face; gāvaḥ — the cows; na — do not; hṛṣyanti — take pleasure; ṛṣabhāḥ — the bulls; vraje — in the pasturing ground.

Translation
The calves do not suck the teats of the cows, nor do the cows give milk. They are standing, crying, tears in their eyes, and the bulls take no pleasure in the pasturing grounds.

Text 20
दैवतानि रुदन्तीव स्विद्यन्ति ह्युच्चलन्ति च ।
इमे जनपदा ग्रामा: पुरोद्यानाकराश्रमा: ।
भ्रष्टश्रियो निरानन्दा: किमघं दर्शयन्ति न: ॥ २० ॥
daivatāni rudantīva
svidyanti hy uccalanti ca
ime jana-padā grāmāḥ
purodyānākarāśramāḥ
bhraṣṭa-śriyo nirānandāḥ
kim aghaṁ darśayanti naḥ
Synonyms
daivatāni — the Deities in the temples; rudanti — seem to be crying; iva — like that; svidyanti — perspiring; hi — certainly; uccalanti — as if going out; ca — also; ime — these; jana-padāḥ — cities; grāmāḥ — villages; pura — towns; udyāna — gardens; ākara — mines; āśramāḥ — hermitages, etc.; bhraṣṭa — devoid of; śriyaḥ — beauty; nirānandāḥ — bereft of all happiness; kim — what sort of; agham — calamities; darśayanti — shall manifest; naḥ — to us.

Translation
The Deities seem to be crying in the temple, lamenting and perspiring. They seem about to leave. All the cities, villages, towns, gardens, mines and hermitages are now devoid of beauty and bereft of all happiness. I do not know what sort of calamities are now awaiting us.

Text 21
मन्य एतैर्महोत्पातैर्नूनं भगवत: पदै: ।
अनन्यपुरुषश्रीभिर्हीना भूर्हतसौभगा ॥ २१ ॥
manya etair mahotpātair
nūnaṁ bhagavataḥ padaiḥ
ananya-puruṣa-śrībhir
hīnā bhūr hata-saubhagā
Synonyms
manye — I take it for granted; etaiḥ — by all these; mahā — great; utpātaiḥ — upsurges; nūnam — for want of; bhagavataḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; padaiḥ — the marks on the sole of the foot; ananya — extraordinary; puruṣa — of the Supreme Personality; śrībhiḥ — by the auspicious signs; hīnā — dispossessed; bhūḥ — the earth; hata-saubhagā — without the fortune.

Translation
I think that all these earthly disturbances indicate some greater loss to the good fortune of the world. The world was fortunate to have been marked with the footprints of the lotus feet of the Lord. These signs indicate that this will no longer be.

Text 22
इति चिन्तयतस्तस्य द‍ृष्टारिष्टेन चेतसा ।
राज्ञ: प्रत्यागमद् ब्रह्मन् यदुपुर्या: कपिध्वज: ॥ २२ ॥
iti cintayatas tasya
dṛṣṭāriṣṭena cetasā
rājñaḥ pratyāgamad brahman
yadu-puryāḥ kapi-dhvajaḥ
Synonyms
iti — thus; cintayataḥ — while thinking to himself; tasya — he; dṛṣṭā — by observing; ariṣṭena — bad omens; cetasā — by the mind; rājñaḥ — the King; prati — back; āgamat — came; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; yadu-puryāḥ — from the kingdom of the Yadus; kapi-dhvajaḥ — Arjuna.

Translation
O Brāhmaṇa Śaunaka, while Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, observing the inauspicious signs on the earth at that time, was thus thinking to himself, Arjuna came back from the city of the Yadus [Dvārakā].

Text 23
तं पादयोर्निपतितमयथापूर्वमातुरम् ।
अधोवदनमब्बिन्दून् सृजन्तं नयनाब्जयो: ॥ २३ ॥
taṁ pādayor nipatitam
ayathā-pūrvam āturam
adho-vadanam ab-bindūn
sṛjantaṁ nayanābjayoḥ
Synonyms
tam — him (Arjuna); pādayoḥ — at the feet; nipatitam — bowing down; ayathā-pūrvam — unprecedented; āturam — dejected; adhaḥ-vadanam — downward face; ap-bindūn — drops of water; sṛjantam — creating; nayana-abjayoḥ — from the lotuslike eyes.

Translation
When he bowed at his feet, the King saw that his dejection was unprecedented. His head was down, and tears glided from his lotus eyes.

Text 24
विलोक्योद्विग्नहृदयो विच्छायमनुजं नृप: ।
पृच्छति स्म सुहृन्मध्ये संस्मरन्नारदेरितम् ॥ २४ ॥
vilokyodvigna-hṛdayo
vicchāyam anujaṁ nṛpaḥ
pṛcchati sma suhṛn madhye
saṁsmaran nāraderitam
Synonyms
vilokya — by seeing; udvigna — anxious; hṛdayaḥ — heart; vicchāyam — pale appearance; anujam — Arjuna; nṛpaḥ — the King; pṛcchati sma — asked; suhṛt — friends; madhye — amongst; saṁsmaran — remembering; nārada — Sage Nārada; īritam — indicated by.

Translation
Seeing Arjuna pale due to heartfelt anxieties, the King, remembering the indications of the sage Nārada, questioned him in the midst of friends.

Text 25
युधिष्ठिर उवाच
कच्चिदानर्तपुर्यां न: स्वजना: सुखमासते ।
मधुभोजदशार्हार्हसात्वतान्धकवृष्णय: ॥ २५ ॥
yudhiṣṭhira uvāca
kaccid ānarta-puryāṁ naḥ
sva-janāḥ sukham āsate
madhu-bhoja-daśārhārha-
sātvatāndhaka-vṛṣṇayaḥ
Synonyms
yudhiṣṭhiraḥ uvāca — Yudhiṣṭhira said; kaccit — whether; ānarta-puryām — of Dvārakā; naḥ — our; sva-janāḥ — relatives; sukham — happily; āsate — are passing their days; madhu — Madhu; bhoja — Bhoja; daśārha — Daśārha; arha — Arha; sātvata — Sātvata; andhaka — Andhaka; vṛṣṇayaḥ — of the family of Vṛṣṇi.

Translation
Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira said: My dear brother, please tell me whether our friends and relatives, such as Madhu, Bhoja, Daśārha, Ārha, Sātvata, Andhaka and the members of the Yadu family are all passing their days in happiness.

Text 26
शूरो मातामह: कच्चित्स्वस्त्यास्ते वाथ मारिष: ।
मातुल: सानुज: कच्चित्कुशल्यानकदुन्दुभि: ॥ २६ ॥
śūro mātāmahaḥ kaccit
svasty āste vātha māriṣaḥ
mātulaḥ sānujaḥ kaccit
kuśaly ānakadundubhiḥ
Synonyms
śūraḥ — Śūrasena; mātāmahaḥ — maternal grandfather; kaccit — whether; svasti — all good; āste — passing his days; vā — or; atha — therefore; māriṣaḥ — respectful; mātulaḥ — maternal uncle; sa-anujaḥ — with his younger brothers; kaccit — whether; kuśalī — all well; ānaka-dundubhiḥ — Vasudeva.

Translation
Is my respectable grandfather Śūrasena in a happy mood? And are my maternal uncle Vasudeva and his younger brothers all doing well?

Text 27
सप्त स्वसारस्तत्पत्न्यो मातुलान्य: सहात्मजा: ।
आसते सस्‍नुषा: क्षेमं देवकीप्रमुखा: स्वयम् ॥ २७ ॥
sapta sva-sāras tat-patnyo
mātulānyaḥ sahātmajāḥ
āsate sasnuṣāḥ kṣemaṁ
devakī-pramukhāḥ svayam
Synonyms
sapta — seven; sva-sāraḥ — own sisters; tat-patnyaḥ — his wives; mātulānyaḥ — maternal aunts; saha — along with; ātma-jāḥ — sons and grandsons; āsate — are all; sasnuṣāḥ — with their daughters-in-law; kṣemam — happiness; devakī — Devakī; pramukhāḥ — headed by; svayam — personally.

Translation
His seven wives, headed by Devakī, are all sisters. Are they and their sons and daughters-in-law all happy?

Texts 28-29
कच्चिद्राजाहुको जीवत्यसत्पुत्रोऽस्य चानुज: ।
हृदीक: ससुतोऽक्रूरो जयन्तगदसारणा: ॥ २८ ॥
आसते कुशलं कच्चिद्ये च शत्रुजिदादय: ।
कच्चिदास्ते सुखं रामो भगवान् सात्वतां प्रभु: ॥ २९ ॥
kaccid rājāhuko jīvaty
asat-putro ’sya cānujaḥ
hṛdīkaḥ sasuto ’krūro
jayanta-gada-sāraṇāḥ
āsate kuśalaṁ kaccid
ye ca śatrujid-ādayaḥ
kaccid āste sukhaṁ rāmo
bhagavān sātvatāṁ prabhuḥ
Synonyms
kaccit — whether; rājā — the King; āhukaḥ — another name of Ugrasena; jīvati — still living; asat — mischievous; putraḥ — son; asya — his; ca — also; anujaḥ — younger brother; hṛdīkaḥ — Hṛdīka; sa-sutaḥ — along with son, Kṛtavarmā; akrūraḥ — Akrūra; jayanta — Jayanta; gada — Gada; sāraṇāḥ — Sāraṇa; āsate — are they all; kuśalam — in happiness; kaccit — whether; ye — they; ca — also; śatrujit — Śatrujit; ādayaḥ — headed by; kaccit — whether; āste — are they; sukham — all right; rāmaḥ — Balarāma; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; sātvatām — of the devotees; prabhuḥ — protector.

Translation
Are Ugrasena, whose son was the mischievous Kaṁsa, and his younger brother still living? Are Hṛdīka and his son Kṛtavarmā happy? Are Akrūra, Jayanta, Gada, Sāraṇa and Śatrujit all happy? How is Balarāma, the Personality of Godhead and the protector of devotees?

Text 30
प्रद्युम्न: सर्ववृष्णीनां सुखमास्ते महारथ: ।
गम्भीररयोऽनिरुद्धो वर्धते भगवानुत ॥ ३० ॥
pradyumnaḥ sarva-vṛṣṇīnāṁ
sukham āste mahā-rathaḥ
gambhīra-rayo ’niruddho
vardhate bhagavān uta
Synonyms
pradyumnaḥ — Pradyumna (a son of Lord Kṛṣṇa); sarva — all; vṛṣṇīnām — of the members of the Vṛṣṇi family; sukham — happiness; āste — are in; mahā-rathaḥ — the great general; gambhīra — deeply; rayaḥ — dexterity; aniruddhaḥ — Aniruddha (a grandson of Lord Kṛṣṇa); vardhate — flourishing; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; uta — must.

Translation
How is Pradyumna, the great general of the Vṛṣṇi family? Is He happy? And is Aniruddha, the plenary expansion of the Personality of Godhead, faring well?

Text 31
सुषेणश्चारुदेष्णश्च साम्बो जाम्बवतीसुत: ।
अन्ये च कार्ष्णिप्रवरा: सपुत्रा ऋषभादय: ॥ ३१ ॥
suṣeṇaś cārudeṣṇaś ca
sāmbo jāmbavatī-sutaḥ
anye ca kārṣṇi-pravarāḥ
saputrā ṛṣabhādayaḥ
Synonyms
suṣeṇaḥ — Suṣeṇa; cārudeṣṇaḥ — Cārudeṣṇa; ca — and; sāmbaḥ — Sāmba; jāmbavatī-sutaḥ — the son of Jāmbavatī; anye — others; ca — also; kārṣṇi — the sons of Lord Kṛṣṇa; pravarāḥ — all chieftains; sa-putrāḥ — along with their sons; ṛṣabha — Ṛṣabha; ādayaḥ — etc.

Translation
Are all the chieftain sons of Lord Kṛṣṇa, such as Suṣeṇa, Cārudeṣṇa, Sāmba the son of Jāmbavatī, and Ṛṣabha, along with their sons, all doing well?

Texts 32-33
तथैवानुचरा: शौरे: श्रुतदेवोद्धवादय: ।
सुनन्दनन्दशीर्षण्या ये चान्ये सात्वतर्षभा: ॥ ३२ ॥
अपि स्वस्त्यासते सर्वे रामकृष्णभुजाश्रया: ।
अपि स्मरन्ति कुशलमस्माकं बद्धसौहृदा: ॥ ३३ ॥
tathaivānucarāḥ śaureḥ
śrutadevoddhavādayaḥ
sunanda-nanda-śīrṣaṇyā
ye cānye sātvatarṣabhāḥ
api svasty āsate sarve
rāma-kṛṣṇa-bhujāśrayāḥ
api smaranti kuśalam
asmākaṁ baddha-sauhṛdāḥ
Synonyms
tathā eva — similarly; anucarāḥ — constant companions; śaureḥ — of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa such as; śrutadeva — Śrutadeva; uddhava-ādayaḥ — Uddhava and others; sunanda — Sunanda; nanda — Nanda; śīrṣaṇyāḥ — other leaders; ye — all of them; ca — and; anye — others; sātvata — liberated souls; ṛṣabhāḥ — the best men; api — if; svasti — doing well; āsate — are; sarve — all of them; rāma — Balarāma; kṛṣṇa — Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhuja-āśrayāḥ — under the protection of; api — if also; smaranti — do remember; kuśalam — welfare; asmākam — about ourselves; baddha-sauhṛdāḥ — bound by eternal friendship.

Translation
Also, Śrutadeva, Uddhava and others, Nanda, Sunanda and other leaders of liberated souls who are constant companions of the Lord are protected by Lord Balarāma and Kṛṣṇa. Are they all doing well in their respective functions? Do they, who are all eternally bound in friendship with us, remember our welfare?

Text 34
भगवानपि गोविन्दो ब्रह्मण्यो भक्तवत्सल: ।
कच्चित्पुरे सुधर्मायां सुखमास्ते सुहृद्‍वृत: ॥ ३४ ॥
bhagavān api govindo
brahmaṇyo bhakta-vatsalaḥ
kaccit pure sudharmāyāṁ
sukham āste suhṛd-vṛtaḥ
Synonyms
bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa; api — also; govindaḥ — one who enlivens the cows and the senses; brahmaṇyaḥ — devoted to the devotees or the brāhmaṇas; bhakta-vatsalaḥ — affectionate to the devotees; kaccit — whether; pure — in Dvārakā Purī; sudharmāyām — pious assembly; sukham — happiness; āste — does enjoy; suhṛt-vṛtaḥ — surrounded by friends.

Translation
Is Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who gives pleasure to the cows, the senses and the brāhmaṇas, who is very affectionate towards His devotees, enjoying the pious assembly at Dvārakā Purī surrounded by friends?

Texts 35-36
मङ्गलाय च लोकानां क्षेमाय च भवाय च ।
आस्ते यदुकुलाम्भोधावाद्योऽनन्तसख: पुमान् ॥ ३५ ॥
यद्बाहुदण्डगुप्तायां स्वपुर्यां यदवोऽर्चिता: ।
क्रीडन्ति परमानन्दं महापौरुषिका इव ॥ ३६ ॥
maṅgalāya ca lokānāṁ
kṣemāya ca bhavāya ca
āste yadu-kulāmbhodhāv
ādyo ’nanta-sakhaḥ pumān
yad bāhu-daṇḍa-guptāyāṁ
sva-puryāṁ yadavo ’rcitāḥ
krīḍanti paramānandaṁ
mahā-pauruṣikā iva
Synonyms
maṅgalāya — for all good; ca — also; lokānām — of all the planets; kṣemāya — for protection; ca — and; bhavāya — for elevation; ca — also; āste — is there; yadu-kula-ambhodhau — in the ocean of the Yadu dynasty; ādyaḥ — the original; ananta-sakhaḥ — in the company of Ananta (Balarāma); pumān — the supreme enjoyer; yat — whose; bāhu-daṇḍa-guptāyām — being protected by His arms; sva-puryām — in His own city; yadavaḥ — the members of the Yadu family; arcitāḥ — as they deserve; krīḍanti — are relishing; parama-ānandam — transcendental pleasure; mahā-pauruṣikāḥ — the residents of the spiritual sky; iva — like.

Translation
The original Personality of Godhead, the enjoyer, and Balarāma, the primeval Lord Ananta, are staying in the ocean of the Yadu dynasty for the welfare, protection and general progress of the entire universe. And the members of the Yadu dynasty, being protected by the arms of the Lord, are enjoying life like the residents of the spiritual sky.

Text 37
यत्पादशुश्रूषणमुख्यकर्मणा
सत्यादयो द्व्यष्टसहस्रयोषित: ।
निर्जित्य सङ्ख्ये त्रिदशांस्तदाशिषो
हरन्ति वज्रायुधवल्लभोचिता: ॥ ३७ ॥
yat-pāda-śuśrūṣaṇa-mukhya-karmaṇā
satyādayo dvy-aṣṭa-sahasra-yoṣitaḥ
nirjitya saṅkhye tri-daśāṁs tad-āśiṣo
haranti vajrāyudha-vallabhocitāḥ
Synonyms
yat — whose; pāda — feet; śuśrūṣaṇa — administration of comforts; mukhya — the most important; karmaṇā — by the acts of; satya-ādayaḥ — queens headed by Satyabhāmā; dvi-aṣṭa — twice eight; sahasra — thousand; yoṣitaḥ — the fair sex; nirjitya — by subduing; saṅkhye — in the battle; tri-daśān — of the denizens of heaven; tat-āśiṣaḥ — what is enjoyed by the demigods; haranti — do take away; vajra-āyudha-vallabhā — the wives of the personality who controls the thunderbolt; ucitāḥ — deserving.

Translation
Simply by administering comforts at the lotus feet of the Lord, which is the most important of all services, the queens at Dvārakā, headed by Satyabhāmā, induced the Lord to conquer the demigods. Thus the queens enjoy things which are prerogatives of the wives of the controller of thunderbolts.

Text 38
यद्बाहुदण्डाभ्युदयानुजीविनो
यदुप्रवीरा ह्यकुतोभया मुहु: ।
अधिक्रमन्त्यङ्‌घ्रिभिराहृतां बलात्
सभां सुधर्मां सुरसत्तमोचिताम् ॥ ३८ ॥
yad bāhu-daṇḍābhyudayānujīvino
yadu-pravīrā hy akutobhayā muhuḥ
adhikramanty aṅghribhir āhṛtāṁ balāt
sabhāṁ sudharmāṁ sura-sattamocitām
Synonyms
yat — whose; bāhu-daṇḍa — arms; abhyudaya — influenced by; anujīvinaḥ — always living; yadu — the members of the Yadu dynasty; pravīrāḥ — great heroes; hi akutobhayāḥ — fearless in every respect; muhuḥ — constantly; adhikramanti — traversing; aṅghribhiḥ — by foot; āhṛtām — brought about; balāt — by force; sabhām — assembly house; sudharmām — Sudharmā; sura-sat-tama — the best among the demigods; ucitām — deserving.

Translation
The great heroes of the Yadu dynasty, being protected by the arms of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, always remain fearless in every respect. And therefore their feet trample over the Sudharmā assembly house, which the best demigods deserved but which was taken away from them.

Text 39
कच्चित्तेऽनामयं तात भ्रष्टतेजा विभासि मे ।
अलब्धमानोऽवज्ञात: किं वा तात चिरोषित: ॥ ३९ ॥
kaccit te ’nāmayaṁ tāta
bhraṣṭa-tejā vibhāsi me
alabdha-māno ’vajñātaḥ
kiṁ vā tāta ciroṣitaḥ
Synonyms
kaccit — whether; te — your; anāmayam — health is all right; tāta — my dear brother; bhraṣṭa — bereft; tejāḥ — luster; vibhāsi — appear; me — to me; alabdha-mānaḥ — without respect; avajñātaḥ — neglected; kim — whether; vā — or; tāta — my dear brother; ciroṣitaḥ — because of long residence.

Translation
My brother Arjuna, please tell me whether your health is all right. You appear to have lost your bodily luster. Is this due to others disrespecting and neglecting you because of your long stay at Dvārakā?

Text 40
कच्चिन्नाभिहतोऽभावै: शब्दादिभिरमङ्गलै: ।
न दत्तमुक्तमर्थिभ्य आशया यत्प्रतिश्रुतम् ॥ ४० ॥
kaccin nābhihato ’bhāvaiḥ
śabdādibhir amaṅgalaiḥ
na dattam uktam arthibhya
āśayā yat pratiśrutam
Synonyms
kaccit — whether; na — could not; abhihataḥ — addressed by; abhāvaiḥ — unfriendly; śabda-ādibhiḥ — by sounds; amaṅgalaiḥ — inauspicious; na — did not; dattam — give in charity; uktam — is said; arthibhyaḥ — unto one who asked; āśayā — with hope; yat — what; pratiśrutam — promised to be paid.

Translation
Has someone addressed you with unfriendly words or threatened you? Could you not give charity to one who asked, or could you not keep your promise to someone?

Text 41
कच्चित्त्वं ब्राह्मणं बालं गां वृद्धं रोगिणं स्त्रियम् ।
शरणोपसृतं सत्त्वं नात्याक्षी: शरणप्रद: ॥ ४१ ॥
kaccit tvaṁ brāhmaṇaṁ bālaṁ
gāṁ vṛddhaṁ rogiṇaṁ striyam
śaraṇopasṛtaṁ sattvaṁ
nātyākṣīḥ śaraṇa-pradaḥ
Synonyms
kaccit — whether; tvam — yourself; brāhmaṇam — the brāhmaṇas; bālam — the child; gām — the cow; vṛddham — old; rogiṇam — the diseased; striyam — the woman; śaraṇa-upasṛtam — having approached for protection; sattvam — any living being; na — whether; atyākṣīḥ — not given shelter; śaraṇa-pradaḥ — deserving protection.

Translation
You are always the protector of the deserving living beings, such as brāhmaṇas, children, cows, women and the diseased. Could you not give them protection when they approached you for shelter?

Text 42
कच्चित्त्वं नागमोऽगम्यां गम्यां वासत्कृतां स्त्रियम् ।
पराजितो वाथ भवान्नोत्तमैर्नासमै: पथि ॥ ४२ ॥
kaccit tvaṁ nāgamo ’gamyāṁ
gamyāṁ vāsat-kṛtāṁ striyam
parājito vātha bhavān
nottamair nāsamaiḥ pathi
Synonyms
kaccit — whether; tvam — yourself; na — not; agamaḥ — did contact; agamyām — impeachable; gamyām — acceptable; vā — either; asat-kṛtām — improperly treated; striyam — a woman; parājitaḥ — defeated by; vā — either; atha — after all; bhavān — your good self; na — nor; uttamaiḥ — by superior power; na — not; asamaiḥ — by equals; pathi — on the road.

Translation
Have you contacted a woman of impeachable character, or have you not properly treated a deserving woman? Or have you been defeated on the way by someone who is inferior or equal to you?

Text 43
अपि स्वित्पर्यभुङ्‍क्‍थास्त्वं सम्भोज्यान् वृद्धबालकान् ।
जुगुप्सितं कर्म किञ्चित्कृतवान्न यदक्षमम् ॥ ४३ ॥
api svit parya-bhuṅkthās tvaṁ
sambhojyān vṛddha-bālakān
jugupsitaṁ karma kiñcit
kṛtavān na yad akṣamam
Synonyms
api svit — if it were so that; parya — by leaving aside; bhuṅkthāḥ — have dined; tvam — yourself; sambhojyān — deserving to dine together; vṛddha — the old men; bālakān — boys; jugupsitam — abominable; karma — action; kiñcit — something; kṛtavān — you must have done; na — not; yat — that which; akṣamam — unpardonable.

Translation
Have you not taken care of old men and boys who deserve to dine with you? Have you left them and taken your meals alone? Have you committed some unpardonable mistake which is considered to be abominable?

Text 44
कच्चित् प्रेष्ठतमेनाथ हृदयेनात्मबन्धुना ।
शून्योऽस्मि रहितो नित्यं मन्यसे तेऽन्यथा न रुक् ॥ ४४ ॥
kaccit preṣṭhatamenātha
hṛdayenātma-bandhunā
śūnyo ’smi rahito nityaṁ
manyase te ’nyathā na ruk
Synonyms
kaccit — whether; preṣṭha-tamena — unto the most dear one; atha — my brother Arjuna; hṛdayena — most intimate; ātma-bandhunā — own friend Lord Kṛṣṇa; śūnyaḥ — void; asmi — I am; rahitaḥ — having lost; nityam — for all time; manyase — you think; te — your; anyathā — otherwise; na — never; ruk — mental distress.

Translation
Or is it that you are feeling empty for all time because you might have lost your most intimate friend, Lord Kṛṣṇa? O my brother Arjuna, I can think of no other reason for your becoming so dejected.