Text 1
सूत उवाच
तत: परीक्षिद् द्विजवर्यशिक्षया
महीं महाभागवत: शशास ह ।
यथा हि सूत्यामभिजातकोविदा:
समादिशन् विप्र महद्गुणस्तथा ॥ १ ॥
sūta uvāca
tataḥ parīkṣid dvija-varya-śikṣayā
mahīṁ mahā-bhāgavataḥ śaśāsa ha
yathā hi sūtyām abhijāta-kovidāḥ
samādiśan vipra mahad-guṇas tathā
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Sūta Gosvāmī said; tataḥ — thereafter; parīkṣit — Mahārāja Parīkṣit; dvija-varya — the great twice-born brāhmaṇas; śikṣayā — by their instructions; mahīm — the earth; mahā-bhāgavataḥ — the great devotee; śaśāsa — ruled; ha — in the past; yathā — as they told it; hi — certainly; sūtyām — at the time of his birth; abhijāta-kovidāḥ — expert astrologers at the time of birth; samādiśan — gave their opinions; vipra — O brāhmaṇas; mahat-guṇaḥ — great qualities; tathā — true to that.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī said: O learned brāhmaṇas, Mahārāja Parīkṣit then began to rule over the world as a great devotee of the Lord under the instructions of the best of the twice-born brāhmaṇas. He ruled by those great qualities which were foretold by expert astrologers at the time of his birth.

Text 2
स उत्तरस्य तनयामुपयेम इरावतीम् ।
जनमेजयादींश्चतुरस्तस्यामुत्पादयत् सुतान् ॥ २ ॥
sa uttarasya tanayām
upayema irāvatīm
janamejayādīṁś caturas
tasyām utpādayat sutān
Synonyms
saḥ — he; uttarasya — of King Uttara; tanayām — daughter; upayeme — married; irāvatīm — Irāvatī; janamejaya-ādīn — headed by Mahārāja Janamejaya; caturaḥ — four; tasyām — in her; utpādayat — begot; sutān — sons.

Translation
King Parīkṣit married the daughter of King Uttara and begot four sons, headed by Mahārāja Janamejaya.

Text 3
आजहाराश्वमेधांस्त्रीन् गङ्गायां भूरिदक्षिणान् ।
शारद्वतं गुरुं कृत्वा देवा यत्राक्षिगोचरा: ॥ ३ ॥
ājahārāśva-medhāṁs trīn
gaṅgāyāṁ bhūri-dakṣiṇān
śāradvataṁ guruṁ kṛtvā
devā yatrākṣi-gocarāḥ
Synonyms
ājahāra — performed; aśva-medhān — horse sacrifices; trīn — three; gaṅgāyām — the bank of the Ganges; bhūri — sufficiently; dakṣiṇān — rewards; śāradvatam — unto Kṛpācārya; gurum — spiritual master; kṛtvā — having selected; devāḥ — the demigods; yatra — wherein; akṣi — eyes; gocarāḥ — within the purview.

Translation
Mahārāja Parīkṣit, after having selected Kṛpācārya for guidance as his spiritual master, performed three horse sacrifices on the banks of the Ganges. These were executed with sufficient rewards for the attendants. And at these sacrifices, even the common man could see demigods.

Text 4
निजग्राहौजसा वीर: कलिं दिग्विजये क्‍वचित् ।
नृपलिङ्गधरं शूद्रं घ्नन्तं गोमिथुनं पदा ॥ ४ ॥
nijagrāhaujasā vīraḥ
kaliṁ digvijaye kvacit
nṛpa-liṅga-dharaṁ śūdraṁ
ghnantaṁ go-mithunaṁ padā
Synonyms
nijagrāha — sufficiently punished; ojasā — by prowess; vīraḥ — valiant hero; kalim — unto Kali, the master of the age; digvijaye — on his way to conquer the world; kvacit — once upon a time; nṛpa-liṅga-dharam — one who passes in the dress of a king; śūdram — the lower class; ghnantam — hurting; go-mithunam — a cow and bull; padā — on the leg.

Translation
Once, when Mahārāja Parīkṣit was on his way to conquer the world, he saw the master of Kali-yuga, who was lower than a śūdra, disguised as a king and hurting the legs of a cow and bull. The King at once caught hold of him to deal sufficient punishment.

Text 5
शौनक उवाच
कस्य हेतोर्निजग्राह कलिं दिग्विजये नृप: ।
नृदेवचिह्नधृक्‍शूद्रकोऽसौ गां य: पदाहनत् ।
तत्कथ्यतां महाभाग यदि कृष्णकथाश्रयम् ॥ ५ ॥
śaunaka uvāca
kasya hetor nijagrāha
kaliṁ digvijaye nṛpaḥ
nṛdeva-cihna-dhṛk śūdra-
ko ’sau gāṁ yaḥ padāhanat
tat kathyatāṁ mahā-bhāga
yadi kṛṣṇa-kathāśrayam
Synonyms
śaunakaḥ uvāca — Śaunaka Ṛṣi said; kasya — for what; hetoḥ — reason; nijagrāha — sufficiently punished; kalim — the master of the Age of Kali; digvijaye — during the time of his world tour; nṛpaḥ — the King; nṛ-deva — royal person; cihna-dhṛk — decorated like; śūdrakaḥ — lowest of the śūdras; asau — he; gām — cow; yaḥ — one who; padā ahanat — struck on the leg; tat — all that; kathyatām — please describe; mahā-bhāga — O greatly fortunate one; yadi — if, however; kṛṣṇa — about Kṛṣṇa; kathā-āśrayam — related with His topics.

Translation
Śaunaka Ṛṣi inquired: Why did Mahārāja Parīkṣit simply punish him, since he was the lowest of the śūdras, having dressed as a king and having struck a cow on the leg? Please describe all these incidents if they relate to the topics of Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Text 6
अथवास्य पदाम्भोजमकरन्दलिहां सताम् ।
किमन्यैरसदालापैरायुषो यदसद्व्यय: ॥ ६ ॥
athavāsya padāmbhoja-
makaranda-lihāṁ satām
kim anyair asad-ālāpair
āyuṣo yad asad-vyayaḥ
Synonyms
athavā — otherwise; asya — of His (Lord Kṛṣṇa’s); pada-ambhoja — lotus feet; makaranda-lihām — of those who lick the honey from such a lotus flower; satām — of those who are to exist eternally; kim anyaiḥ — what is the use of anything else; asat — illusory; ālāpaiḥ — topics; āyuṣaḥ — of the duration of life; yat — that which is; asat-vyayaḥ — unnecessary waste of life.

Translation
The devotees of the Lord are accustomed to licking up the honey available from the lotus feet of the Lord. What is the use of topics which simply waste one’s valuable life?

Text 7
क्षुद्रायुषां नृणामङ्ग मर्त्यानामृतमिच्छताम् ।
इहोपहूतो भगवान्मृत्यु: शामित्रकर्मणि ॥ ७ ॥
kṣudrāyuṣāṁ nṛṇām aṅga
martyānām ṛtam icchatām
ihopahūto bhagavān
mṛtyuḥ śāmitra-karmaṇi
Synonyms
kṣudra — very small; āyuṣām — of the duration of life; nṛṇām — of the human beings; aṅga — O Sūta Gosvāmī; martyānām — of those who are sure to meet death; ṛtam — eternal life; icchatām — of those who desire it; iha — herein; upahūtaḥ — called for being present; bhagavān — representing the Lord; mṛtyuḥ — the controller of death, Yamarāja; śāmitra — suppressing; karmaṇi — performances.

Translation
O Sūta Gosvāmī, there are those amongst men who desire freedom from death and get eternal life. They escape the slaughtering process by calling the controller of death, Yamarāja.

Text 8
न कश्चिन्म्रियते तावद् यावदास्त इहान्तक: ।
एतदर्थं हि भगवानाहूत: परमर्षिभि: ।
अहो नृलोके पीयेत हरिलीलामृतं वच: ॥ ८ ॥
na kaścin mriyate tāvad
yāvad āsta ihāntakaḥ
etad-arthaṁ hi bhagavān
āhūtaḥ paramarṣibhiḥ
aho nṛ-loke pīyeta
hari-līlāmṛtaṁ vacaḥ
Synonyms
na — not; kaścit — anyone; mriyate — will die; tāvat — so long; yāvat — as long as; āste — is present; iha — herein; antakaḥ — one who causes the end of life; etat — this; artham — reason; hi — certainly; bhagavān — the representative of the Lord; āhūtaḥ — invited; parama-ṛṣibhiḥ — by the great sages; aho — alas; nṛ-loke — in human society; pīyeta — let them drink; hari-līlā — transcendental pastimes of the Lord; amṛtam — nectar for eternal life; vacaḥ — narrations.

Translation
As long as Yamarāja, who causes everyone’s death, is present here, no one shall meet with death. The great sages have invited the controller of death, Yamarāja, who is the representative of the Lord. Living beings who are under his grip should take advantage by hearing the deathless nectar in the form of this narration of the transcendental pastimes of the Lord.

Text 9
मन्दस्य मन्दप्रज्ञस्य वयो मन्दायुषश्च वै ।
निद्रया ह्रियते नक्तं दिवा च व्यर्थकर्मभि: ॥ ९ ॥
mandasya manda-prajñasya
vayo mandāyuṣaś ca vai
nidrayā hriyate naktaṁ
divā ca vyartha-karmabhiḥ
Synonyms
mandasya — of the lazy; manda — paltry; prajñasya — of intelligence; vayaḥ — age; manda — short; āyuṣaḥ — of duration of life; ca — and; vai — exactly; nidrayā — by sleeping; hriyate — passes away; naktam — night; divā — daytime; ca — also; vyartha — for nothing; karmabhiḥ — by activities.

Translation
Lazy human beings with paltry intelligence and a short duration of life pass the night sleeping and the day performing activities that are for naught.

Text 10
सूत उवाच
यदा परीक्षित् कुरुजाङ्गलेऽवसत्
कलिं प्रविष्टं निजचक्रवर्तिते ।
निशम्य वार्तामनतिप्रियां तत:
शरासनं संयुगशौण्डिराददे ॥ १० ॥
sūta uvāca
yadā parīkṣit kuru-jāṅgale ’vasat
kaliṁ praviṣṭaṁ nija-cakravartite
niśamya vārtām anatipriyāṁ tataḥ
śarāsanaṁ saṁyuga-śauṇḍir ādade
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Sūta Gosvāmī said; yadā — when; parīkṣit — Mahārāja Parīkṣit; kuru-jāṅgale — in the capital of Kuru’s empire; avasat — was residing; kalim — the symptoms of the Age of Kali; praviṣṭam — entered; nija-cakravartite — within his jurisdiction; niśamya — thus hearing; vārtām — news; anati-priyām — not very palatable; tataḥ — thereafter; śarāsanam — arrows and bow; saṁyuga — having gotten a chance for; śauṇḍiḥ — martial activities; ādade — took up.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī said: While Mahārāja Parīkṣit was residing in the capital of the Kuru empire, the symptoms of the Age of Kali began to infiltrate within the jurisdiction of his state. When he learned about this, he did not think the matter very palatable. This did, however, give him a chance to fight. He took up his bow and arrows and prepared himself for military activities.

Text 11
स्वलङ्‍कृतं श्यामतुरङ्गयोजितं
रथं मृगेन्द्रध्वजमाश्रित: पुरात् ।
वृतो रथाश्वद्विपपत्तियुक्तया
स्वसेनया दिग्विजयाय निर्गत: ॥ ११ ॥
svalaṅkṛtaṁ śyāma-turaṅga-yojitaṁ
rathaṁ mṛgendra-dhvajam āśritaḥ purāt
vṛto rathāśva-dvipapatti-yuktayā
sva-senayā digvijayāya nirgataḥ
Synonyms
su-alaṅkṛtam — very well decorated; śyāma — black; turaṅga — horses; yojitam — tackled; ratham — chariot; mṛga-indra — lion; dhvajam — flagged; āśritaḥ — under the protection; purāt — from the capital; vṛtaḥ — surrounded by; ratha — charioteers; aśva — cavalry; dvipapatti — elephants; yuktayā — thus being equipped; sva-senayā — along with infantry; digvijayāya — for the purpose of conquering; nirgataḥ — went out.

Translation
Mahārāja Parīkṣit sat on a chariot drawn by black horses. His flag was marked with the sign of a lion. Being so decorated and surrounded by charioteers, cavalry, elephants and infantry soldiers, he left the capital to conquer in all directions.

Text 12
भद्राश्वं केतुमालं च भारतं चोत्तरान् कुरून् ।
किम्पुरुषादीनि वर्षाणि विजित्य जगृहे बलिम् ॥ १२ ॥
bhadrāśvaṁ ketumālaṁ ca
bhārataṁ cottarān kurūn
kimpuruṣādīni varṣāṇi
vijitya jagṛhe balim
Synonyms
bhadrāśvam — Bhadrāśva; ketumālam — Ketumāla; ca — also; bhāratam — Bhārata; ca — and; uttarān — the northern countries; kurūn — the kingdom of the Kuru dynasty; kimpuruṣa-ādīni — a country beyond the northern side of the Himālayas; varṣāṇi — parts of the earth planet; vijitya — conquering; jagṛhe — exacted; balim — strength.

Translation
Mahārāja Parīkṣit then conquered all parts of the earthly planet — Bhadrāśva, Ketumāla, Bhārata, the northern Kuru, Kimpuruṣa, etc. — and exacted tributes from their respective rulers.

Texts 13-15
तत्र तत्रोपश‍ृण्वान: स्वपूर्वेषां महात्मनाम् ।
प्रगीयमाणं च यश: कृष्णमाहात्म्यसूचकम् ॥ १३ ॥
आत्मानं च परित्रातमश्वत्थाम्नोऽस्त्रतेजस: ।
स्‍नेहं च वृष्णिपार्थानां तेषां भक्तिं च केशवे ॥ १४ ॥
तेभ्य: परमसन्तुष्ट: प्रीत्युज्जृम्भितलोचन: ।
महाधनानि वासांसि ददौ हारान् महामना: ॥ १५ ॥
tatra tatropaśṛṇvānaḥ
sva-pūrveṣāṁ mahātmanām
pragīyamāṇaṁ ca yaśaḥ
kṛṣṇa-māhātmya-sūcakam
ātmānaṁ ca paritrātam
aśvatthāmno ’stra-tejasaḥ
snehaṁ ca vṛṣṇi-pārthānāṁ
teṣāṁ bhaktiṁ ca keśave
tebhyaḥ parama-santuṣṭaḥ
prīty-ujjṛmbhita-locanaḥ
mahā-dhanāni vāsāṁsi
dadau hārān mahā-manāḥ
Synonyms
tatra tatra — everywhere the King visited; upaśṛṇvānaḥ — continuously he heard; sva-pūrveṣām — about his own forefathers; mahā-ātmanām — who were all great devotees of the Lord; pragīyamāṇam — unto those who were thus addressing; ca — also; yaśaḥ — glories; kṛṣṇa — Lord Kṛṣṇa; māhātmya — glorious acts; sūcakam — indicating; ātmānam — his personal self; ca — also; paritrātam — delivered; aśvatthāmnaḥ — of Aśvatthāmā; astra — weapon; tejasaḥ — powerful rays; sneham — affection; ca — also; vṛṣṇi-pārthānām — between descendants of Vṛṣṇi and those of Pṛthā; teṣām — of all of them; bhaktim — devotion; ca — also; keśave — unto Lord Kṛṣṇa; tebhyaḥ — unto them; parama — extremely; santuṣṭaḥ — pleased; prīti — attraction; ujjṛmbhita — pleasingly open; locanaḥ — one who has such eyes; mahā-dhanāni — valuable riches; vāsāṁsi — clothing; dadau — gave in charity; hārān — necklace; mahā-manāḥ — one who has a broader outlook.

Translation
Wherever the King visited, he continuously heard the glories of his great forefathers, who were all devotees of the Lord, and also of the glorious acts of Lord Kṛṣṇa. He also heard how he himself had been protected by the Lord from the powerful heat of the weapon of Aśvatthāmā. People also mentioned the great affection between the descendants of Vṛṣṇi and Pṛthā due to the latter’s great devotion to Lord Keśava. The King, being very pleased with the singers of such glories, opened his eyes in great satisfaction. Out of magnanimity he was pleased to award them very valuable necklaces and clothing.

Text 16
सारथ्यपारषदसेवनसख्यदौत्य-
वीरासनानुगमनस्तवनप्रणामान् ।
स्‍निग्धेषु पाण्डुषु जगत्प्रणतिं च विष्णो-
र्भक्तिं करोति नृपतिश्चरणारविन्दे ॥ १६ ॥
sārathya-pāraṣada-sevana-sakhya-dautya-
vīrāsanānugamana-stavana-praṇāmān
snigdheṣu pāṇḍuṣu jagat-praṇatiṁ ca viṣṇor
bhaktiṁ karoti nṛ-patiś caraṇāravinde
Synonyms
sārathya — acceptance of the post of a chariot driver; pāraṣada — acceptance of the presidency in the assembly of the Rājasūya sacrifice; sevana — engaging the mind constantly in the service of the Lord; sakhya — to think of the Lord as a friend; dautya — acceptance of the post of a messenger; vīra-āsana — acceptance of the post of a watchman with a drawn sword at night; anugamana — following in the footsteps; stavana — offering of prayers; praṇāmān — offering obeisances; snigdheṣu — unto them who are malleable to the will of the Lord; pāṇḍuṣu — unto the sons of Pāṇḍu; jagat — the universal; praṇatim — one who is obeyed; ca — and; viṣṇoḥ — of Viṣṇu; bhaktim — devotion; karoti — does; nṛ-patiḥ — the King; caraṇa-aravinde — unto His lotus feet.

Translation
Mahārāja Parīkṣit heard that out of His causeless mercy Lord Kṛṣṇa [Viṣṇu], who is universally obeyed, rendered all kinds of service to the malleable sons of Pāṇḍu by accepting posts ranging from chariot driver to president to messenger, friend, night watchman, etc., according to the will of the Pāṇḍavas, obeying them like a servant and offering obeisances like one younger in years. When he heard this, Mahārāja Parīkṣit became overwhelmed with devotion to the lotus feet of the Lord.

Text 17
तस्यैवं वर्तमानस्य पूर्वेषां वृत्तिमन्वहम् ।
नातिदूरे किलाश्चर्यं यदासीत् तन्निबोध मे ॥ १७ ॥
tasyaivaṁ vartamānasya
pūrveṣāṁ vṛttim anvaham
nātidūre kilāścaryaṁ
yad āsīt tan nibodha me
Synonyms
tasya — of Mahārāja Parīkṣit; evam — thus; vartamānasya — remaining absorbed in such thought; pūrveṣām — of his forefathers; vṛttim — good engagement; anvaham — day after day; na — not; ati-dūre — far off; kila — verily; āścaryam — astonishing; yat — that; āsīt — was; tat — which; nibodha — know it; me — from me.

Translation
Now you may hear from me of what happened while Mahārāja Parīkṣit was passing his days hearing of the good occupations of his forefathers and being absorbed in thought of them.

Text 18
धर्म: पदैकेन चरन् विच्छायामुपलभ्य गाम् ।
पृच्छति स्माश्रुवदनां विवत्सामिव मातरम् ॥ १८ ॥
dharmaḥ padaikena caran
vicchāyām upalabhya gām
pṛcchati smāśru-vadanāṁ
vivatsām iva mātaram
Synonyms
dharmaḥ — the personality of religious principles; padā — leg; ekena — on one only; caran — wandering; vicchāyām — overtaken by the shadow of grief; upalabhya — having met; gām — the cow; pṛcchati sma — asked; aśru-vadanām — with tears on the face; vivatsām — one who has lost her offspring; iva — like; mātaram — the mother.

Translation
The personality of religious principles, Dharma, was wandering about in the form of a bull. And he met the personality of earth in the form of a cow who appeared to grieve like a mother who had lost her child. She had tears in her eyes, and the beauty of her body was lost. Thus Dharma questioned the earth as follows.

Text 19
धर्म उवाच
कच्चिद्भद्रेऽनामयमात्मनस्ते
विच्छायासि म्‍लायतेषन्मुखेन ।
आलक्षये भवतीमन्तराधिं
दूरे बन्धुं शोचसि कञ्चनाम्ब ॥ १९ ॥
dharma uvāca
kaccid bhadre ’nāmayam ātmanas te
vicchāyāsi mlāyateṣan mukhena
ālakṣaye bhavatīm antarādhiṁ
dūre bandhuṁ śocasi kañcanāmba
Synonyms
dharmaḥ uvāca — Dharma inquired; kaccit — whether; bhadre — madam; anāmayam — quite hale and hearty; ātmanaḥ — self; te — unto you; vicchāyā asi — appear to be covered with the shadow of grief; mlāyatā — which darkens; īṣat — slightly; mukhena — by the face; ālakṣaye — you look; bhavatīm — unto yourself; antarādhim — some disease within; dūre — long distant; bandhum — friend; śocasi — thinking of; kañcana — someone; amba — O mother.

Translation
Dharma [in the form of a bull] asked: Madam, are you not hale and hearty? Why are you covered with the shadow of grief? It appears by your face that you have become black. Are you suffering from some internal disease, or are you thinking of some relative who is away in a distant place?

Text 20
पादैर्न्यूनं शोचसि मैकपाद-
मात्मानं वा वृषलैर्भोक्ष्यमाणम् ।
आहो सुरादीन् हृतयज्ञभागान्
प्रजा उत स्विन्मघवत्यवर्षति ॥ २० ॥
pādair nyūnaṁ śocasi maika-pādam
ātmānaṁ vā vṛṣalair bhokṣyamāṇam
āho surādīn hṛta-yajña-bhāgān
prajā uta svin maghavaty avarṣati
Synonyms
pādaiḥ — by three legs; nyūnam — diminished; śocasi — if you are lamenting for that; mā — my; eka-pādam — only one leg; ātmānam — own body; vā — or; vṛṣalaiḥ — by the unlawful meat-eaters; bhokṣyamāṇam — to be exploited; āhoḥ — in sacrifice; sura-ādīn — the authorized demigods; hṛta-yajña — devoid of sacrificial; bhāgān — share; prajāḥ — the living beings; uta — increasing; svit — whether; maghavati — in famine and scarcity; avarṣati — because of rainlessness.

Translation
I have lost my three legs and am now standing on one only. Are you lamenting for my state of existence? Or are you in great anxiety because henceforward the unlawful meat-eaters will exploit you? Or are you in a sorry plight because the demigods are now bereft of their share of sacrificial offerings because no sacrifices are being performed at present? Or are you grieving for living beings because of their sufferings due to famine and drought?

Text 21
अरक्ष्यमाणा: स्त्रिय उर्वि बालान्
शोचस्यथो पुरुषादैरिवार्तान् ।
वाचं देवीं ब्रह्मकुले कुकर्म-
ण्यब्रह्मण्ये राजकुले कुलाग्रयान् ॥ २१ ॥
arakṣyamāṇāḥ striya urvi bālān
śocasy atho puruṣādair ivārtān
vācaṁ devīṁ brahma-kule kukarmaṇy
abrahmaṇye rāja-kule kulāgryān
Synonyms
arakṣyamāṇāḥ — unprotected; striyaḥ — women; urvi — on the earth; bālān — children; śocasi — you are feeling compassion; atho — as such; puruṣa-ādaiḥ — by cannibals (Rākṣasas); iva — like that; ārtān — those who are unhappy; vācam — vocabulary; devīm — the goddess; brahma-kule — in the family of the brāhmaṇa; kukarmaṇi — acts against the principles of religion; abrahmaṇye — persons against the brahminical culture; rāja-kule — in the administrative family; kula-agryān — most of all the families (the brāhmaṇas).

Translation
Are you feeling compunction for the unhappy women and children who are left forlorn by unscrupulous persons? Or are you unhappy because the goddess of learning is being handled by brāhmaṇas addicted to acts against the principles of religion? Or are you sorry to see that the brāhmaṇas have taken shelter of administrative families that do not respect brahminical culture?

Text 22
किं क्षत्रबन्धून् कलिनोपसृष्टान्
राष्ट्राणि वा तैरवरोपितानि ।
इतस्ततो वाशनपानवास:
स्‍नानव्यवायोन्मुखजीवलोकम् ॥ २२ ॥
kiṁ kṣatra-bandhūn kalinopasṛṣṭān
rāṣṭrāṇi vā tair avaropitāni
itas tato vāśana-pāna-vāsaḥ-
snāna-vyavāyonmukha-jīva-lokam
Synonyms
kim — whether; kṣatra-bandhūn — the unworthy administrators; kalinā — by the influence of the Age of Kali; upasṛṣṭān — bewildered; rāṣṭrāṇi — state affairs; vā — or; taiḥ — by them; avaropitāni — put into disorder; itaḥ — here; tataḥ — there; vā — or; aśana — accepting foodstuff; pāna — drink; vāsaḥ — residence; snāna — bath; vyavāya — sexual intercourse; unmukha — inclined; jīva-lokam — human society.

Translation
The so-called administrators are now bewildered by the influence of this Age of Kali, and thus they have put all state affairs into disorder. Are you now lamenting this disorder? Now the general populace does not follow the rules and regulations for eating, sleeping, drinking, mating, etc., and they are inclined to perform such anywhere and everywhere. Are you unhappy because of this?

Text 23
यद्वाम्ब ते भूरिभरावतार
कृतावतारस्य हरेर्धरित्रि ।
अन्तर्हितस्य स्मरती विसृष्टा
कर्माणि निर्वाणविलम्बितानि ॥ २३ ॥
yadvāmba te bhūri-bharāvatāra-
kṛtāvatārasya harer dharitri
antarhitasya smaratī visṛṣṭā
karmāṇi nirvāṇa-vilambitāni
Synonyms
yadvā — that may be; amba — O mother; te — your; bhūri — heavy; bhara — load; avatāra — decreasing the load; kṛta — done; avatārasya — one who incarnated; hareḥ — of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; dharitri — O earth; antarhitasya — of Him who is now out of sight; smaratī — while thinking of; visṛṣṭā — all that were performed; karmāṇi — activities; nirvāṇa — salvation; vilambitāni — that which entails.

Translation
O mother earth, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, incarnated Himself as Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa just to unload your heavy burden. All His activities here are transcendental, and they cement the path of liberation. You are now bereft of His presence. You are probably now thinking of those activities and feeling sorry in their absence.

Text 24
इदं ममाचक्ष्व तवाधिमूलं
वसुन्धरे येन विकर्शितासि ।
कालेन वा ते बलिनां बलीयसा सुरार्चितं
किं हृतमम्ब सौभगम् ॥ २४ ॥
idaṁ mamācakṣva tavādhi-mūlaṁ
vasundhare yena vikarśitāsi
kālena vā te balināṁ balīyasā
surārcitaṁ kiṁ hṛtam amba saubhagam
Synonyms
idam — this; mama — unto me; ācakṣva — kindly inform; tava — your; ādhimūlam — the root cause of your tribulations; vasundhare — O reservoir of all riches; yena — by which; vikarśitā asi — reduced to much weakness; kālena — by the influence of time; vā — or; te — your; balinām — very powerful; balīyasā — more powerful; sura-arcitam — adored by the demigods; kim — whether; hṛtam — taken away; amba — mother; saubhagam — fortune.

Translation
Mother, you are the reservoir of all riches. Please inform me of the root cause of your tribulations by which you have been reduced to such a weak state. I think that the powerful influence of time, which conquers the most powerful, might have forcibly taken away all your fortune, which was adored even by the demigods.

Text 25
dharaṇy uvāca
bhavān hi veda tat sarvaṁ
yan māṁ dharmānupṛcchasi
caturbhir vartase yena
pādair loka-sukhāvahaiḥ
Synonyms
dharaṇī uvāca — mother earth replied; bhavān — your good self; hi — certainly; veda — know; tat sarvam — all that you have inquired from me; yat — that; mām — from me; dharma — O personality of religious principles; anupṛcchasi — you have inquired one after another; caturbhiḥ — by four; vartase — you exist; yena — by which; pādaiḥ — by the legs; loka — in each and every planet; sukha-āvahaiḥ — increasing the happiness.

Translation
The earthly deity [in the form of a cow] thus replied to the personality of religious principles [in the form of a bull]: O Dharma, whatever you have inquired from me shall be known to you. I shall try to reply to all those questions. Once you too were maintained by your four legs, and you increased happiness all over the universe by the mercy of the Lord.

Texts 26-30
सत्यं शौचं दया क्षान्तिस्त्याग: सन्तोष आर्जवम् ।
शमो दमस्तप: साम्यं तितिक्षोपरति: श्रुतम् ॥ २६ ॥
ज्ञानं विरक्तिरैश्वर्यं शौर्यं तेजो बलं स्मृति: ।
स्वातन्त्र्यं कौशलं कान्तिर्धैर्यं मार्दवमेव च ॥ २७ ॥
प्रागल्भ्यं प्रश्रय: शीलं सह ओजो बलं भग: ।
गाम्भीर्यं स्थैर्यमास्तिक्यं कीर्तिर्मानोऽनहङ्‍कृति: ॥ २८ ॥
एते चान्ये च भगवन्नित्या यत्र महागुणा: ।
प्रार्थ्या महत्त्वमिच्छद्भ‍िर्न वियन्ति स्म कर्हिचित् ॥ २९ ॥
तेनाहं गुणपात्रेण श्रीनिवासेन साम्प्रतम् ।
शोचामि रहितं लोकं पाप्मना कलिनेक्षितम् ॥ ३० ॥
satyaṁ śaucaṁ dayā kṣāntis
tyāgaḥ santoṣa ārjavam
śamo damas tapaḥ sāmyaṁ
titikṣoparatiḥ śrutam
jñānaṁ viraktir aiśvaryaṁ
śauryaṁ tejo balaṁ smṛtiḥ
svātantryaṁ kauśalaṁ kāntir
dhairyaṁ mārdavam eva ca
prāgalbhyaṁ praśrayaḥ śīlaṁ
saha ojo balaṁ bhagaḥ
gāmbhīryaṁ sthairyam āstikyaṁ
kīrtir māno ’nahaṅkṛtiḥ
ete cānye ca bhagavan
nityā yatra mahā-guṇāḥ
prārthyā mahattvam icchadbhir
na viyanti sma karhicit
tenāhaṁ guṇa-pātreṇa
śrī-nivāsena sāmpratam
śocāmi rahitaṁ lokaṁ
pāpmanā kalinekṣitam
Synonyms
satyam — truthfulness; śaucam — cleanliness; dayā — intolerance of others’ unhappiness; kṣāntiḥ — self-control even if there is cause of anger; tyāgaḥ — magnanimity; santoṣaḥ — self-satisfaction; ārjavam — straightforwardness; śamaḥ — fixing of the mind; damaḥ — control of the sense organs; tapaḥ — trueness to one’s responsibility; sāmyam — indiscrimination between friend and foe; titikṣā — tolerance of the offenses of others; uparatiḥ — indifference to loss and gain; śrutam — following scriptural injunctions; jñānam — knowledge (self-realization); viraktiḥ — detachment from sense enjoyment; aiśvaryam — leadership; śauryam — chivalry; tejaḥ — influence; balam — to render possible that which is impossible; smṛtiḥ — to find one’s proper duty; svātantryam — not to depend on others; kauśalam — dexterity in all activities; kāntiḥ — beauty; dhairyam — freedom from disturbance; mārdavam — kindheartedness; eva — thus; ca — also; prāgalbhyam — ingenuity; praśrayaḥ — gentility; śīlam — mannerliness; sahaḥ — determination; ojaḥ — perfect knowledge; balam — proper execution; bhagaḥ — object of enjoyment; gāmbhīryam — joyfulness; sthairyam — immovability; āstikyam — faithfulness; kīrtiḥ — fame; mānaḥ — worthy of being worshiped; anahaṅkṛtiḥ — pridelessness; ete — all these; ca anye — also many others; ca — and; bhagavan — the Personality of Godhead; nityāḥ — everlasting; yatra — where; mahā-guṇāḥ — great qualities; prārthyāḥ — worthy to possess; mahattvam — greatness; icchadbhiḥ — those who desire so; na — never; viyanti — deteriorates; sma — ever; karhicit — at any time; tena — by Him; aham — myself; guṇa-pātreṇa — the reservoir of all qualities; śrī — the goddess of fortune; nivāsena — by the resting place; sāmpratam — very recently; śocāmi — I am thinking of; rahitam — bereft of; lokam — planets; pāpmanā — by the store of all sins; kalinā — by Kali; īkṣitam — is seen.

Translation
In Him reside (1) truthfulness, (2) cleanliness, (3) intolerance of another’s unhappiness, (4) the power to control anger, (5) self-satisfaction, (6) straightforwardness, (7) steadiness of mind, (8) control of the sense organs, (9) responsibility, (10) equality, (11) tolerance, (12) equanimity, (13) faithfulness, (14) knowledge, (15) absence of sense enjoyment, (16) leadership, (17) chivalry, (18) influence, (19) the power to make everything possible, (20) the discharge of proper duty, (21) complete independence, (22) dexterity, (23) fullness of all beauty, (24) serenity, (25) kindheartedness, (26) ingenuity, (27) gentility, (28) magnanimity, (29) determination, (30) perfection in all knowledge, (31) proper execution, (32) possession of all objects of enjoyment, (33) joyfulness, (34) immovability, (35) fidelity, (36) fame, (37) worship, (38) pridelessness, (39) being (as the Personality of Godhead), (40) eternity, and many other transcendental qualities which are eternally present and never to be separated from Him. That Personality of Godhead, the reservoir of all goodness and beauty, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, has now closed His transcendental pastimes on the face of the earth. In His absence the Age of Kali has spread its influence everywhere, so I am sorry to see this condition of existence.

Text 31
आत्मानं चानुशोचामि भवन्तं चामरोत्तमम् ।
देवान् पितृनृषीन् साधून् सर्वान् वर्णांस्तथाश्रमान् ॥ ३१ ॥
ātmānaṁ cānuśocāmi
bhavantaṁ cāmarottamam
devān pitṝn ṛṣīn sādhūn
sarvān varṇāṁs tathāśramān
Synonyms
ātmānam — myself; ca — also; anuśocāmi — lamenting; bhavantam — yourself; ca — as well as; amara-uttamam — the best amongst the demigods; devān — about the demigods; pitṝn — about the denizens of the Pitṛloka planet; ṛṣīn — about the sages; sādhūn — about the devotees; sarvān — all of them; varṇān — sections; tathā — as also; āśramān — orders of human society.

Translation
I am thinking about myself and also, O best amongst the demigods, about you, as well as about all the demigods, sages, denizens of Pitṛloka, devotees of the Lord and all men obedient to the system of varṇa and āśrama in human society.

Texts 32-33
ब्रह्मादयो बहुतिथं यदपाङ्गमोक्ष-
कामास्तप: समचरन् भगवत्प्रपन्ना: ।
सा श्री: स्ववासमरविन्दवनं विहाय
यत्पादसौभगमलं भजतेऽनुरक्ता ॥ ३२ ॥
तस्याहमब्जकुलिशाङ्‍कुशकेतुकेतै:
श्रीमत्पदैर्भगवत: समलङ्‍कृताङ्गी ।
त्रीनत्यरोच उपलभ्य ततो विभूतिं
लोकान् स मां व्यसृजदुत्स्मयतीं तदन्ते ॥ ३३ ॥
brahmādayo bahu-tithaṁ yad-apāṅga-mokṣa-
kāmās tapaḥ samacaran bhagavat-prapannāḥ
sā śrīḥ sva-vāsam aravinda-vanaṁ vihāya
yat-pāda-saubhagam alaṁ bhajate ’nuraktā
tasyāham abja-kuliśāṅkuśa-ketu-ketaiḥ
śrīmat-padair bhagavataḥ samalaṅkṛtāṅgī
trīn atyaroca upalabhya tato vibhūtiṁ
lokān sa māṁ vyasṛjad utsmayatīṁ tad-ante
Synonyms
brahma-ādayaḥ — demigods such as Brahmā; bahu-titham — for many days; yat — of Lakṣmī, the goddess of fortune; apāṅga-mokṣa — glance of grace; kāmāḥ — being desirous of; tapaḥ — penances; samacaran — executing; bhagavat — unto the Personality of Godhead; prapannāḥ — surrendered; sā — she (the goddess of fortune); śrīḥ — Lakṣmījī; sva-vāsam — her own abode; aravinda-vanam — the forest of lotus flowers; vihāya — leaving aside; yat — whose; pāda — feet; saubhagam — all-blissful; alam — without hesitation; bhajate — worships; anuraktā — being attached; tasya — His; aham — myself; abja — lotus flower; kuliśa — thunderbolt; aṅkuśa — rod for driving elephants; ketu — flag; ketaiḥ — impressions; śrīmat — the owner of all opulence; padaiḥ — by the soles of the feet; bhagavataḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; samalaṅkṛta-aṅgī — one whose body is so decorated; trīn — three; ati — superseding; aroce — beautifully decorated; upalabhya — having obtained; tataḥ — thereafter; vibhūtim — specific powers; lokān — planetary systems; saḥ — He; mām — me; vyasṛjat — gave up; utsmayatīm — while feeling proud; tat-ante — at the end.

Translation
Lakṣmījī, the goddess of fortune, whose glance of grace was sought by demigods like Brahmā and for whom they surrendered many a day unto the Personality of Godhead, gave up her own abode in the forest of lotus flowers and engaged herself in the service of the lotus feet of the Lord. I was endowed with specific powers to supersede the fortune of all the three planetary systems by being decorated with the impressions of the flag, thunderbolt, elephant-driving rod and lotus flower, which are signs of the lotus feet of the Lord. But at the end, when I felt I was so fortunate, the Lord left me.

Text 34
यो वै ममातिभरमासुरवंशराज्ञा-
मक्षौहिणीशतमपानुददात्मतन्त्र: ।
त्वां दु:स्थमूनपदमात्मनि पौरुषेण
सम्पादयन् यदुषु रम्यमबिभ्रदङ्गम् ॥ ३४ ॥
yo vai mamātibharam āsura-vaṁśa-rājñām
akṣauhiṇī-śatam apānudad ātma-tantraḥ
tvāṁ duḥstham ūna-padam ātmani pauruṣeṇa
sampādayan yaduṣu ramyam abibhrad aṅgam
Synonyms
yaḥ — He who; vai — certainly; mama — mine; ati-bharam — too burdensome; āsura-vaṁśa — unbelievers; rājñām — of the kings; akṣauhiṇī — one military division*; śatam — hundreds of such divisions; apānudat — extirpated; ātma-tantraḥ — self-sufficient; tvām — unto you; duḥstham — put into difficulty; ūna-padam — devoid of strength to stand; ātmani — internal; pauruṣeṇa — by dint of energy; sampādayan — for executing; yaduṣu — in the Yadu dynasty; ramyam — transcendentally beautiful; abibhrat — accepted; aṅgam — body.

Translation
O personality of religion, I was greatly overburdened by the undue military phalanxes arranged by atheistic kings, and I was relieved by the grace of the Personality of Godhead. Similarly you were also in a distressed condition, weakened in your standing strength, and thus He also incarnated by His internal energy in the family of the Yadus to relieve you.

Text 35
का वा सहेत विरहं
पुरुषोत्तमस्य प्रेमावलोकरुचिरस्मितवल्गुजल्पै: ।
स्थैर्यं समानमहरन्मधुमानिनीनां
रोमोत्सवो मम यदङ्‌घ्रिविटङ्किताया: ॥ ३५ ॥
kā vā saheta virahaṁ puruṣottamasya
premāvaloka-rucira-smita-valgu-jalpaiḥ
sthairyaṁ samānam aharan madhu-māninīnāṁ
romotsavo mama yad-aṅghri-viṭaṅkitāyāḥ
Synonyms
kā — who; vā — either; saheta — can tolerate; viraham — separation; puruṣa-uttamasya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; prema — loving; avaloka — glancing; rucira-smita — pleasing smile; valgu-jalpaiḥ — hearty appeals; sthairyam — gravity; sa-mānam — along with passionate wrath; aharat — conquered; madhu — sweethearts; māninīnām — women such as Satyabhāmā; roma-utsavaḥ — hair standing on end out of pleasure; mama — mine; yat — whose; aṅghri — feet; viṭaṅkitāyāḥ — imprinted with.

Translation
Who, therefore, can tolerate the pangs of separation from that Supreme Personality of Godhead? He could conquer the gravity and passionate wrath of His sweethearts like Satyabhāmā by His sweet smile of love, pleasing glance and hearty appeals. When He traversed my [earth’s] surface, I would be immersed in the dust of His lotus feet and thus would be sumptuously covered with grass which appeared like hairs standing on me out of pleasure.

Text 36
तयोरेवं कथयतो: पृथिवीधर्मयोस्तदा ।
परीक्षिन्नाम राजर्षि: प्राप्त: प्राचीं सरस्वतीम् ॥ ३६ ॥
tayor evaṁ kathayatoḥ
pṛthivī-dharmayos tadā
parīkṣin nāma rājarṣiḥ
prāptaḥ prācīṁ sarasvatīm
Synonyms
tayoḥ — between them; evam — thus; kathayatoḥ — engaged in conversation; pṛthivī — earth; dharmayoḥ — and the personality of religion; tadā — at that time; parīkṣit — King Parīkṣit; nāma — of the name; rāja-ṛṣiḥ — a saint amongst kings; prāptaḥ — arrived; prācīm — flowing towards the east; sarasvatīm — River Sarasvatī.

Translation
While the earth and the personality of religion were thus engaged in conversation, the saintly King Parīkṣit reached the shore of the Sarasvatī River, which flowed towards the east.