Text 1
सूत उवाच
तत्र गोमिथुनं राजा हन्यमानमनाथवत् ।
दण्डहस्तं च वृषलं दद‍ृशे नृपलाञ्छनम् ॥ १ ॥
sūta uvāca
tatra go-mithunaṁ rājā
hanyamānam anāthavat
daṇḍa-hastaṁ ca vṛṣalaṁ
dadṛśe nṛpa-lāñchanam
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said; tatra — thereupon; go-mithunam — a cow and a bull; rājā — the King; hanyamānam — being beaten; anātha-vat — appearing to be bereft of their owner; daṇḍa-hastam — with a club in hand; ca — also; vṛṣalam — lower-caste śūdra; dadṛśe — observed; nṛpa — a king; lāñchanam — dressed like.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī said: After reaching that place, Mahārāja Parīkṣit observed that a lower-caste śūdra, dressed like a king, was beating a cow and a bull with a club, as if they had no owner.

Text 2
वृषं मृणालधवलं मेहन्तमिव बिभ्यतम् ।
वेपमानं पदैकेन सीदन्तं शूद्रताडितम् ॥ २ ॥
vṛṣaṁ mṛṇāla-dhavalaṁ
mehantam iva bibhyatam
vepamānaṁ padaikena
sīdantaṁ śūdra-tāḍitam
Synonyms
vṛṣam — the bull; mṛṇāla-dhavalam — as white as a white lotus; mehantam — urinating; iva — as if; bibhyatam — being too afraid; vepamānam — trembling; padā ekena — standing on only one leg; sīdantam — terrified; śūdra-tāḍitam — being beaten by a śūdra.

Translation
The bull was as white as a white lotus flower. He was terrified of the śūdra who was beating him, and he was so afraid that he was standing on one leg, trembling and urinating.

Text 3
गां च धर्मदुघां दीनां भृशं शूद्रपदाहताम् ।
विवत्सामाश्रुवदनां क्षामां यवसमिच्छतीम् ॥ ३ ॥
gāṁ ca dharma-dughāṁ dīnāṁ
bhṛśaṁ śūdra-padāhatām
vivatsām āśru-vadanāṁ
kṣāmāṁ yavasam icchatīm
Synonyms
gām — the cow; ca — also; dharma-dughām — beneficial because one can draw religion from her; dīnām — now rendered poor; bhṛśam — distressed; śūdra — the lower caste; pada-āhatām — beaten on the legs; vivatsām — without any calf; āśru-vadanām — with tears in her eyes; kṣāmām — very weak; yavasam — grass; icchatīm — as if desiring to have some grass to eat.

Translation
Although the cow is beneficial because one can draw religious principles from her, she was now rendered poor and calfless. Her legs were being beaten by a śūdra. There were tears in her eyes, and she was distressed and weak. She was hankering after some grass in the field.

Text 4
पप्रच्छ रथमारूढ: कार्तस्वरपरिच्छदम् ।
मेघगम्भीरया वाचा समारोपितकार्मुक: ॥ ४ ॥
papraccha ratham ārūḍhaḥ
kārtasvara-paricchadam
megha-gambhīrayā vācā
samāropita-kārmukaḥ
Synonyms
papraccha — inquired; ratham — chariot; ārūḍhaḥ — seated on; kārtasvara — gold; paricchadam — embossed with; megha — cloud; gambhīrayā — exonerating; vācā — sound; samāropita — well equipped; kārmukaḥ — arrows and bow.

Translation
Mahārāja Parīkṣit, well equipped with arrows and bow and seated on a gold-embossed chariot, spoke to him [the śūdra] with a deep voice sounding like thunder.

Text 5
कस्त्वं मच्छरणे लोके बलाद्धंस्यबलान् बली ।
नरदेवोऽसि वेशेण नटवत्कर्मणाद्विज: ॥ ५ ॥
kas tvaṁ mac-charaṇe loke
balād dhaṁsy abalān balī
nara-devo ’si veṣeṇa
naṭavat karmaṇā ’dvijaḥ
Synonyms
kaḥ — who are; tvam — you; mat — my; śaraṇe — under protection; loke — in this world; balāt — by force; haṁsi — killing; abalān — those who are helpless; balī — although full of strength; nara-devaḥ — man-god; asi — appear to be; veṣeṇa — by your dress; naṭa-vat — like a theatrical player; karmaṇā — by deeds; advi-jaḥ — a man not twice-born by culture.

Translation
Oh, who are you? You appear to be strong and yet you dare kill, within my protection, those who are helpless! By your dress you pose yourself to be a godly man [king], but by your deeds you are opposing the principles of the twice-born kṣatriyas.

Text 6
यस्त्वं कृष्णे गते दूरं सहगाण्डीवधन्वना ।
शोच्योऽस्यशोच्यान् रहसि प्रहरन् वधमर्हसि ॥ ६ ॥
yas tvaṁ kṛṣṇe gate dūraṁ
saha-gāṇḍīva-dhanvanā
śocyo ’sy aśocyān rahasi
praharan vadham arhasi
Synonyms
yaḥ — on account of; tvam — you rogue; kṛṣṇe — Lord Kṛṣṇa; gate — having gone away; dūram — out of sight; saha — along with; gāṇḍīva — the bow named Gāṇḍīva; dhanvanā — the carrier, Arjuna; śocyaḥ — culprit; asi — you are considered; aśocyān — innocent; rahasi — in a secluded place; praharan — beating; vadham — to be killed; arhasi — deserve.

Translation
You rogue, do you dare beat an innocent cow because Lord Kṛṣṇa and Arjuna, the carrier of the Gāṇḍīva bow, are out of sight? Since you are beating the innocent in a secluded place, you are considered a culprit and therefore deserve to be killed.

Text 7
त्वं वा मृणालधवल: पादैर्न्यून: पदा चरन् ।
वृषरूपेण किं कश्चिद् देवो न: परिखेदयन् ॥ ७ ॥
tvaṁ vā mṛṇāla-dhavalaḥ
pādair nyūnaḥ padā caran
vṛṣa-rūpeṇa kiṁ kaścid
devo naḥ parikhedayan
Synonyms
tvam — you; vā — either; mṛṇāla-dhavalaḥ — as white as a lotus; pādaiḥ — of three legs; nyūnaḥ — being deprived; padā — on one leg; caran — moving; vṛṣa — bull; rūpeṇa — in the form of; kim — whether; kaścit — someone; devaḥ — demigod; naḥ — us; parikhedayan — causing grief.

Translation
Then he [Mahārāja Parīkṣit] asked the bull: Oh, who are you? Are you a bull as white as a white lotus, or are you a demigod? You have lost three of your legs and are moving on only one. Are you some demigod causing us grief in the form of a bull?

Text 8
न जातु कौरवेन्द्राणां दोर्दण्डपरिरम्भिते ।
भूतलेऽनुपतन्त्यस्मिन् विना ते प्राणिनां शुच: ॥ ८ ॥
na jātu kauravendrāṇāṁ
dordaṇḍa-parirambhite
bhū-tale ’nupatanty asmin
vinā te prāṇināṁ śucaḥ
Synonyms
na — not; jātu — at any time; kaurava-indrāṇām — of the kings in the Kuru dynasty; dordaṇḍa — strength of arms; parirambhite — protected by; bhū-tale — on the surface of the earth; anupatanti — grieving; asmin — up till now; vinā — save and except; te — you; prāṇinām — of the living being; śucaḥ — tears in the eyes.

Translation
Now for the first time in a kingdom well protected by the arms of the kings of the Kuru dynasty, I see you grieving with tears in your eyes. Up till now no one on earth has ever shed tears because of royal negligence.

Text 9
मा सौरभेयात्र शुचो व्येतु ते वृषलाद् भयम् ।
मा रोदीरम्ब भद्रं ते खलानां मयि शास्तरि ॥ ९ ॥
mā saurabheyātra śuco
vyetu te vṛṣalād bhayam
mā rodīr amba bhadraṁ te
khalānāṁ mayi śāstari
Synonyms
mā — do not; saurabheya — O son of Surabhi; atra — in my kingdom; śucaḥ — lamentation; vyetu — let there be; te — your; vṛṣalāt — by the śūdra; bhayam — cause of fear; mā — do not; rodīḥ — cry; amba — mother cow; bhadram — all good; te — unto you; khalānām — of the envious; mayi — while I am living; śāstari — the ruler or subduer.

Translation
O son of Surabhi, you need lament no longer now. There is no need to fear this low-class śūdra. And, O mother cow, as long as I am living as the ruler and subduer of all envious men, there is no cause for you to cry. Everything will be good for you.

Texts 10-11
यस्य राष्ट्रे प्रजा: सर्वास्त्रस्यन्ते साध्व्यसाधुभि: ।
तस्य मत्तस्य नश्यन्ति कीर्तिरायुर्भगो गति: ॥ १० ॥
एष राज्ञां परो धर्मो ह्यार्तानामार्तिनिग्रह: ।
अत एनं वधिष्यामि भूतद्रुहमसत्तमम् ॥ ११ ॥
yasya rāṣṭre prajāḥ sarvās
trasyante sādhvy asādhubhiḥ
tasya mattasya naśyanti
kīrtir āyur bhago gatiḥ
eṣa rājñāṁ paro dharmo
hy ārtānām ārti-nigrahaḥ
ata enaṁ vadhiṣyāmi
bhūta-druham asattamam
Synonyms
yasya — one whose; rāṣṭre — in the state; prajāḥ — living beings; sarvāḥ — one and all; trasyante — are terrified; sādhvi — O chaste one; asādhubhiḥ — by the miscreants; tasya — his; mattasya — of the illusioned; naśyanti — vanishes; kīrtiḥ — fame; āyuḥ — duration of life; bhagaḥ — fortune; gatiḥ — good rebirth; eṣaḥ — these are; rājñām — of the kings; paraḥ — superior; dharmaḥ — occupation; hi — certainly; ārtānām — of the sufferers; ārti — sufferings; nigrahaḥ — subduing; ataḥ — therefore; enam — this man; vadhiṣyāmi — I shall kill; bhūta-druham — revolter against other living beings; asat-tamam — the most wretched.

Translation
O chaste one, the king’s good name, duration of life and good rebirth vanish when all kinds of living beings are terrified by miscreants in his kingdom. It is certainly the prime duty of the king to subdue first the sufferings of those who suffer. Therefore I must kill this most wretched man because he is violent against other living beings.

Text 12
कोऽवृश्चत् तव पादांस्त्रीन् सौरभेय चतुष्पद ।
मा भूवंस्त्वाद‍ृशा राष्ट्रे राज्ञां कृष्णानुवर्तिनाम् ॥ १२ ॥
ko ’vṛścat tava pādāṁs trīn
saurabheya catuṣ-pada
mā bhūvaṁs tvādṛśā rāṣṭre
rājñāṁ kṛṣṇānuvartinām
Synonyms
kaḥ — who is he; avṛścat — cut off; tava — your; pādān — legs; trīn — three; saurabheya — O son of Surabhi; catuḥ-pada — you are four-legged; mā — never to be; bhūvan — it so happened; tvādṛśāḥ — as yourself; rāṣṭre — in the state; rājñām — of the kings; kṛṣṇa-anuvartinām — those who follow the codes of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
He [Mahārāja Parīkṣit] repeatedly addressed and questioned the bull thus: O son of Surabhi, who has cut off your three legs? In the state of the kings who are obedient to the laws of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Kṛṣṇa, there is no one as unhappy as you.

Text 13
आख्याहि वृष भद्रं व: साधूनामकृतागसाम् ।
आत्मवैरूप्यकर्तारं पार्थानां कीर्तिदूषणम् ॥ १३ ॥
ākhyāhi vṛṣa bhadraṁ vaḥ
sādhūnām akṛtāgasām
ātma-vairūpya-kartāraṁ
pārthānāṁ kīrti-dūṣaṇam
Synonyms
ākhyāhi — just let me know; vṛṣa — O bull; bhadram — good; vaḥ — for you; sādhūnām — of the honest; akṛta-āgasām — of those who are offenseless; ātma-vairūpya — deformation of the self; kartāram — the doer; pārthānām — of the sons of Pṛthā; kīrti-dūṣaṇam — blackening the reputation.

Translation
O bull, you are offenseless and thoroughly honest; therefore I wish all good to you. Please tell me of the perpetrator of these mutilations, which blacken the reputation of the sons of Pṛthā.

Text 14
जनेऽनागस्यघं युञ्जन् सर्वतोऽस्य च मद्भयम् ।
साधूनां भद्रमेव स्यादसाधुदमने कृते ॥ १४ ॥
jane ’nāgasy aghaṁ yuñjan
sarvato ’sya ca mad-bhayam
sādhūnāṁ bhadram eva syād
asādhu-damane kṛte
Synonyms
jane — to the living beings; anāgasi — those who are offenseless; agham — sufferings; yuñjan — by applying; sarvataḥ — anywhere and everywhere; asya — of such offenders; ca — and; mat-bhayam — fear me; sādhūnām — of the honest persons; bhadram — good fortune; eva — certainly; syāt — will take place; asādhu — dishonest miscreants; damane — curbed; kṛte — being so done.

Translation
Whoever causes offenseless living beings to suffer must fear me anywhere and everywhere in the world. By curbing dishonest miscreants, one automatically benefits the offenseless.

Text 15
अनाग:स्विह भूतेषु य आगस्कृन्निरङ्कुश: ।
आहर्तास्मि भुजं साक्षादमर्त्यस्यापि साङ्गदम् ॥ १५ ॥
anāgaḥsv iha bhūteṣu
ya āgas-kṛn niraṅkuśaḥ
āhartāsmi bhujaṁ sākṣād
amartyasyāpi sāṅgadam
Synonyms
anāgaḥsu iha — to the offenseless; bhūteṣu — living beings; yaḥ — the person; āgaḥ-kṛt — commits offense; niraṅkuśaḥ — upstart; āhartā asmi — I shall bring forth; bhujam — arms; sākṣāt — directly; amartyasya api — even one who is a demigod; sa-aṅgadam — with decorations and armor.

Translation
An upstart living being who commits offenses by torturing those who are offenseless shall be directly uprooted by me, even though he be a denizen of heaven with armor and decorations.

Text 16
राज्ञो हि परमो धर्म: स्वधर्मस्थानुपालनम् ।
शासतोऽन्यान् यथाशास्त्रमनापद्युत्पथानिह ॥ १६ ॥
rājño hi paramo dharmaḥ
sva-dharma-sthānupālanam
śāsato ’nyān yathā-śāstram
anāpady utpathān iha
Synonyms
rājñaḥ — of the king or the executive head; hi — certainly; paramaḥ — supreme; dharmaḥ — occupational duty; sva-dharma-stha — one who is faithful to his prescribed duty; anupālanam — giving protection always; śāsataḥ — while ruling; anyān — others; yathā — according to; śāstram — rulings of scriptures; anāpadi — without danger; utpathān — persons going astray; iha — as a matter of fact.

Translation
The supreme duty of the ruling king is to give all protection to law-abiding persons and to chastise those who stray from the ordinances of the scriptures in ordinary times, when there is no emergency.

Text 17
धर्म उवाच
एतद् व: पाण्डवेयानां युक्तमार्ताभयं वच: ।
येषां गुणगणै: कृष्णो दौत्यादौ भगवान् कृत: ॥ १७ ॥
dharma uvāca
etad vaḥ pāṇḍaveyānāṁ
yuktam ārtābhayaṁ vacaḥ
yeṣāṁ guṇa-gaṇaiḥ kṛṣṇo
dautyādau bhagavān kṛtaḥ
Synonyms
dharmaḥ uvāca — the personality of religion said; etat — all these; vaḥ — by you; pāṇḍaveyānām — of those who are in the Pāṇḍava dynasty; yuktam — just befitting; ārta — the sufferer; abhayam — freedom from all fears; vacaḥ — speeches; yeṣām — those; guṇa-gaṇaiḥ — by the qualifications; kṛṣṇaḥ — even Lord Kṛṣṇa; dautya-ādau — the duty of a messenger, etc.; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; kṛtaḥ — performed.

Translation
The personality of religion said: These words just spoken by you befit a person of the Pāṇḍava dynasty. Captivated by the devotional qualities of the Pāṇḍavas, even Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, performed duties as a messenger.

Text 18
न वयं क्लेशबीजानि यत: स्यु: पुरुषर्षभ ।
पुरुषं तं विजानीमो वाक्यभेदविमोहिता: ॥ १८ ॥
na vayaṁ kleśa-bījāni
yataḥ syuḥ puruṣarṣabha
puruṣaṁ taṁ vijānīmo
vākya-bheda-vimohitāḥ
Synonyms
na — not; vayam — we; kleśa-bījāni — the root cause of sufferings; yataḥ — wherefrom; syuḥ — it so happens; puruṣa-ṛṣabha — O greatest of all human beings; puruṣam — the person; tam — that; vijānīmaḥ — know; vākya-bheda — difference of opinion; vimohitāḥ — bewildered by.

Translation
O greatest among human beings, it is very difficult to ascertain the particular miscreant who has caused our sufferings, because we are bewildered by all the different opinions of theoretical philosophers.

Text 19
केचिद् विकल्पवसना आहुरात्मानमात्मन: ।
दैवमन्येऽपरे कर्म स्वभावमपरे प्रभुम् ॥ १९ ॥
kecid vikalpa-vasanā
āhur ātmānam ātmanaḥ
daivam anye ’pare karma
svabhāvam apare prabhum
Synonyms
kecit — some of them; vikalpa-vasanāḥ — those who deny all kinds of duality; āhuḥ — declare; ātmānam — own self; ātmanaḥ — of the self; daivam — superhuman; anye — others; apare — someone else; karma — activity; svabhāvam — material nature; apare — many other; prabhum — authorities.

Translation
Some of the philosophers, who deny all sorts of duality, declare that one’s own self is responsible for his personal happiness and distress. Others say that superhuman powers are responsible, while yet others say that activity is responsible, and the gross materialists maintain that nature is the ultimate cause.

Text 20
अप्रतर्क्यादनिर्देश्यादिति केष्वपि निश्चय: ।
अत्रानुरूपं राजर्षे विमृश स्वमनीषया ॥ २० ॥
apratarkyād anirdeśyād
iti keṣv api niścayaḥ
atrānurūpaṁ rājarṣe
vimṛśa sva-manīṣayā
Synonyms
apratarkyāt — beyond the power of reasoning; anirdeśyāt — beyond the power of thinking; iti — thus; keṣu — someone; api — also; niścayaḥ — definitely concluded; atra — herein; anurūpam — which of them is right; rāja-ṛṣe — O sage amongst the kings; vimṛśa — judge yourself; sva — by your own; manīṣayā — power of intelligence.

Translation
There are also some thinkers who believe that no one can ascertain the cause of distress by argumentation, nor know it by imagination, nor express it by words. O sage amongst kings, judge for yourself by thinking over all this with your own intelligence.

Text 21
सूत उवाच
एवं धर्मे प्रवदति स सम्राड् द्विजसत्तमा: ।
समाहितेन मनसा विखेद: पर्यचष्ट तम् ॥ २१ ॥
sūta uvāca
evaṁ dharme pravadati
sa samrāḍ dvija-sattamāḥ
samāhitena manasā
vikhedaḥ paryacaṣṭa tam
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Sūta Gosvāmī said; evam — so; dharme — the personality of religion; pravadati — thus having spoken; saḥ — he; samrāṭ — the Emperor; dvija-sattamāḥ — O best among the brāhmaṇas; samāhitena — with proper attention; manasā — by the mind; vikhedaḥ — without any mistake; paryacaṣṭa — counterreplied; tam — unto him.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī said: O best among the brāhmaṇas, the Emperor Parīkṣit, thus hearing the personality of religion speak, was fully satisfied, and without mistake or regret he gave his reply.

Text 22
राजोवाच
धर्मं ब्रवीषि धर्मज्ञ धर्मोऽसि वृषरूपधृक् ।
यदधर्मकृत: स्थानं सूचकस्यापि तद्भवेत् ॥ २२ ॥
rājovāca
dharmaṁ bravīṣi dharma-jña
dharmo ’si vṛṣa-rūpa-dhṛk
yad adharma-kṛtaḥ sthānaṁ
sūcakasyāpi tad bhavet
Synonyms
rājā uvāca — the King said; dharmam — religion; bravīṣi — as you speak; dharma-jña — O one who knows the codes of religion; dharmaḥ — the personality of religion; asi — you are; vṛṣa-rūpa-dhṛk — in the disguise of a bull; yat — whatever; adharma-kṛtaḥ — one who acts irreligiously; sthānam — place; sūcakasya — of the identifier; api — also; tat — that; bhavet — becomes.

Translation
The King said: O you, who are in the form of a bull! You know the truth of religion, and you are speaking according to the principle that the destination intended for the perpetrator of irreligious acts is also intended for one who identifies the perpetrator. You are no other than the personality of religion.

Text 23
अथवा देवमायाया नूनं गतिरगोचरा ।
चेतसो वचसश्चापि भूतानामिति निश्चय: ॥ २३ ॥
athavā deva-māyāyā
nūnaṁ gatir agocarā
cetaso vacasaś cāpi
bhūtānām iti niścayaḥ
Synonyms
athavā — alternatively; deva — the Lord; māyāyāḥ — energies; nūnam — very little; gatiḥ — movement; agocarā — inconceivable; cetasaḥ — either by the mind; vacasaḥ — by words; ca — or; api — also; bhūtānām — of all living beings; iti — thus; niścayaḥ — concluded.

Translation
Thus it is concluded that the Lord’s energies are inconceivable. No one can estimate them by mental speculation or by word jugglery.

Text 24
तप: शौचं दया सत्यमिति पादा: कृते कृता: ।
अधर्मांशैस्त्रयो भग्ना: स्मयसङ्गमदैस्तव ॥ २४ ॥
tapaḥ śaucaṁ dayā satyam
iti pādāḥ kṛte kṛtāḥ
adharmāṁśais trayo bhagnāḥ
smaya-saṅga-madais tava
Synonyms
tapaḥ — austerity; śaucam — cleanliness; dayā — mercy; satyam — truthfulness; iti — thus; pādāḥ — legs; kṛte — in the age of Satya; kṛtāḥ — established; adharma — irreligiosity; aṁśaiḥ — by the parts; trayaḥ — three combined; bhagnāḥ — broken; smaya — pride; saṅga — too much association with women; madaiḥ — intoxication; tava — your.

Translation
In the age of Satya [truthfulness] your four legs were established by the four principles of austerity, cleanliness, mercy and truthfulness. But it appears that three of your legs are broken due to rampant irreligion in the form of pride, lust for women, and intoxication.

Text 25
इदानीं धर्म पादस्ते सत्यं निर्वर्तयेद्यत: ।
तं जिघृक्षत्यधर्मोऽयमनृतेनैधित: कलि: ॥ २५ ॥
idānīṁ dharma pādas te
satyaṁ nirvartayed yataḥ
taṁ jighṛkṣaty adharmo ’yam
anṛtenaidhitaḥ kaliḥ
Synonyms
idānīm — at the present moment; dharma — O personality of religion; pādaḥ — leg; te — of you; satyam — truthfulness; nirvartayet — hobbling along somehow or other; yataḥ — whereby; tam — that; jighṛkṣati — trying to destroy; adharmaḥ — the personality of irreligion; ayam — this; anṛtena — by deceit; edhitaḥ — flourishing; kaliḥ — quarrel personified.

Translation
You are now standing on one leg only, which is your truthfulness, and you are somehow or other hobbling along. But quarrel personified [Kali], flourishing by deceit, is also trying to destroy that leg.

Text 26
इयं च भूमिर्भगवता न्यासितोरुभरा सती ।
श्रीमद्भ‍िस्तत्पदन्यासै: सर्वत: कृतकौतुका ॥ २६ ॥
iyaṁ ca bhūmir bhagavatā
nyāsitoru-bharā satī
śrīmadbhis tat-pada-nyāsaiḥ
sarvataḥ kṛta-kautukā
Synonyms
iyam — this; ca — and; bhūmiḥ — surface of the earth; bhagavatā — by the Personality of Godhead; nyāsita — being performed personally as well as by others; uru — great; bharā — burden; satī — being so done; śrīmadbhiḥ — by the all-auspicious; tat — that; pada-nyāsaiḥ — footprints; sarvataḥ — all around; kṛta — done; kautukā — good fortune.

Translation
The burden of the earth was certainly diminished by the Personality of Godhead and by others as well. When He was present as an incarnation, all good was performed because of His auspicious footprints.

Text 27
शोचत्यश्रुकला साध्वी दुर्भगेवोज्झिता सती ।
अब्रह्मण्या नृपव्याजा: शूद्रा भोक्ष्यन्ति मामिति ॥ २७ ॥
śocaty aśru-kalā sādhvī
durbhagevojjhitā satī
abrahmaṇyā nṛpa-vyājāḥ
śūdrā bhokṣyanti mām iti
Synonyms
śocati — lamenting; aśru-kalā — with tears in the eyes; sādhvī — the chaste; durbhagā — as if the most unfortunate; iva — like; ujjhitā — forlorn; satī — being so done; abrahmaṇyāḥ — devoid of brahminical culture; nṛpa-vyājāḥ — posed as the ruler; śūdrāḥ — lower class; bhokṣyanti — would enjoy; mām — me; iti — thus.

Translation
Now she, the chaste one, being unfortunately forsaken by the Personality of Godhead, laments her future with tears in her eyes, for now she is being ruled and enjoyed by lower-class men who pose as rulers.

Text 28
इति धर्मं महीं चैव सान्‍त्वयित्वा महारथ: ।
निशातमाददे खड्गं कलयेऽधर्महेतवे ॥ २८ ॥
iti dharmaṁ mahīṁ caiva
sāntvayitvā mahā-rathaḥ
niśātam ādade khaḍgaṁ
kalaye ’dharma-hetave
Synonyms
iti — thus; dharmam — the personality of religion; mahīm — the earth; ca — also; eva — as; sāntvayitvā — after pacifying; mahā-rathaḥ — the general who could fight alone with thousands of enemies; niśātam — sharp; ādade — took up; khaḍgam — sword; kalaye — to kill the personified Kali; adharma — irreligion; hetave — the root cause.

Translation
Mahārāja Parīkṣit, who could fight one thousand enemies single-handedly, thus pacified the personality of religion and the earth. Then he took up his sharp sword to kill the personality of Kali, who is the cause of all irreligion.

Text 29
तं जिघांसुमभिप्रेत्य विहाय नृपलाञ्छनम् ।
तत्पादमूलं शिरसा समगाद् भयविह्वल: ॥ २९ ॥
taṁ jighāṁsum abhipretya
vihāya nṛpa-lāñchanam
tat-pāda-mūlaṁ śirasā
samagād bhaya-vihvalaḥ
Synonyms
tam — him; jighāṁsum — willing to kill; abhipretya — knowing it well; vihāya — leaving aside; nṛpa-lāñchanam — the dress of a king; tat-pāda-mūlam — at his feet; śirasā — by the head; samagāt — fully surrendered; bhaya-vihvalaḥ — under pressure of fearfulness.

Translation
When the personality of Kali understood that the King was willing to kill him, he at once abandoned the dress of a king and, under pressure of fear, completely surrendered to him, bowing his head.

Text 30
पतितं पादयोर्वीर: कृपया
दीनवत्सल: ।
शरण्यो
नावधीच्छ्‍लोक्य आह चेदं हसन्निव ॥ ३० ॥
patitaṁ pādayor vīraḥ
kṛpayā dīna-vatsalaḥ
śaraṇyo nāvadhīc chlokya
āha cedaṁ hasann iva
Synonyms
patitam — fallen; pādayoḥ — at the feet; vīraḥ — the hero; kṛpayā — out of compassion; dīna-vatsalaḥ — kind to the poor; śaraṇyaḥ — one who is qualified to accept surrender; na — not; avadhīt — did kill; ślokyaḥ — one who is worthy of being sung; āha — said; ca — also; idam — this; hasan — smiling; iva — like.

Translation
Mahārāja Parīkṣit, who was qualified to accept surrender and worthy of being sung in history, did not kill the poor surrendered and fallen Kali, but smiled compassionately, for he was kind to the poor.

Text 31
राजोवाच
न ते गुडाकेशयशोधराणां
बद्धाञ्जलेर्वै भयमस्ति किञ्चित् ।
न वर्तितव्यं भवता कथञ्चन
क्षेत्रे मदीये त्वमधर्मबन्धु: ॥ ३१ ॥
rājovāca
na te guḍākeśa-yaśo-dharāṇāṁ
baddhāñjaler vai bhayam asti kiñcit
na vartitavyaṁ bhavatā kathañcana
kṣetre madīye tvam adharma-bandhuḥ
Synonyms
rājā uvāca — the King said; na — not; te — your; guḍākeśa — Arjuna; yaśaḥ-dharāṇām — of us who inherited the fame; baddha-añjaleḥ — one with folded hands; vai — certainly; bhayam — fear; asti — there is; kiñcit — even a slight; na — neither; vartitavyam — can be allowed to live; bhavatā — by you; kathañcana — by all means; kṣetre — in the land; madīye — in my kingdom; tvam — you; adharma-bandhuḥ — the friend of irreligion.

Translation
The King thus said: We have inherited the fame of Arjuna; therefore since you have surrendered yourself with folded hands you need not fear for your life. But you cannot remain in my kingdom, for you are the friend of irreligion.

Text 32
त्वां वर्तमानं नरदेवदेहे-
ष्वनुप्रवृत्तोऽयमधर्मपूग: ।
लोभोऽनृतं चौर्यमनार्यमंहो
ज्येष्ठा च माया कलहश्च दम्भ: ॥ ३२ ॥
tvāṁ vartamānaṁ nara-deva-deheṣv
anupravṛtto ’yam adharma-pūgaḥ
lobho ’nṛtaṁ cauryam anāryam aṁho
jyeṣṭhā ca māyā kalahaś ca dambhaḥ
Synonyms
tvām — you; vartamānam — while present; nara-deva — a man-god, or a king; deheṣu — in the body; anupravṛttaḥ — taking place everywhere; ayam — all these; adharma — irreligious principles; pūgaḥ — in the masses; lobhaḥ — greed; anṛtam — falsity; cauryam — robbery; anāryam — incivility; aṁhaḥ — treachery; jyeṣṭhā — misfortune; ca — and; māyā — cheating; kalahaḥ — quarrel; ca — and; dambhaḥ — vanity.

Translation
If the personality of Kali, irreligion, is allowed to act as a man-god or an executive head, certainly irreligious principles like greed, falsehood, robbery, incivility, treachery, misfortune, cheating, quarrel and vanity will abound.

Text 33
न वर्तितव्यं तदधर्मबन्धो
धर्मेण सत्येन च वर्तितव्ये ।
ब्रह्मावर्ते यत्र यजन्ति यज्ञै-
र्यज्ञेश्वरं यज्ञवितानविज्ञा: ॥ ३३ ॥
na vartitavyaṁ tad adharma-bandho
dharmeṇa satyena ca vartitavye
brahmāvarte yatra yajanti yajñair
yajñeśvaraṁ yajña-vitāna-vijñāḥ
Synonyms
na — not; vartitavyam — deserve to remain; tat — therefore; adharma — irreligiosity; bandho — friend; dharmeṇa — with religion; satyena — with truth; ca — also; vartitavye — being situated in; brahma-āvarte — place where sacrifice is performed; yatra — where; yajanti — duly perform; yajñaiḥ — by sacrifices or devotional services; yajña-īśvaram — unto the Supreme Lord, the Personality of Godhead; yajña — sacrifice; vitāna — spreading; vijñāḥ — experts.

Translation
Therefore, O friend of irreligion, you do not deserve to remain in a place where experts perform sacrifices according to truth and religious principles for the satisfaction of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Text 34
यस्मिन् हरिर्भगवानिज्यमान
इज्यात्ममूर्तिर्यजतां शं तनोति ।
कामानमोघान् स्थिरजङ्गमाना-
मन्तर्बहिर्वायुरिवैष आत्मा ॥ ३४ ॥
yasmin harir bhagavān ijyamāna
ijyātma-mūrtir yajatāṁ śaṁ tanoti
kāmān amoghān sthira-jaṅgamānām
antar bahir vāyur ivaiṣa ātmā
Synonyms
yasmin — in such sacrificial ceremonies; hariḥ — the Supreme Lord; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; ijyamānaḥ — being worshiped; ijya-ātma — the soul of all worshipable deities; mūrtiḥ — in the forms; yajatām — those who worship; śam — welfare; tanoti — spreads; kāmān — desires; amoghān — inviolable; sthira-jaṅgamānām — of all the moving and nonmoving; antaḥ — within; bahiḥ — outside; vāyuḥ — air; iva — like; eṣaḥ — of all of them; ātmā — spirit soul.

Translation
In all sacrificial ceremonies, although sometimes a demigod is worshiped, the Supreme Lord Personality of Godhead is worshiped because He is the Supersoul of everyone, and exists both inside and outside like the air. Thus it is He only who awards all welfare to the worshiper.

Text 35
सूत उवाच
परीक्षितैवमादिष्ट: स कलिर्जातवेपथु: ।
तमुद्यतासिमाहेदं दण्डपाणिमिवोद्यतम् ॥ ३५ ॥
sūta uvāca
parīkṣitaivam ādiṣṭaḥ
sa kalir jāta-vepathuḥ
tam udyatāsim āhedaṁ
daṇḍa-pāṇim ivodyatam
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said; parīkṣitā — by Mahārāja Parīkṣit; evam — thus; ādiṣṭaḥ — being ordered; saḥ — he; kaliḥ — the personality of Kali; jāta — there was; vepathuḥ — trembling; tam — him; udyata — raised; asim — sword; āha — said; idam — thus; daṇḍa-pāṇim — Yamarāja, the personality of death; iva — like; udyatam — almost ready.

Translation
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said: The personality of Kali, thus being ordered by Mahārāja Parīkṣit, began to tremble in fear. Seeing the King before him like Yamarāja, ready to kill him, Kali spoke to the King as follows.

Text 36
कलिरुवाच
यत्र क्‍व वाथ वत्स्यामि सार्वभौम तवाज्ञया ।
लक्षये तत्र तत्रापि त्वामात्तेषुशरासनम् ॥ ३६ ॥
kalir uvāca
yatra kva vātha vatsyāmi
sārva-bhauma tavājñayā
lakṣaye tatra tatrāpi
tvām ātteṣu-śarāsanam
Synonyms
kaliḥ uvāca — the personality of Kali said; yatra — anywhere; kva — and everywhere; vā — either; atha — thereof; vatsyāmi — I shall reside; sārva-bhauma — O lord (or emperor) of the earth; tava — your; ājñayā — by the order; lakṣaye — I see; tatra tatra — anywhere and everywhere; api — also; tvām — Your Majesty; ātta — taken over; iṣu — arrows; śarāsanam — bows.

Translation
O Your Majesty, though I may live anywhere and everywhere under your order, I shall but see you with bow and arrows wherever I look.

Text 37
तन्मे धर्मभृतां श्रेष्ठ स्थानं निर्देष्टुमर्हसि ।
यत्रैव नियतो वत्स्य आतिष्ठंस्तेऽनुशासनम् ॥ ३७ ॥
tan me dharma-bhṛtāṁ śreṣṭha
sthānaṁ nirdeṣṭum arhasi
yatraiva niyato vatsya
ātiṣṭhaṁs te ’nuśāsanam
Synonyms
tat — therefore; me — me; dharma-bhṛtām — of all the protectors of religion; śreṣṭha — O chief; sthānam — place; nirdeṣṭum — fix; arhasi — may you do so; yatra — where; eva — certainly; niyataḥ — always; vatsye — can reside; ātiṣṭhan — permanently situated; te — your; anuśāsanam — under your rule.

Translation
Therefore, O chief amongst the protectors of religion, please fix some place for me where I can live permanently under the protection of your government.

Text 38
सूत उवाच
अभ्यर्थितस्तदा तस्मै स्थानानि कलये ददौ ।
द्यूतं पानं स्त्रिय: सूना यत्राधर्मश्चतुर्विध: ॥ ३८ ॥
sūta uvāca
abhyarthitas tadā tasmai
sthānāni kalaye dadau
dyūtaṁ pānaṁ striyaḥ sūnā
yatrādharmaś catur-vidhaḥ
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Sūta Gosvāmī said; abhyarthitaḥ — thus being petitioned; tadā — at that time; tasmai — unto him; sthānāni — places; kalaye — to the personality of Kali; dadau — gave him permission; dyūtam — gambling; pānam — drinking; striyaḥ — illicit association with women; sūnā — animal slaughter; yatra — wherever; adharmaḥ — sinful activities; catuḥ-vidhaḥ — four kinds of.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī said: Mahārāja Parīkṣit, thus being petitioned by the personality of Kali, gave him permission to reside in places where gambling, drinking, prostitution and animal slaughter were performed.

Text 39
पुनश्च याचमानाय जातरूपमदात्प्रभु: ।
ततोऽनृतं मदं कामं रजो वैरं च पञ्चमम् ॥ ३९ ॥
punaś ca yācamānāya
jāta-rūpam adāt prabhuḥ
tato ’nṛtaṁ madaṁ kāmaṁ
rajo vairaṁ ca pañcamam
Synonyms
punaḥ — again; ca — also; yācamānāya — to the beggar; jāta-rūpam — gold; adāt — gave away; prabhuḥ — the King; tataḥ — whereby; anṛtam — falsehood; madam — intoxication; kāmam — lust; rajaḥ — on account of a passionate mood; vairam — enmity; ca — also; pañcamam — the fifth one.

Translation
The personality of Kali asked for something more, and because of his begging, the King gave him permission to live where there is gold because wherever there is gold there is also falsity, intoxication, lust, envy and enmity.

Text 40
अमूनि पञ्च स्थानानि ह्यधर्मप्रभव: कलि: ।
औत्तरेयेण दत्तानि न्यवसत् तन्निदेशकृत् ॥ ४० ॥
amūni pañca sthānāni
hy adharma-prabhavaḥ kaliḥ
auttareyeṇa dattāni
nyavasat tan-nideśa-kṛt
Synonyms
amūni — all those; pañca — five; sthānāni — places; hi — certainly; adharma — irreligious principles; prabhavaḥ — encouraging; kaliḥ — the Age of Kali; auttareyeṇa — by the son of Uttarā; dattāni — delivered; nyavasat — dwelt; tat — by him; nideśa-kṛt — directed.

Translation
Thus the personality of Kali, by the directions of Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the son of Uttarā, was allowed to live in those five places.

Text 41
अथैतानि न सेवेत बुभूषु: पुरुष: क्‍वचित् ।
विशेषतो धर्मशीलो राजा लोकपतिर्गुरु: ॥ ४१ ॥
athaitāni na seveta
bubhūṣuḥ puruṣaḥ kvacit
viśeṣato dharma-śīlo
rājā loka-patir guruḥ
Synonyms
atha — therefore; etāni — all these; na — never; seveta — come in contact; bubhūṣuḥ — those who desire well-being; puruṣaḥ — person; kvacit — in any circumstances; viśeṣataḥ — specifically; dharma-śīlaḥ — those who are on the progressive path of liberation; rājā — the king; loka-patiḥ — public leader; guruḥ — the brāhmaṇas and the sannyāsīs.

Translation
Therefore, whoever desires progressive well-being, especially kings, religionists, public leaders, brāhmaṇas and sannyāsīs, should never come in contact with the four above-mentioned irreligious principles.

Text 42
वृषस्य नष्टांस्त्रीन् पादान् तप: शौचं दयामिति ।
प्रतिसन्दध आश्वास्य महीं च समवर्धयत् ॥ ४२ ॥
vṛṣasya naṣṭāṁs trīn pādān
tapaḥ śaucaṁ dayām iti
pratisandadha āśvāsya
mahīṁ ca samavardhayat
Synonyms
vṛṣasya — of the bull (the personality of religion); naṣṭān — lost; trīn — three; pādān — legs; tapaḥ — austerity; śaucam — cleanliness; dayām — mercy; iti — thus; pratisandadhe — reestablished; āśvāsya — by encouraging activities; mahīm — the earth; ca — and; samavardhayat — perfectly improved.

Translation
Thereafter the King reestablished the lost legs of the personality of religion [the bull], and by encouraging activities he sufficiently improved the condition of the earth.

Texts 43-44
स एष एतर्ह्यध्यास्त आसनं पार्थिवोचितम् ।
पितामहेनोपन्यस्तं राज्ञारण्यं विविक्षता ॥ ४३ ॥
आस्तेऽधुना स राजर्षि: कौरवेन्द्रश्रियोल्लसन् ।
गजाह्वये महाभागश्चक्रवर्ती बृहच्छ्रवा: ॥ ४४ ॥
sa eṣa etarhy adhyāsta
āsanaṁ pārthivocitam
pitāmahenopanyastaṁ
rājñāraṇyaṁ vivikṣatā
āste ’dhunā sa rājarṣiḥ
kauravendra-śriyollasan
gajāhvaye mahā-bhāgaś
cakravartī bṛhac-chravāḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he; eṣaḥ — this; etarhi — at the present; adhyāste — is ruling over; āsanam — the throne; pārthiva-ucitam — just befitting a king; pitāmahena — by the grandfather; upanyastam — being handed over; rājñā — by the King; araṇyam — forest; vivikṣatā — desiring; āste — is there; adhunā — at present; saḥ — that; rāja-ṛṣiḥ — the sage amongst the kings; kaurava-indra — the chief amongst the Kuru kings; śriyā — glories; ullasan — spreading; gajāhvaye — in Hastināpura; mahā-bhāgaḥ — the most fortunate; cakravartī — the Emperor; bṛhat-śravāḥ — highly famous.

Translation
The most fortunate emperor Mahārāja Parīkṣit, who was entrusted with the kingdom of Hastināpura by Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira when he desired to retire to the forest, is now ruling the world with great success due to his being glorified by the deeds of the kings of the Kuru dynasty.

Text 45
इत्थम्भूतानुभावोऽयमभिमन्युसुतो नृप: ।
यस्य पालयत: क्षौणीं यूयं सत्राय दीक्षिता: ॥ ४५ ॥
ittham-bhūtānubhāvo ’yam
abhimanyu-suto nṛpaḥ
yasya pālayataḥ kṣauṇīṁ
yūyaṁ satrāya dīkṣitāḥ
Synonyms
ittham-bhūta — being thus; anubhāvaḥ — experience; ayam — of this; abhimanyu-sutaḥ — son of Abhimanyu; nṛpaḥ — the king; yasya — whose; pālayataḥ — on account of his ruling; kṣauṇīm — on the earth; yūyam — you all; satrāya — in performing sacrifices; dīkṣitāḥ — initiated.

Translation
Mahārāja Parīkṣit, the son of Abhimanyu, is so experienced that by dint of his expert administration and patronage, it has been possible for you to perform a sacrifice such as this.