Text 1
सूत उवाच
जगृहे पौरुषं रूपं भगवान्महदादिभि: ।
सम्भूतं षोडशकलमादौ लोकसिसृक्षया ॥ १ ॥
sūta uvāca
jagṛhe pauruṣaṁ rūpaṁ
bhagavān mahad-ādibhiḥ
sambhūtaṁ ṣoḍaśa-kalam
ādau loka-sisṛkṣayā
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Sūta said; jagṛhe — accepted; pauruṣam — plenary portion as the puruṣa incarnation; rūpam — form; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; mahat-ādibhiḥ — with the ingredients of the material world; sambhūtam — thus there was the creation of; ṣoḍaśa-kalam — sixteen primary principles; ādau — in the beginning; loka — the universes; sisṛkṣayā — on the intention of creating.

Translation
Sūta said: In the beginning of the creation, the Lord first expanded Himself in the universal form of the puruṣa incarnation and manifested all the ingredients for the material creation. And thus at first there was the creation of the sixteen principles of material action. This was for the purpose of creating the material universes.

Text 2
यस्याम्भसि शयानस्य योगनिद्रां वितन्वत: ।
नाभिह्रदाम्बुजादासीद्ब्रह्मा विश्वसृजां पति: ॥ २ ॥
yasyāmbhasi śayānasya
yoga-nidrāṁ vitanvataḥ
nābhi-hradāmbujād āsīd
brahmā viśva-sṛjāṁ patiḥ
Synonyms
yasya — whose; ambhasi — in the water; śayānasya — lying down; yoga-nidrām — sleeping in meditation; vitanvataḥ — ministering; nābhi — navel; hrada — out of the lake; ambujāt — from the lotus; āsīt — was manifested; brahmā — the grandfather of the living beings; viśva — the universe; sṛjām — the engineers; patiḥ — master.

Translation
A part of the puruṣa lies down within the water of the universe, from the navel lake of His body sprouts a lotus stem, and from the lotus flower atop this stem, Brahmā, the master of all engineers in the universe, becomes manifest.

Text 3
यस्यावयवसंस्थानै: कल्पितो लोकविस्तर: ।
तद्वै भगवतो रूपं विशुद्धं सत्त्वमूर्जितम् ॥ ३ ॥
yasyāvayava-saṁsthānaiḥ
kalpito loka-vistaraḥ
tad vai bhagavato rūpaṁ
viśuddhaṁ sattvam ūrjitam
Synonyms
yasya — whose; avayava — bodily expansion; saṁsthānaiḥ — situated in; kalpitaḥ — is imagined; loka — planets of inhabitants; vistaraḥ — various; tat vai — but that is; bhagavataḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; rūpam — form; viśuddham — purely; sattvam — existence; ūrjitam — excellence.

Translation
It is believed that all the universal planetary systems are situated on the extensive body of the puruṣa, but He has nothing to do with the created material ingredients. His body is eternally in spiritual existence par excellence.

Text 4
पश्यन्त्यदो रूपमदभ्रचक्षुषा
सहस्रपादोरुभुजाननाद्भुतम् ।
सहस्रमूर्धश्रवणाक्षिनासिकं
सहस्रमौल्यम्बरकुण्डलोल्लसत् ॥ ४ ॥
paśyanty ado rūpam adabhra-cakṣuṣā
sahasra-pādoru-bhujānanādbhutam
sahasra-mūrdha-śravaṇākṣi-nāsikaṁ
sahasra-mauly-ambara-kuṇḍalollasat
Synonyms
paśyanti — see; adaḥ — the form of the puruṣa; rūpam — form; adabhra — perfect; cakṣuṣā — by the eyes; sahasra-pāda — thousands of legs; ūru — thighs; bhuja-ānana — hands and faces; adbhutam — wonderful; sahasra — thousands of; mūrdha — heads; śravaṇa — ears; akṣi — eyes; nāsikam — noses; sahasra — thousands; mauli — garlands; ambara — dresses; kuṇḍala — earrings; ullasat — all glowing.

Translation
The devotees, with their perfect eyes, see the transcendental form of the puruṣa who has thousands of legs, thighs, arms and faces — all extraordinary. In that body there are thousands of heads, ears, eyes and noses. They are decorated with thousands of helmets and glowing earrings and are adorned with garlands.

Text 5
एतन्नानावताराणां निधानं बीजमव्ययम् ।
यस्यांशांशेन सृज्यन्ते देवतिर्यङ्‍नरादय: ॥ ५ ॥
etan nānāvatārāṇāṁ
nidhānaṁ bījam avyayam
yasyāṁśāṁśena sṛjyante
deva-tiryaṅ-narādayaḥ
Synonyms
etat — this (form); nānā — multifarious; avatārāṇām — of the incarnations; nidhānam — source; bījam — seed; avyayam — indestructible; yasya — whose; aṁśa — plenary portion; aṁśena — part of the plenary portion; sṛjyante — create; deva — demigods; tiryak — animals; nara-ādayaḥ — human beings and others.

Translation
This form [the second manifestation of the puruṣa] is the source and indestructible seed of multifarious incarnations within the universe. From the particles and portions of this form, different living entities, like demigods, men and others, are created.

Text 6
स एव प्रथमं देव: कौमारं सर्गमाश्रित: ।
चचार दुश्चरं ब्रह्मा ब्रह्मचर्यमखण्डितम् ॥ ६ ॥
sa eva prathamaṁ devaḥ
kaumāraṁ sargam āśritaḥ
cacāra duścaraṁ brahmā
brahmacaryam akhaṇḍitam
Synonyms
saḥ — that; eva — certainly; prathamam — first; devaḥ — Supreme Lord; kaumāram — named the Kumāras (unmarried); sargam — creation; āśritaḥ — under; cacāra — performed; duścaram — very difficult to do; brahmā — in the order of Brahman; brahmacaryam — under discipline to realize the Absolute (Brahman); akhaṇḍitam — unbroken.

Translation
First of all, in the beginning of creation, there were the four unmarried sons of Brahmā [the Kumāras], who, being situated in a vow of celibacy, underwent severe austerities for realization of the Absolute Truth.

Text 7
द्वितीयं तु भवायास्य रसातलगतां महीम् ।
उद्धरिष्यन्नुपादत्त यज्ञेश: सौकरं वपु: ॥ ७ ॥
dvitīyaṁ tu bhavāyāsya
rasātala-gatāṁ mahīm
uddhariṣyann upādatta
yajñeśaḥ saukaraṁ vapuḥ
Synonyms
dvitīyam — the second; tu — but; bhavāya — for the welfare; asya — of this earth; rasātala — of the lowest region; gatām — having gone; mahīm — the earth; uddhariṣyan — lifting; upādatta — established; yajñeśaḥ — the proprietor or the supreme enjoyer; saukaram — hoggish; vapuḥ — incarnation.

Translation
The supreme enjoyer of all sacrifices accepted the incarnation of a boar [the second incarnation], and for the welfare of the earth He lifted the earth from the nether regions of the universe.

Text 8
तृतीयमृषिसर्गं वै देवर्षित्वमुपेत्य स: ।
तन्त्रं सात्वतमाचष्ट नैष्कर्म्यं कर्मणां यत: ॥ ८ ॥
tṛtīyam ṛṣi-sargaṁ vai
devarṣitvam upetya saḥ
tantraṁ sātvatam ācaṣṭa
naiṣkarmyaṁ karmaṇāṁ yataḥ
Synonyms
tṛtīyam — the third one; ṛṣi-sargam — the millennium of the ṛṣis; vai — certainly; devarṣitvam — incarnation of the ṛṣi amongst the demigods; upetya — having accepted; saḥ — he; tantram — exposition of the Vedas; sātvatam — which is especially meant for devotional service; ācaṣṭa — collected; naiṣkarmyam — nonfruitive; karmaṇām — of work; yataḥ — from which.

Translation
In the millennium of the ṛṣis, the Personality of Godhead accepted the third empowered incarnation in the form of Devarṣi Nārada, who is a great sage among the demigods. He collected expositions of the Vedas which deal with devotional service and which inspire nonfruitive action.

Text 9
तुर्ये धर्मकलासर्गे नरनारायणावृषी ।
भूत्वात्मोपशमोपेतमकरोद्दुश्चरं तप: ॥ ९ ॥
turye dharma-kalā-sarge
nara-nārāyaṇāv ṛṣī
bhūtvātmopaśamopetam
akarot duścaraṁ tapaḥ
Synonyms
turye — in the fourth of the line; dharma-kalā — wife of Dharmarāja; sarge — being born of; nara-nārāyaṇau — named Nara and Nārāyaṇa; ṛṣī — sages; bhūtvā — becoming; ātma-upaśama — controlling the senses; upetam — for achievement of; akarot — undertook; duścaram — very strenuous; tapaḥ — penance.

Translation
In the fourth incarnation, the Lord became Nara and Nārāyaṇa, the twin sons of the wife of King Dharma. Thus He undertook severe and exemplary penances to control the senses.

Text 10
पञ्चम: कपिलो नाम सिद्धेश: कालविप्लुतम् ।
प्रोवाचासुरये साङ्ख्यं तत्त्वग्रामविनिर्णयम् ॥ १० ॥
pañcamaḥ kapilo nāma
siddheśaḥ kāla-viplutam
provācāsuraye sāṅkhyaṁ
tattva-grāma-vinirṇayam
Synonyms
pañcamaḥ — the fifth one; kapilaḥ — Kapila; nāma — of the name; siddheśaḥ — the foremost amongst the perfect; kāla — time; viplutam — lost; provāca — said; āsuraye — unto the brāhmaṇa named Āsuri; sāṅkhyam — metaphysics; tattva-grāma — the sum total of the creative elements; vinirṇayam — exposition.

Translation
The fifth incarnation, named Lord Kapila, is foremost among perfected beings. He gave an exposition of the creative elements and metaphysics to Āsuri Brāhmaṇa, for in course of time this knowledge had been lost.

Text 11
षष्ठमत्रेरपत्यत्वं वृत: प्राप्तोऽनसूयया ।
आन्वीक्षिकीमलर्काय प्रह्लादादिभ्य ऊचिवान् ॥ ११ ॥
ṣaṣṭham atrer apatyatvaṁ
vṛtaḥ prāpto ’nasūyayā
ānvīkṣikīm alarkāya
prahlādādibhya ūcivān
Synonyms
ṣaṣṭham — the sixth one; atreḥ — of Atri; apatyatvam — sonship; vṛtaḥ — being prayed for; prāptaḥ — obtained; anasūyayā — by Anasūyā; ānvīkṣikīm — on the subject of transcendence; alarkāya — unto Alarka; prahlāda-ādibhyaḥ — unto Prahlāda and others; ūcivān — spoke.

Translation
The sixth incarnation of the puruṣa was the son of the sage Atri. He was born from the womb of Anasūyā, who prayed for an incarnation. He spoke on the subject of transcendence to Alarka, Prahlāda and others [Yadu, Haihaya, etc.].

Text 12
तत: सप्तम आकूत्यां रुचेर्यज्ञोऽभ्यजायत ।
स यामाद्यै: सुरगणैरपात्स्वायम्भुवान्तरम् ॥ १२ ॥
tataḥ saptama ākūtyāṁ
rucer yajño ’bhyajāyata
sa yāmādyaiḥ sura-gaṇair
apāt svāyambhuvāntaram
Synonyms
tataḥ — after that; saptame — the seventh in the line; ākūtyām — in the womb of Ākūti; ruceḥ — by Prajāpati Ruci; yajñaḥ — the Lord’s incarnation as Yajña; abhyajāyata — advented; saḥ — He; yāma-ādyaiḥ — with Yāma and others; sura-gaṇaiḥ — with demigods; apāt — ruled; svāyambhuva-antaram — the change of the period of Svāyambhuva Manu.

Translation
The seventh incarnation was Yajña, the son of Prajāpati Ruci and his wife Ākūti. He controlled the period during the change of the Svāyambhuva Manu and was assisted by demigods such as His son Yāma.

Text 13
अष्टमे मेरुदेव्यां तु नाभेर्जात उरुक्रम: ।
दर्शयन् वर्त्म धीराणां सर्वाश्रमनमस्कृतम् ॥ १३ ॥
aṣṭame merudevyāṁ tu
nābher jāta urukramaḥ
darśayan vartma dhīrāṇāṁ
sarvāśrama-namaskṛtam
Synonyms
aṣṭame — the eighth of the incarnations; merudevyām tu — in the womb of Merudevī, the wife of; nābheḥ — King Nābhi; jātaḥ — took birth; urukramaḥ — the all-powerful Lord; darśayan — by showing; vartma — the way; dhīrāṇām — of the perfect beings; sarva — all; āśrama — orders of life; namaskṛtam — honored by.

Translation
The eighth incarnation was King Ṛṣabha, son of King Nābhi and his wife Merudevī. In this incarnation the Lord showed the path of perfection, which is followed by those who have fully controlled their senses and who are honored by all orders of life.

Text 14
ऋषिभिर्याचितो भेजे नवमं पार्थिवं वपु: ।
दुग्धेमामोषधीर्विप्रास्तेनायं स उशत्तम: ॥ १४ ॥
ṛṣibhir yācito bheje
navamaṁ pārthivaṁ vapuḥ
dugdhemām oṣadhīr viprās
tenāyaṁ sa uśattamaḥ
Synonyms
ṛṣibhiḥ — by the sages; yācitaḥ — being prayed for; bheje — accepted; navamam — the ninth one; pārthivam — the ruler of the earth; vapuḥ — body; dugdha — milking; imām — all these; oṣadhīḥ — products of the earth; viprāḥ — O brāhmaṇas; tena — by; ayam — this; saḥ — he; uśattamaḥ — beautifully attractive.

Translation
O brāhmaṇas, in the ninth incarnation, the Lord, prayed for by sages, accepted the body of a king [Pṛthu] who cultivated the land to yield various produce, and for that reason the earth was beautiful and attractive.

Text 15
रूपं स जगृहे मात्स्यं चाक्षुषोदधिसम्प्लवे ।
नाव्यारोप्य महीमय्यामपाद्वैवस्वतं मनुम् ॥ १५ ॥
rūpaṁ sa jagṛhe mātsyaṁ
cākṣuṣodadhi-samplave
nāvy āropya mahī-mayyām
apād vaivasvataṁ manum
Synonyms
rūpam — form; saḥ — He; jagṛhe — accepted; mātsyam — of a fish; cākṣuṣa — Cākṣuṣa; udadhi — water; samplave — inundation; nāvi — on the boat; āropya — keeping on; mahī — the earth; mayyām — drowned in; apāt — protected; vaivasvatam — Vaivasvata; manum — Manu, the father of man.

Translation
When there was a complete inundation after the period of the Cākṣuṣa Manu and the whole world was deep within water, the Lord accepted the form of a fish and protected Vaivasvata Manu, keeping him up on a boat.

Text 16
सुरासुराणामुदधिं मथ्नतां मन्दराचलम् ।
दध्रे कमठरूपेण पृष्ठ एकादशे विभु: ॥ १६ ॥
surāsurāṇām udadhiṁ
mathnatāṁ mandarācalam
dadhre kamaṭha-rūpeṇa
pṛṣṭha ekādaśe vibhuḥ
Synonyms
sura — the theists; asurāṇām — of the atheists; udadhim — in the ocean; mathnatām — churning; mandarācalam — the Mandarācala Hill; dadhre — sustained; kamaṭha — tortoise; rūpeṇa — in the form of; pṛṣṭhe — shell; ekādaśe — the eleventh in the line; vibhuḥ — the great.

Translation
The eleventh incarnation of the Lord took the form of a tortoise whose shell served as a pivot for the Mandarācala Hill, which was being used as a churning rod by the theists and atheists of the universe.

Text 17
धान्वन्तरं द्वादशमं त्रयोदशममेव च ।
अपाययत्सुरानन्यान्मोहिन्या मोहयन् स्त्रिया ॥ १७ ॥
dhānvantaraṁ dvādaśamaṁ
trayodaśamam eva ca
apāyayat surān anyān
mohinyā mohayan striyā
Synonyms
dhānvantaram — the incarnation of Godhead named Dhanvantari; dvādaśamam — the twelfth in the line; trayodaśamam — the thirteenth in the line; eva — certainly; ca — and; apāyayat — gave to drink; surān — the demigods; anyān — others; mohinyā — by charming beauty; mohayan — alluring; striyā — in the form of a woman.

Translation
In the twelfth incarnation, the Lord appeared as Dhanvantari, and in the thirteenth He allured the atheists by the charming beauty of a woman and gave nectar to the demigods to drink.

Text 18
चतुर्दशं नारसिंहं बिभ्रद्दैत्येन्द्रमूर्जितम् ।
ददार करजैरूरावेरकां कटकृद्यथा ॥ १८ ॥
caturdaśaṁ nārasiṁhaṁ
bibhrad daityendram ūrjitam
dadāra karajair ūrāv
erakāṁ kaṭa-kṛd yathā
Synonyms
caturdaśam — the fourteenth in the line; nāra-siṁham — the incarnation of the Lord as half-man and half-lion; bibhrat — advented; daitya-indram — the king of the atheists; ūrjitam — strongly built; dadāra — bifurcated; karajaiḥ — by the nails; ūrau — on the lap; erakām — canes; kaṭa-kṛt — carpenter; yathā — just like.

Translation
In the fourteenth incarnation, the Lord appeared as Nṛsiṁha and bifurcated the strong body of the atheist Hiraṇyakaśipu with His nails, just as a carpenter pierces cane.

Text 19
पञ्चदशं वामनकं कृत्वागादध्वरं बले: ।
पदत्रयं याचमान: प्रत्यादित्सुस्त्रिपिष्टपम् ॥ १९ ॥
pañcadaśaṁ vāmanakaṁ
kṛtvāgād adhvaraṁ baleḥ
pada-trayaṁ yācamānaḥ
pratyāditsus tri-piṣṭapam
Synonyms
pañcadaśam — the fifteenth in the line; vāmanakam — the dwarf brāhmaṇa; kṛtvā — by assumption of; agāt — went; adhvaram — arena of sacrifice; baleḥ — of King Bali; pada-trayam — three steps only; yācamānaḥ — begging; pratyāditsuḥ — willing at heart to return; tri-piṣṭapam — the kingdom of the three planetary systems.

Translation
In the fifteenth incarnation, the Lord assumed the form of a dwarf brāhmaṇa [Vāmana] and visited the arena of sacrifice arranged by Mahārāja Bali. Although at heart He was willing to regain the kingdom of the three planetary systems, He simply asked for a donation of three steps of land.

Text 20
अवतारे षोडशमे पश्यन् ब्रह्मद्रुहो नृपान् ।
त्रि:सप्तकृत्व: कुपितो नि:क्षत्रामकरोन्महीम् ॥ २० ॥
avatāre ṣoḍaśame
paśyan brahma-druho nṛpān
triḥ-sapta-kṛtvaḥ kupito
niḥ-kṣatrām akaron mahīm
Synonyms
avatāre — in the incarnation of the Lord; ṣoḍaśame — the sixteenth; paśyan — seeing; brahma-druhaḥ — disobedient to the orders of the brāhmaṇas; nṛpān — the kingly order; triḥ-sapta — thrice seven times; kṛtvaḥ — had done; kupitaḥ — being engaged; niḥ — negation; kṣatrām — the administrative class; akarot — did perform; mahīm — the earth.

Translation
In the sixteenth incarnation of the Godhead, the Lord [as Bhṛgupati] annihilated the administrative class [kṣatriyas] twenty-one times, being angry with them because of their rebellion against the brāhmaṇas [the intelligent class].

Text 21
तत: सप्तदशे जात: सत्यवत्यां पराशरात् ।
चक्रे वेदतरो: शाखा द‍ृष्ट्वा पुंसोऽल्पमेधस: ॥ २१ ॥
tataḥ saptadaśe jātaḥ
satyavatyāṁ parāśarāt
cakre veda-taroḥ śākhā
dṛṣṭvā puṁso ’lpa-medhasaḥ
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; saptadaśe — in the seventeenth incarnation; jātaḥ — advented; satyavatyām — in the womb of Satyavatī; parāśarāt — by Parāśara Muni; cakre — prepared; veda-taroḥ — of the desire tree of the Vedas; śākhāḥ — branches; dṛṣṭvā — be seeing; puṁsaḥ — the people in general; alpa-medhasaḥ — less intelligent.

Translation
Thereafter, in the seventeenth incarnation of Godhead, Śrī Vyāsadeva appeared in the womb of Satyavatī through Parāśara Muni, and he divided the one Veda into several branches and subbranches, seeing that the people in general were less intelligent.

Text 22
नरदेवत्वमापन्न: सुरकार्यचिकीर्षया ।
समुद्रनिग्रहादीनि चक्रे वीर्याण्यत: परम् ॥ २२ ॥
nara-devatvam āpannaḥ
sura-kārya-cikīrṣayā
samudra-nigrahādīni
cakre vīryāṇy ataḥ param
Synonyms
nara — human being; devatvam — divinity; āpannaḥ — having assumed the form of; sura — the demigods; kārya — activities; cikīrṣayā — for the purpose of performing; samudra — the Indian Ocean; nigraha-ādīni — controlling, etc.; cakre — did perform; vīryāṇi — superhuman prowess; ataḥ param — thereafter.

Translation
In the eighteenth incarnation, the Lord appeared as King Rāma. In order to perform some pleasing work for the demigods, He exhibited superhuman powers by controlling the Indian Ocean and then killing the atheist King Rāvaṇa, who was on the other side of the sea.

Text 23
एकोनविंशे विंशतिमे वृष्णिषु प्राप्य जन्मनी ।
रामकृष्णाविति भुवो भगवानहरद्भ‍रम् ॥ २३ ॥
ekonaviṁśe viṁśatime
vṛṣṇiṣu prāpya janmanī
rāma-kṛṣṇāv iti bhuvo
bhagavān aharad bharam
Synonyms
ekonaviṁśe — in the nineteenth; viṁśatime — in the twentieth also; vṛṣṇiṣu — in the Vṛṣṇi dynasty; prāpya — having obtained; janmanī — births; rāma — Balarāma; kṛṣṇau — Śrī Kṛṣṇa; iti — thus; bhuvaḥ — of the world; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; aharat — removed; bharam — burden.

Translation
In the nineteenth and twentieth incarnations, the Lord advented Himself as Lord Balarāma and Lord Kṛṣṇa in the family of Vṛṣṇi [the Yadu dynasty], and by so doing He removed the burden of the world.

Text 24
तत: कलौ सम्प्रवृत्ते सम्मोहाय सुरद्विषाम् ।
बुद्धो नाम्नाञ्जनसुत: कीकटेषु भविष्यति ॥ २४ ॥
tataḥ kalau sampravṛtte
sammohāya sura-dviṣām
buddho nāmnāñjana-sutaḥ
kīkaṭeṣu bhaviṣyati
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; kalau — the Age of Kali; sampravṛtte — having ensued; sammohāya — for the purpose of deluding; sura — the theists; dviṣām — those who are envious; buddhaḥ — Lord Buddha; nāmnā — of the name; añjana-sutaḥ — whose mother was Añjanā; kīkaṭeṣu — in the province of Gayā (Bihar); bhaviṣyati — will take place.

Translation
Then, in the beginning of Kali-yuga, the Lord will appear as Lord Buddha, the son of Añjanā, in the province of Gayā, just for the purpose of deluding those who are envious of the faithful theist.

Text 25
अथासौ युगसन्ध्यायां दस्युप्रायेषु राजसु ।
जनिता विष्णुयशसो नाम्ना कल्किर्जगत्पति: ॥ २५ ॥
athāsau yuga-sandhyāyāṁ
dasyu-prāyeṣu rājasu
janitā viṣṇu-yaśaso
nāmnā kalkir jagat-patiḥ
Synonyms
atha — thereafter; asau — the same Lord; yuga-sandhyāyām — at the conjunction of the yugas; dasyu — plunderers; prāyeṣu — almost all; rājasu — the governing personalities; janitā — will take His birth; viṣṇu — named Viṣṇu; yaśasaḥ — surnamed Yaśā; nāmnā — in the name of; kalkiḥ — the incarnation of the Lord; jagat-patiḥ — the Lord of the creation.

Translation
Thereafter, at the conjunction of two yugas, the Lord of the creation will take His birth as the Kalki incarnation and become the son of Viṣṇu Yaśā. At this time almost all the rulers of the earth will have degenerated into plunderers.

Text 26
अवतारा ह्यसङ्ख्येया हरे: सत्त्वनिधेर्द्विजा: ।
यथाविदासिन: कुल्या: सरस: स्यु: सहस्रश: ॥ २६ ॥
avatārā hy asaṅkhyeyā
hareḥ sattva-nidher dvijāḥ
yathāvidāsinaḥ kulyāḥ
sarasaḥ syuḥ sahasraśaḥ
Synonyms
avatārāḥ — incarnations; hi — certainly; asaṅkhyeyāḥ — innumerable; hareḥ — of Hari, the Lord; sattva-nidheḥ — of the ocean of goodness; dvijāḥ — the brāhmaṇas; yathā — as it is; avidāsinaḥ — inexhaustible; kulyāḥ — rivulets; sarasaḥ — of vast lakes; syuḥ — are; sahasraśaḥ — thousands of.

Translation
O brāhmaṇas, the incarnations of the Lord are innumerable, like rivulets flowing from inexhaustible sources of water.

Text 27
ऋषयो मनवो देवा मनुपुत्रा महौजस: ।
कला: सर्वे हरेरेव सप्रजापतय: स्मृता: ॥ २७ ॥
ṛṣayo manavo devā
manu-putrā mahaujasaḥ
kalāḥ sarve harer eva
saprajāpatayaḥ smṛtāḥ
Synonyms
ṛṣayaḥ — all the sages; manavaḥ — all the Manus; devāḥ — all the demigods; manu-putrāḥ — all the descendants of Manu; mahā-ojasaḥ — very powerful; kalāḥ — portion of the plenary portion; sarve — all collectively; hareḥ — of the Lord; eva — certainly; sa-prajāpatayaḥ — along with the Prajāpatis; smṛtāḥ — are known.

Translation
All the ṛṣis, Manus, demigods and descendants of Manu, who are especially powerful, are plenary portions or portions of the plenary portions of the Lord. This also includes the Prajāpatis.

Text 28
एते चांशकला: पुंस: कृष्णस्तु भगवान् स्वयम् ।
इन्द्रारिव्याकुलं लोकं मृडयन्ति युगे युगे ॥ २८ ॥
ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ
kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam
indrāri-vyākulaṁ lokaṁ
mṛḍayanti yuge yuge
Synonyms
ete — all these; ca — and; aṁśa — plenary portions; kalāḥ — portions of the plenary portions; puṁsaḥ — of the Supreme; kṛṣṇaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa; tu — but; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; svayam — in person; indra-ari — the enemies of Indra; vyākulam — disturbed; lokam — all the planets; mṛḍayanti — gives protection; yuge yuge — in different ages.

Translation
All of the above-mentioned incarnations are either plenary portions or portions of the plenary portions of the Lord, but Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the original Personality of Godhead. All of them appear on planets whenever there is a disturbance created by the atheists. The Lord incarnates to protect the theists.

Text 29
जन्म गुह्यं भगवतो य एतत्प्रयतो नर: ।
सायं प्रातर्गृणन् भक्त्या दु:खग्रामाद्विमुच्यते ॥ २९ ॥
janma guhyaṁ bhagavato
ya etat prayato naraḥ
sāyaṁ prātar gṛṇan bhaktyā
duḥkha-grāmād vimucyate
Synonyms
janma — birth; guhyam — mysterious; bhagavataḥ — of the Lord; yaḥ — one; etat — all these; prayataḥ — carefully; naraḥ — man; sāyam — evening; prātaḥ — morning; gṛṇan — recites; bhaktyā — with devotion; duḥkha-grāmāt — from all miseries; vimucyate — gets relief from.

Translation
Whoever carefully recites the mysterious appearances of the Lord, with devotion in the morning and in the evening, gets relief from all miseries of life.

Text 30
एतद्रूपं भगवतो ह्यरूपस्य चिदात्मन: ।
मायागुणैर्विरचितं महदादिभिरात्मनि ॥ ३० ॥
etad rūpaṁ bhagavato
hy arūpasya cid-ātmanaḥ
māyā-guṇair viracitaṁ
mahadādibhir ātmani
Synonyms
etat — all these; rūpam — forms; bhagavataḥ — of the Lord; hi — certainly; arūpasya — of one who has no material form; cit-ātmanaḥ — of the Transcendence; māyā — material energy; guṇaiḥ — by the qualities; viracitam — manufactured; mahat-ādibhiḥ — with the ingredients of matter; ātmani — in the self.

Translation
The conception of the virāṭ universal form of the Lord, as appearing in the material world, is imaginary. It is to enable the less intelligent [and neophytes] to adjust to the idea of the Lord’s having form. But factually the Lord has no material form.

Text 31
यथा नभसि मेघौघो रेणुर्वा पार्थिवोऽनिले ।
एवं द्रष्टरि द‍ृश्यत्वमारोपितमबुद्धिभि: ॥ ३१ ॥
yathā nabhasi meghaugho
reṇur vā pārthivo ’nile
evaṁ draṣṭari dṛśyatvam
āropitam abuddhibhiḥ
Synonyms
yathā — as it is; nabhasi — in the sky; megha-oghaḥ — a mass of clouds; reṇuḥ — dust; vā — as well as; pārthivaḥ — muddiness; anile — in the air; evam — thus; draṣṭari — to the seer; dṛśyatvam — for the purpose of seeing; āropitam — is implied; abuddhibhiḥ — by the less intelligent persons.

Translation
Clouds and dust are carried by the air, but less intelligent persons say that the sky is cloudy and the air is dirty. Similarly, they also implant material bodily conceptions on the spirit self.

Text 32
अत: परं यदव्यक्तमव्यूढगुणबृंहितम् ।
अद‍ृष्टाश्रुतवस्तुत्वात्स जीवो यत्पुनर्भव: ॥ ३२ ॥
ataḥ paraṁ yad avyaktam
avyūḍha-guṇa-bṛṁhitam
adṛṣṭāśruta-vastutvāt
sa jīvo yat punar-bhavaḥ
Synonyms
ataḥ — this; param — beyond; yat — which; avyaktam — unmanifested; avyūḍha — without formal shape; guṇa-bṛṁhitam — affected by the qualities; adṛṣṭa — unseen; aśruta — unheard; vastutvāt — being like that; saḥ — that; jīvaḥ — living being; yat — that which; punaḥ-bhavaḥ — takes birth repeatedly.

Translation
Beyond this gross conception of form is another, subtle conception of form which is without formal shape and is unseen, unheard and unmanifest. The living being has his form beyond this subtlety, otherwise he could not have repeated births.

Text 33
यत्रेमे सदसद्रूपे प्रतिषिद्धे स्वसंविदा ।
अविद्ययात्मनि कृते इति तद्ब्रह्मदर्शनम् ॥ ३३ ॥
yatreme sad-asad-rūpe
pratiṣiddhe sva-saṁvidā
avidyayātmani kṛte
iti tad brahma-darśanam
Synonyms
yatra — whenever; ime — in all these; sat-asat — gross and subtle; rūpe — in the forms of; pratiṣiddhe — on being nullified; sva-saṁvidā — by self-realization; avidyayā — by ignorance; ātmani — in the self; kṛte — having been imposed; iti — thus; tat — that is; brahma-darśanam — the process of seeing the Absolute.

Translation
Whenever a person experiences, by self-realization, that both the gross and subtle bodies have nothing to do with the pure self, at that time he sees himself as well as the Lord.

Text 34
यद्येषोपरता देवी माया वैशारदी मति: ।
सम्पन्न एवेति विदुर्महिम्नि स्वे महीयते ॥ ३४ ॥
yady eṣoparatā devī
māyā vaiśāradī matiḥ
sampanna eveti vidur
mahimni sve mahīyate
Synonyms
yadi — if, however; eṣā — they; uparatā — subsided; devī māyā — illusory energy; vaiśāradī — full of knowledge; matiḥ — enlightenment; sampannaḥ — enriched with; eva — certainly; iti — thus; viduḥ — being cognizant of; mahimni — in the glories; sve — of the self; mahīyate — being situated in.

Translation
If the illusory energy subsides and the living entity becomes fully enriched with knowledge by the grace of the Lord, then he becomes at once enlightened with self-realization and thus becomes situated in his own glory.

Text 35
एवं जन्मानि कर्माणि ह्यकर्तुरजनस्य च ।
वर्णयन्ति स्म कवयो वेदगुह्यानि हृत्पते: ॥ ३५ ॥
evaṁ janmāni karmāṇi
hy akartur ajanasya ca
varṇayanti sma kavayo
veda-guhyāni hṛt-pateḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; janmāni — birth; karmāṇi — activities; hi — certainly; akartuḥ — of the inactive; ajanasya — of the unborn; ca — and; varṇayanti — describe; sma — in the past; kavayaḥ — the learned; veda-guhyāni — undiscoverable by the Vedas; hṛt-pateḥ — of the Lord of the heart.

Translation
Thus learned men describe the births and activities of the unborn and inactive, which is undiscoverable even in the Vedic literatures. He is the Lord of the heart.

Text 36
स वा इदं विश्वममोघलील:
सृजत्यवत्यत्ति न सज्जतेऽस्मिन् ।
भूतेषु चान्तर्हित आत्मतन्त्र:
षाड्‍वर्गिकं जिघ्रति षड्‍गुणेश: ॥ ३६ ॥
sa vā idaṁ viśvam amogha-līlaḥ
sṛjaty avaty atti na sajjate ’smin
bhūteṣu cāntarhita ātma-tantraḥ
ṣāḍ-vargikaṁ jighrati ṣaḍ-guṇeśaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — the Supreme Lord; vā — alternately; idam — this; viśvam — manifested universes; amogha-līlaḥ — one whose activities are spotless; sṛjati — creates; avati atti — maintains and annihilates; na — not; sajjate — is affected by; asmin — in them; bhūteṣu — in all living beings; ca — also; antarhitaḥ — living within; ātma-tantraḥ — self-independent; ṣāṭ-vargikam — endowed with all the potencies of His opulences; jighrati — superficially attached, like smelling the fragrance; ṣaṭ-guṇa-īśaḥ — master of the six senses.

Translation
The Lord, whose activities are always spotless, is the master of the six senses and is fully omnipotent with six opulences. He creates the manifested universes, maintains them and annihilates them without being in the least affected. He is within every living being and is always independent.

Text 37
न चास्य कश्चिन्निपुणेन धातु-
रवैति जन्तु: कुमनीष ऊती: ।
नामानि रूपाणि मनोवचोभि:
सन्तन्वतो नटचर्यामिवाज्ञ: ॥ ३७ ॥
na cāsya kaścin nipuṇena dhātur
avaiti jantuḥ kumanīṣa ūtīḥ
nāmāni rūpāṇi mano-vacobhiḥ
santanvato naṭa-caryām ivājñaḥ
Synonyms
na — not; ca — and; asya — of Him; kaścit — anyone; nipuṇena — by dexterity; dhātuḥ — of the creator; avaiti — can know; jantuḥ — the living being; kumanīṣaḥ — with a poor fund of knowledge; ūtīḥ — activities of the Lord; nāmāni — His names; rūpāṇi — His forms; manaḥ-vacobhiḥ — by dint of mental speculation or deliverance of speeches; santanvataḥ — displaying; naṭa-caryām — a dramatic action; iva — like; ajñaḥ — the foolish.

Translation
The foolish with a poor fund of knowledge cannot know the transcendental nature of the forms, names and activities of the Lord, who is playing like an actor in a drama. Nor can they express such things, neither in their speculations nor in their words.

Text 38
स वेद धातु: पदवीं परस्य
दुरन्तवीर्यस्य रथाङ्गपाणे: ।
योऽमायया सन्ततयानुवृत्त्या
भजेत तत्पादसरोजगन्धम् ॥ ३८ ॥
sa veda dhātuḥ padavīṁ parasya
duranta-vīryasya rathāṅga-pāṇeḥ
yo ’māyayā santatayānuvṛttyā
bhajeta tat-pāda-saroja-gandham
Synonyms
saḥ — He alone; veda — can know; dhātuḥ — of the creator; padavīm — glories; parasya — of the transcendence; duranta-vīryasya — of the greatly powerful; ratha-aṅga-pāṇeḥ — of Lord Kṛṣṇa, who bears in His hand the wheel of a chariot; yaḥ — one who; amāyayā — without reservation; santatayā — without any gap; anuvṛttyā — favorably; bhajeta — renders service; tat-pāda — of His feet; saroja-gandham — fragrance of the lotus.

Translation
Only those who render unreserved, uninterrupted, favorable service unto the lotus feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa, who carries the wheel of the chariot in His hand, can know the creator of the universe in His full glory, power and transcendence.

Text 39
अथेह धन्या भगवन्त इत्थं
यद्वासुदेवेऽखिललोकनाथे ।
कुर्वन्ति सर्वात्मकमात्मभावं
न यत्र भूय: परिवर्त उग्र: ॥ ३९ ॥
atheha dhanyā bhagavanta itthaṁ
yad vāsudeve ’khila-loka-nāthe
kurvanti sarvātmakam ātma-bhāvaṁ
na yatra bhūyaḥ parivarta ugraḥ
Synonyms
atha — thus; iha — in this world; dhanyāḥ — successful; bhagavantaḥ — perfectly cognizant; ittham — such; yat — what; vāsudeve — unto the Personality of Godhead; akhila — all-embracing; loka-nāthe — unto the proprietor of all the universes; kurvanti — inspires; sarva-ātmakam — one- hundred-percent; ātma — spirit; bhāvam — ecstasy; na — never; yatra — wherein; bhūyaḥ — again; parivartaḥ — repetition; ugraḥ — dreadful.

Translation
Only by making such inquiries in this world can one be successful and perfectly cognizant, for such inquiries invoke transcendental ecstatic love unto the Personality of Godhead, who is the proprietor of all the universes, and guarantee cent-percent immunity from the dreadful repetition of birth and death.

Text 40
इदं भागवतं नाम पुराणं ब्रह्मसम्मितम् ।
उत्तमश्लोकचरितं चकार भगवानृषि: ।
नि:श्रेयसाय लोकस्य धन्यं स्वस्त्ययनं महत् ॥ ४० ॥
idaṁ bhāgavataṁ nāma
purāṇaṁ brahma-sammitam
uttama-śloka-caritaṁ
cakāra bhagavān ṛṣiḥ
niḥśreyasāya lokasya
dhanyaṁ svasty-ayanaṁ mahat
Synonyms
idam — this; bhāgavatam — book containing the narration of the Personality of Godhead and His pure devotees; nāma — of the name; purāṇam — supplementary to the Vedas; brahma-sammitam — incarnation of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; uttama-śloka — of the Personality of Godhead; caritam — activities; cakāra — compiled; bhagavān — incarnation of the Personality of Godhead; ṛṣiḥ — Śrī Vyāsadeva; niḥśreyasāya — for the ultimate good; lokasya — of all people; dhanyam — fully successful; svasti-ayanam — all-blissful; mahat — all-perfect.

Translation
This Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the literary incarnation of God, and it is compiled by Śrīla Vyāsadeva, the incarnation of God. It is meant for the ultimate good of all people, and it is all-successful, all-blissful and all-perfect.

Text 41
तदिदं ग्राहयामास सुतमात्मवतां वरम् ।
सर्ववेदेतिहासानां सारं सारं समुद्‍धृतम् ॥ ४१ ॥
tad idaṁ grāhayām āsa
sutam ātmavatāṁ varam
sarva-vedetihāsānāṁ
sāraṁ sāraṁ samuddhṛtam
Synonyms
tat — that; idam — this; grāhayām āsa — made to accept; sutam — unto his son; ātmavatām — of the self-realized; varam — most respectful; sarva — all; veda — Vedic literatures (books of knowledge); itihāsānām — of all the histories; sāram — cream; sāram — cream; samuddhṛtam — taken out.

Translation
Śrī Vyāsadeva delivered it to his son, who is the most respected among the self-realized, after extracting the cream of all Vedic literatures and histories of the universe.

Text 42
स तु संश्रावयामास महाराजं परीक्षितम् ।
प्रायोपविष्टं गङ्गायां परीतं परमर्षिभि: ॥ ४२ ॥
sa tu saṁśrāvayām āsa
mahārājaṁ parīkṣitam
prāyopaviṣṭaṁ gaṅgāyāṁ
parītaṁ paramarṣibhiḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — the son of Vyāsadeva; tu — again; saṁśrāvayām āsa — make them audible; mahā-rājam — unto the emperor; parīkṣitam — of the name Parīkṣit; prāya-upaviṣṭam — who sat until death without food or drink; gaṅgāyām — on the bank of the Ganges; parītam — being surrounded; parama-ṛṣibhiḥ — by great sages.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the son of Vyāsadeva, in his turn delivered the Bhāgavatam to the great Emperor Parīkṣit, who sat surrounded by sages on the bank of the Ganges, awaiting death without taking food or drink.

Text 43
कृष्णे स्वधामोपगते धर्मज्ञानादिभि: सह ।
कलौ नष्टद‍ृशामेष पुराणार्कोऽधुनोदित: ॥ ४३ ॥
kṛṣṇe sva-dhāmopagate
dharma-jñānādibhiḥ saha
kalau naṣṭa-dṛśām eṣa
purāṇārko ’dhunoditaḥ
Synonyms
kṛṣṇe — in Kṛṣṇa’s; sva-dhāma — own abode; upagate — having returned; dharma — religion; jñāna — knowledge; ādibhiḥ — combined together; saha — along with; kalau — in the Kali-yuga; naṣṭa-dṛśām — of persons who have lost their sight; eṣaḥ — all these; purāṇa-arkaḥ — the Purāṇa which is brilliant like the sun; adhunā — just now; uditaḥ — has arisen.

Translation
This Bhāgavata Purāṇa is as brilliant as the sun, and it has arisen just after the departure of Lord Kṛṣṇa to His own abode, accompanied by religion, knowledge, etc. Persons who have lost their vision due to the dense darkness of ignorance in the Age of Kali shall get light from this Purāṇa.

Text 44
तत्र कीर्तयतो विप्रा विप्रर्षेर्भूरितेजस: ।
अहं चाध्यगमं तत्र निविष्टस्तदनुग्रहात् ।
सोऽहं व: श्रावयिष्यामि यथाधीतं यथामति ॥ ४४ ॥
tatra kīrtayato viprā
viprarṣer bhūri-tejasaḥ
ahaṁ cādhyagamaṁ tatra
niviṣṭas tad-anugrahāt
so ’haṁ vaḥ śrāvayiṣyāmi
yathādhītaṁ yathā-mati
Synonyms
tatra — there; kīrtayataḥ — while reciting; viprāḥ — O brāhmaṇas; vipra-ṛṣeḥ — from the great brāhmaṇa-ṛṣi; bhūri — greatly; tejasaḥ — powerful; aham — I; ca — also; adhyagamam — could understand; tatra — in that meeting; niviṣṭaḥ — being perfectly attentive; tat-anugrahāt — by his mercy; saḥ — that very thing; aham — I; vaḥ — unto you; śrāvayiṣyāmi — shall let you hear; yathā-adhītam yathā-mati — as far as my realization.

Translation
O learned brāhmaṇas, when Śukadeva Gosvāmī recited Bhāgavatam there [in the presence of Emperor Parīkṣit], I heard him with rapt attention, and thus, by his mercy, I learned the Bhāgavatam from that great and powerful sage. Now I shall try to make you hear the very same thing as I learned it from him and as I have realized it.