Text 1
व्यास उवाच
इति ब्रुवाणं संस्तूय मुनीनां दीर्घसत्रिणाम् ।
वृद्ध: कुलपति: सूतं बह्‌वृच: शौनकोऽब्रवीत् ॥ १ ॥
vyāsa uvāca
iti bruvāṇaṁ saṁstūya
munīnāṁ dīrgha-satriṇām
vṛddhaḥ kula-patiḥ sūtaṁ
bahvṛcaḥ śaunako ’bravīt
Synonyms
vyāsaḥ — Vyāsadeva; uvāca — said; iti — thus; bruvāṇam — speaking; saṁstūya — congratulating; munīnām — of the great sages; dīrgha — prolonged; satriṇām — of those engaged in the performance of sacrifice; vṛddhaḥ — elderly; kula-patiḥ — head of the assembly; sūtam — unto Sūta Gosvāmī; bahu-ṛcaḥ — learned; śaunakaḥ — of the name Śaunaka; abravīt — addressed.

Translation
Vyāsadeva said: On hearing Sūta Gosvāmī speak thus, Śaunaka Muni, who was the elderly, learned leader of all the ṛṣis engaged in that prolonged sacrificial ceremony, congratulated Sūta Gosvāmī by addressing him as follows.

Text 2
शौनक उवाच
सूत सूत महाभाग वद नो वदतां वर ।
कथां भागवतीं पुण्यां यदाह भगवाञ्छुक: ॥ २ ॥
śaunaka uvāca
sūta sūta mahā-bhāga
vada no vadatāṁ vara
kathāṁ bhāgavatīṁ puṇyāṁ
yad āha bhagavāñ chukaḥ
Synonyms
śaunakaḥ — Śaunaka; uvāca — said; sūta sūta — O Sūta Gosvāmī; mahā-bhāga — the most fortunate; vada — please speak; naḥ — unto us; vadatām — of those who can speak; vara — respected; kathām — message; bhāgavatīm — of the Bhāgavatam; puṇyām — pious; yat — which; āha — said; bhagavān — greatly powerful; śukaḥ — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī.

Translation
Śaunaka said: O Sūta Gosvāmī, you are the most fortunate and respected of all those who can speak and recite. Please relate the pious message of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which was spoken by the great and powerful sage Śukadeva Gosvāmī.

Text 3
कस्मिन् युगे प्रवृत्तेयं स्थाने वा केन हेतुना ।
कुत: सञ्चोदित: कृष्ण: कृतवान् संहितां मुनि: ॥ ३ ॥
kasmin yuge pravṛtteyaṁ
sthāne vā kena hetunā
kutaḥ sañcoditaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ
kṛtavān saṁhitāṁ muniḥ
Synonyms
kasmin — in which; yuge — period; pravṛttā — was begun; iyam — this; sthāne — in the place; vā — or; kena — on what; hetunā — ground; kutaḥ — wherefrom; sañcoditaḥ — inspired by; kṛṣṇaḥ — Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana Vyāsa; kṛtavān — compiled; saṁhitām — Vedic literature; muniḥ — the learned.

Translation
In what period and at what place was this first begun, and why was this taken up? From where did Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana Vyāsa, the great sage, get the inspiration to compile this literature?

Text 4
तस्य पुत्रो महायोगी समद‍ृङ्‍‌निर्विकल्पक: ।
एकान्तमतिरुन्निद्रो गूढो मूढ इवेयते ॥ ४ ॥
tasya putro mahā-yogī
sama-dṛṅ nirvikalpakaḥ
ekānta-matir unnidro
gūḍho mūḍha iveyate
Synonyms
tasya — his; putraḥ — son; mahā-yogī — a great devotee; sama-dṛk — equibalanced; nirvikalpakaḥ — absolute monist; ekānta-matiḥ — fixed in monism or oneness of mind; unnidraḥ — surpassed nescience; gūḍhaḥ — not exposed; mūḍhaḥ — stunted; iva — like; īyate — appears like.

Translation
His [Vyāsadeva’s] son was a great devotee, an equibalanced monist, whose mind was always concentrated in monism. He was transcendental to mundane activities, but being unexposed, he appeared like an ignorant person.

Text 5
द‍ृष्ट्वानुयान्तमृषिमात्मजमप्यनग्नं
देव्यो ह्रिया परिदधुर्न सुतस्य चित्रम् ।
तद्वीक्ष्य पृच्छति मुनौ जगदुस्तवास्ति
स्त्रीपुम्भिदा न तु सुतस्य विविक्तद‍ृष्टे: ॥ ५ ॥
dṛṣṭvānuyāntam ṛṣim ātmajam apy anagnaṁ
devyo hriyā paridadhur na sutasya citram
tad vīkṣya pṛcchati munau jagadus tavāsti
strī-pum-bhidā na tu sutasya vivikta-dṛṣṭeḥ
Synonyms
dṛṣṭvā — by seeing; anuyāntam — following; ṛṣim — the sage; ātmajam — his son; api — in spite of; anagnam — not naked; devyaḥ — beautiful damsels; hriyā — out of shyness; paridadhuḥ — covered the body; na — not; sutasya — of the son; citram — astonishing; tat vīkṣya — by seeing that; pṛcchati — asking; munau — unto the muni (Vyāsa); jagaduḥ — replied; tava — your; asti — there are; strī-pum — male and female; bhidā — differences; na — not; tu — but; sutasya — of the son; vivikta — purified; dṛṣṭeḥ — of one who looks.

Translation
While Śrī Vyāsadeva was following his son, beautiful young damsels who were bathing naked covered their bodies with cloth, although Śrī Vyāsadeva himself was not naked. But they had not done so when his son had passed. The sage inquired about this, and the young ladies replied that his son was purified and when looking at them made no distinction between male and female. But the sage made such distinctions.

Text 6
कथमालक्षित: पौरै: सम्प्राप्त: कुरुजाङ्गलान् ।
उन्मत्तमूकजडवद्विचरन् गजसाह्वये ॥ ६ ॥
katham ālakṣitaḥ pauraiḥ
samprāptaḥ kuru-jāṅgalān
unmatta-mūka-jaḍavad
vicaran gaja-sāhvaye
Synonyms
katham — how; ālakṣitaḥ — recognized; pauraiḥ — by the citizens; samprāptaḥ — reaching; kuru-jāṅgalān — the Kuru-jāṅgala provinces; unmatta — mad; mūka — dumb; jaḍavat — stunted; vicaran — wandering; gaja-sāhvaye — Hastināpura.

Translation
How was he [Śrīla Śukadeva, the son of Vyāsa] recognized by the citizens when he entered the city of Hastināpura [now Delhi], after wandering in the provinces of Kuru and Jāṅgala, appearing like a madman, dumb and retarded?

Text 7
कथं वा पाण्डवेयस्य राजर्षेर्मुनिना सह ।
संवाद: समभूत्तात यत्रैषा सात्वती श्रुति: ॥ ७ ॥
kathaṁ vā pāṇḍaveyasya
rājarṣer muninā saha
saṁvādaḥ samabhūt tāta
yatraiṣā sātvatī śrutiḥ
Synonyms
katham — how is it; vā — also; pāṇḍaveyasya — of the descendant of Pāṇḍu (Parīkṣit); rājarṣeḥ — of the king who was a sage; muninā — with the muni; saha — with; saṁvādaḥ — discussion; samabhūt — took place; tāta — O darling; yatra — whereupon; eṣā — like this; sātvatī — transcendental; śrutiḥ — essence of the Vedas.

Translation
How did it so happen that King Parīkṣit met this great sage, making it possible for this great transcendental essence of the Vedas [Bhāgavatam] to be sung to him?

Text 8
स गोदोहनमात्रं हि गृहेषु गृहमेधिनाम् ।
अवेक्षते महाभागस्तीर्थीकुर्वंस्तदाश्रमम् ॥ ८ ॥
sa go-dohana-mātraṁ hi
gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām
avekṣate mahā-bhāgas
tīrthī-kurvaṁs tad āśramam
Synonyms
saḥ — he (Śukadeva Gosvāmī); go-dohana-mātram — only for the time of milking the cow; hi — certainly; gṛheṣu — in the house; gṛha-medhinām — of the householders; avekṣate — waits; mahā-bhāgaḥ — the most fortunate; tīrthī — pilgrimage; kurvan — transforming; tat āśramam — the residence.

Translation
He [Śukadeva Gosvāmī] was accustomed to stay at the door of a householder only long enough for a cow to be milked. And he did this just to sanctify the residence.

Text 9
अभिमन्युसुतं सूत प्राहुर्भागवतोत्तमम् ।
तस्य जन्म महाश्चर्यं कर्माणि च गृणीहि न: ॥ ९ ॥
abhimanyu-sutaṁ sūta
prāhur bhāgavatottamam
tasya janma mahāścaryaṁ
karmāṇi ca gṛṇīhi naḥ
Synonyms
abhimanyu-sutam — the son of Abhimanyu; sūta — O Sūta; prāhuḥ — is said to be; bhāgavata-uttamam — the first-class devotee of the Lord; tasya — his; janma — birth; mahā-āścaryam — very wonderful; karmāṇi — activities; ca — and; gṛṇīhi — please speak to; naḥ — us.

Translation
It is said that Mahārāja Parīkṣit is a great first-class devotee of the Lord and that his birth and activities are all wonderful. Please tell us about him.

Text 10
स सम्राट् कस्य वा हेतो: पाण्डूनां मानवर्धन: ।
प्रायोपविष्टो गङ्गायामनाद‍ृत्याधिराट्‌श्रियम् ॥ १० ॥
sa samrāṭ kasya vā hetoḥ
pāṇḍūnāṁ māna-vardhanaḥ
prāyopaviṣṭo gaṅgāyām
anādṛtyādhirāṭ-śriyam
Synonyms
saḥ — he; samrāṭ — the Emperor; kasya — for what; vā — or; hetoḥ — reason; pāṇḍūnām — of the sons of Pāṇḍu; māna-vardhanaḥ — one who enriches the family; prāya-upaviṣṭaḥ — sitting and fasting; gaṅgāyām — on the bank of the Ganges; anādṛtya — neglecting; adhirāṭ — acquired kingdom; śriyam — opulences.

Translation
He was a great emperor and possessed all the opulences of his acquired kingdom. He was so exalted that he was increasing the prestige of the Pāṇḍu dynasty. Why did he give up everything to sit down on the bank of the Ganges and fast until death?

Text 11
नमन्ति यत्पादनिकेतमात्मन:
शिवायहानीय धनानि शत्रव: ।
कथं स वीर: श्रियमङ्ग दुस्त्यजां
युवैषतोत्स्रष्टुमहो सहासुभि: ॥ ११ ॥
namanti yat-pāda-niketam ātmanaḥ
śivāya hānīya dhanāni śatravaḥ
kathaṁ sa vīraḥ śriyam aṅga dustyajāṁ
yuvaiṣatotsraṣṭum aho sahāsubhiḥ
Synonyms
namanti — bow down; yat-pāda — whose feet; niketam — under; ātmanaḥ — own; śivāya — welfare; hānīya — used to bring about; dhanāni — wealth; śatravaḥ — enemies; katham — for what reason; saḥ — he; vīraḥ — the chivalrous; śriyam — opulences; aṅga — O Sūta Gosvāmī; dustyajām — insuperable; yuvā — in full youth; aiṣata — desired; utsraṣṭum — to give up; aho — exclamation; saha — with; asubhiḥ — life.

Translation
He was such a great emperor that all his enemies would come and bow down at his feet and surrender all their wealth for their own benefit. He was full of youth and strength, and he possessed kingly opulences that were difficult to give up. Why did he want to give up everything, including his life?

Text 12
शिवाय लोकस्य भवाय भूतये
य उत्तमश्लोकपरायणा जना: ।
जीवन्ति नात्मार्थमसौ पराश्रयं
मुमोच निर्विद्य कुत: कलेवरम् ॥ १२ ॥
śivāya lokasya bhavāya bhūtaye
ya uttama-śloka-parāyaṇā janāḥ
jīvanti nātmārtham asau parāśrayaṁ
mumoca nirvidya kutaḥ kalevaram
Synonyms
śivāya — welfare; lokasya — of all living beings; bhavāya — for flourishing; bhūtaye — for economic development; ye — one who is; uttama-śloka-parāyaṇāḥ — devoted to the cause of the Personality of Godhead; janāḥ — men; jīvanti — do live; na — but not; ātma-artham — selfish interest; asau — that; para-āśrayam — shelter for others; mumoca — gave up; nirvidya — being freed from all attachment; kutaḥ — for what reason; kalevaram — mortal body.

Translation
Those who are devoted to the cause of the Personality of Godhead live only for the welfare, development and happiness of others. They do not live for any selfish interest. So even though the Emperor [Parīkṣit] was free from all attachment to worldly possessions, how could he give up his mortal body, which was the shelter for others?

Text 13
तत्सर्वं न: समाचक्ष्व पृष्टो यदिह किञ्चन ।
मन्ये त्वां विषये वाचां स्‍नातमन्यत्र छान्दसात् ॥ १३ ॥
tat sarvaṁ naḥ samācakṣva
pṛṣṭo yad iha kiñcana
manye tvāṁ viṣaye vācāṁ
snātam anyatra chāndasāt
Synonyms
tat — that; sarvam — all; naḥ — unto us; samācakṣva — clearly explain; pṛṣṭaḥ — questioned; yat iha — herein; kiñcana — all that; manye — we think; tvām — you; viṣaye — in all subjects; vācām — meanings of words; snātam — fully acquainted; anyatra — except; chāndasāt — portion of the Vedas.

Translation
We know that you are expert in the meaning of all subjects, except some portions of the Vedas, and thus you can clearly explain the answers to all the questions we have just put to you.

Text 14
सूत उवाच
द्वापरे समनुप्राप्ते तृतीये युगपर्यये ।
जात: पराशराद्योगी वासव्यां कलया हरे: ॥ १४ ॥
sūta uvāca
dvāpare samanuprāpte
tṛtīye yuga-paryaye
jātaḥ parāśarād yogī
vāsavyāṁ kalayā hareḥ
Synonyms
sūtaḥ — Sūta Gosvāmī; uvāca — said; dvāpare — in the second millennium; samanuprāpte — on the advent of; tṛtīye — third; yuga — millennium; paryaye — in the place of; jātaḥ — was begotten; parāśarāt — by Parāśara; yogī — the great sage; vāsavyām — in the womb of the daughter of Vasu; kalayā — in the plenary portion; hareḥ — of the Personality of Godhead.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī said: When the second millennium overlapped the third, the great sage [Vyāsadeva] was born to Parāśara in the womb of Satyavatī, the daughter of Vasu.

Text 15
स कदाचित्सरस्वत्या उपस्पृश्य जलं शुचि: ।
विविक्त एक आसीन उदिते रविमण्डले ॥ १५ ॥
sa kadācit sarasvatyā
upaspṛśya jalaṁ śuciḥ
vivikta eka āsīna
udite ravi-maṇḍale
Synonyms
saḥ — he; kadācit — once; sarasvatyāḥ — on the bank of the Sarasvatī; upaspṛśya — after finishing morning ablutions; jalam — water; śuciḥ — being purified; vivikte — concentration; ekaḥ — alone; āsīnaḥ — being thus seated; udite — on the rise; ravi-maṇḍale — of the sun disc.

Translation
Once upon a time he [Vyāsadeva], as the sun rose, took his morning ablution in the waters of the Sarasvatī and sat alone to concentrate.

Text 16
परावरज्ञ: स ऋषि: कालेनाव्यक्तरंहसा ।
युगधर्मव्यतिकरं प्राप्तं भुवि युगे युगे ॥ १६ ॥
parāvara-jñaḥ sa ṛṣiḥ
kālenāvyakta-raṁhasā
yuga-dharma-vyatikaraṁ
prāptaṁ bhuvi yuge yuge
Synonyms
para-avara — past and future; jñaḥ — one who knows; saḥ — he; ṛṣiḥ — Vyāsadeva; kālena — by time; avyakta — unmanifested; raṁhasā — by great force; yuga-dharma — acts in terms of the millennium; vyatikaram — anomalies; prāptam — having accrued; bhuvi — on the earth; yuge yuge — different ages.

Translation
The great sage Vyāsadeva saw anomalies in the duties of the millennium. This happens on the earth in different ages, due to the unseen force of time.

Texts 17-18
भौतिकानां च भावानां शक्तिह्रासं च तत्कृतम् ।
अश्रद्दधानान्नि:सत्त्वान्दुर्मेधान् ह्रसितायुष: ॥ १७ ॥
दुर्भगांश्च जनान् वीक्ष्य मुनिर्दिव्येन चक्षुषा ।
सर्ववर्णाश्रमाणां यद्दध्यौ हितममोघद‍ृक् ॥ १८ ॥
bhautikānāṁ ca bhāvānāṁ
śakti-hrāsaṁ ca tat-kṛtam
aśraddadhānān niḥsattvān
durmedhān hrasitāyuṣaḥ
durbhagāṁś ca janān vīkṣya
munir divyena cakṣuṣā
sarva-varṇāśramāṇāṁ yad
dadhyau hitam amogha-dṛk
Synonyms
bhautikānām ca — also of everything that is made of matter; bhāvānām — actions; śakti-hrāsam ca — and deterioration of natural power; tat-kṛtam — rendered by that; aśraddadhānān — of the faithless; niḥsattvān — impatient due to want of the mode of goodness; durmedhān — dull-witted; hrasita — reduced; āyuṣaḥ — of duration of life; durbhagān ca — also the unlucky; janān — people in general; vīkṣya — by seeing; muniḥ — the muni; divyena — by transcendental; cakṣuṣā — vision; sarva — all; varṇa-āśramāṇām — of all the statuses and orders of life; yat — what; dadhyau — contemplated; hitam — welfare; amogha-dṛk — one who is fully equipped in knowledge.

Translation
The great sage, who was fully equipped in knowledge, could see through his transcendental vision the deterioration of everything material due to the influence of the age. He could also see that the faithless people in general would be reduced in duration of life and would be impatient due to lack of goodness. Thus he contemplated for the welfare of men in all statuses and orders of life.

Text 19
चातुर्होत्रं कर्म शुद्धं प्रजानां वीक्ष्य वैदिकम् ।
व्यदधाद्यज्ञसन्तत्यै वेदमेकं चतुर्विधम् ॥ १९ ॥
cātur-hotraṁ karma śuddhaṁ
prajānāṁ vīkṣya vaidikam
vyadadhād yajña-santatyai
vedam ekaṁ catur-vidham
Synonyms
cātuḥ — four; hotram — sacrificial fires; karma śuddham — purification of work; prajānām — of the people in general; vīkṣya — after seeing; vaidikam — according to Vedic rites; vyadadhāt — made into; yajña — sacrifice; santatyai — to expand; vedam ekam — only one Veda; catuḥ-vidham — in four divisions.

Translation
He saw that the sacrifices mentioned in the Vedas were means by which the people’s occupations could be purified. And to simplify the process he divided the one Veda into four, in order to expand them among men.

Text 20
ऋग्यजु:सामाथर्वाख्या वेदाश्चत्वार उद्‍धृता: ।
इतिहासपुराणं च पञ्चमो वेद उच्यते ॥ २० ॥
ṛg-yajuḥ-sāmātharvākhyā
vedāś catvāra uddhṛtāḥ
itihāsa-purāṇaṁ ca
pañcamo veda ucyate
Synonyms
ṛg-yajuḥ-sāma-atharva-ākhyāḥ — the names of the four Vedas; vedāḥ — the Vedas; catvāraḥ — four; uddhṛtāḥ — made into separate parts; itihāsa — historical records (Mahābhārata); purāṇam ca — and the Purāṇas; pañcamaḥ — the fifth; vedaḥ — the original source of knowledge; ucyate — is said to be.

Translation
The four divisions of the original sources of knowledge [the Vedas] were made separately. But the historical facts and authentic stories mentioned in the Purāṇas are called the fifth Veda.

Text 21
तत्रर्ग्वेदधर: पैल: सामगो जैमिनि: कवि: ।
वैशम्पायन एवैको निष्णातो यजुषामुत ॥ २१ ॥
tatrarg-veda-dharaḥ pailaḥ
sāmago jaiminiḥ kaviḥ
vaiśampāyana evaiko
niṣṇāto yajuṣām uta
Synonyms
tatra — thereupon; ṛg-veda-dharaḥ — the professor of the Ṛg Veda; pailaḥ — the ṛṣi named Paila; sāma-gaḥ — that of the Sāma Veda; jaiminiḥ — the ṛṣi named Jaimini; kaviḥ — highly qualified; vaiśampāyanaḥ — the ṛṣi named Vaiśampāyana; eva — only; ekaḥ — alone; niṣṇātaḥ — well versed; yajuṣām — of the Yajur Veda; uta — glorified.

Translation
After the Vedas were divided into four divisions, Paila Ṛṣi became the professor of the Ṛg Veda, Jaimini the professor of the Sāma Veda, and Vaiśampāyana alone became glorified by the Yajur Veda.

Text 22
अथर्वाङ्गिरसामासीत्सुमन्तुर्दारुणो मुनि: ।
इतिहासपुराणानां पिता मे रोमहर्षण: ॥ २२ ॥
atharvāṅgirasām āsīt
sumantur dāruṇo muniḥ
itihāsa-purāṇānāṁ
pitā me romaharṣaṇaḥ
Synonyms
atharva — the Atharva Veda; aṅgirasām — unto the ṛṣi Aṅgirā; āsīt — was entrusted; sumantuḥ — also known as Sumantu Muni; dāruṇaḥ — seriously devoted to the Atharva Veda; muniḥ — the sage; itihāsa-purāṇānām — of the historical records and the Purāṇas; pitā — father; me — mine; romaharṣaṇaḥ — the ṛṣi Romaharṣaṇa.

Translation
The Sumantu Muni Aṅgirā, who was very devotedly engaged, was entrusted with the Atharva Veda. And my father, Romaharṣaṇa, was entrusted with the Purāṇas and historical records.

Text 23
त एत ऋषयो वेदं स्वं स्वं व्यस्यन्ननेकधा ।
शिष्यै: प्रशिष्यैस्तच्छिष्यैर्वेदास्ते शाखिनोऽभवन् ॥ २३ ॥
ta eta ṛṣayo vedaṁ
svaṁ svaṁ vyasyann anekadhā
śiṣyaiḥ praśiṣyais tac-chiṣyair
vedās te śākhino ’bhavan
Synonyms
te — they; ete — all these; ṛṣayaḥ — learned scholars; vedam — the respective Vedas; svam svam — in their own entrusted matters; vyasyan — rendered; anekadhā — many; śiṣyaiḥ — disciples; praśiṣyaiḥ — granddisciples; tat-śiṣyaiḥ — great-granddisciples; vedāḥ te — followers of the respective Vedas; śākhinaḥ — different branches; abhavan — thus became.

Translation
All these learned scholars, in their turn, rendered their entrusted Vedas unto their many disciples, granddisciples and great-granddisciples, and thus the respective branches of the followers of the Vedas came into being.

Text 24
त एव वेदा दुर्मेधैर्धार्यन्ते पुरुषैर्यथा ।
एवं चकार भगवान् व्यास: कृपणवत्सल: ॥ २४ ॥
ta eva vedā durmedhair
dhāryante puruṣair yathā
evaṁ cakāra bhagavān
vyāsaḥ kṛpaṇa-vatsalaḥ
Synonyms
te — that; eva — certainly; vedāḥ — the book of knowledge; durmedhaiḥ — by the less intellectual; dhāryante — can assimilate; puruṣaiḥ — by the man; yathā — as much as; evam — thus; cakāra — edited; bhagavān — the powerful; vyāsaḥ — the great sage Vyāsa; kṛpaṇa-vatsalaḥ — very kind to the ignorant mass.

Translation
Thus the great sage Vyāsadeva, who is very kind to the ignorant masses, edited the Vedas so they might be assimilated by less intellectual men.

Text 25
स्त्रीशूद्रद्विजबन्धूनां त्रयी न श्रुतिगोचरा ।
कर्मश्रेयसि मूढानां श्रेय एवं भवेदिह ।
इति भारतमाख्यानं कृपया मुनिना कृतम् ॥ २५ ॥
strī-śūdra-dvijabandhūnāṁ
trayī na śruti-gocarā
karma-śreyasi mūḍhānāṁ
śreya evaṁ bhaved iha
iti bhāratam ākhyānaṁ
kṛpayā muninā kṛtam
Synonyms
strī — the woman class; śūdra — the laboring class; dvija-bandhūnām — of the friends of the twice-born; trayī — the three sacrificial Vedas; na śruti-gocarā — not allowed to be heard; karma-śreyasi — in the successful execution of ritual duties; mūḍhānām — of the less intelligent; śreyaḥ — supreme benefit; evam — thus; bhavet — achieved; iha — by this; iti — thus thinking; bhāratam — the great Mahābhārata; ākhyānam — historical facts; kṛpayā — out of great mercy; muninā — by the muni; kṛtam — is completed.

Translation
Out of compassion, the great sage thought it wise that this would enable men to achieve the ultimate goal of life. Thus he compiled the great historical narration called the Mahābhārata for women, laborers and friends of the twice-born.

Text 26
एवं प्रवृत्तस्य सदा भूतानां श्रेयसि द्विजा: ।
सर्वात्मकेनापि यदा नातुष्यद्‍धृदयं तत: ॥ २६ ॥
evaṁ pravṛttasya sadā
bhūtānāṁ śreyasi dvijāḥ
sarvātmakenāpi yadā
nātuṣyad dhṛdayaṁ tataḥ
Synonyms
evam — thus; pravṛttasya — one who is engaged in; sadā — always; bhūtānām — of the living beings; śreyasi — in the ultimate good; dvijāḥ — O twice-born; sarvātmakena api — by all means; yadā — when; na — not; atuṣyat — become satisfied; hṛdayam — mind; tataḥ — at that time.

Translation
O twice-born brāhmaṇas, still his mind was not satisfied, although he engaged himself in working for the total welfare of all people.

Text 27
नातिप्रसीदद्‍धृदय: सरस्वत्यास्तटे शुचौ ।
वितर्कयन् विविक्तस्थ इदं चोवाच धर्मवित् ॥ २७ ॥
nātiprasīdad-dhṛdayaḥ
sarasvatyās taṭe śucau
vitarkayan vivikta-stha
idaṁ covāca dharma-vit
Synonyms
na — not; atiprasīdat — very much satisfied; hṛdayaḥ — at heart; sarasvatyāḥ — of the river Sarasvatī; taṭe — on the bank of; śucau — being purified; vitarkayan — having considered; vivikta-sthaḥ — situated in a lonely place; idam ca — also this; uvāca — said; dharma-vit — one who knows what religion is.

Translation
Thus the sage, being dissatisfied at heart, at once began to reflect, because he knew the essence of religion, and he said within himself:

Texts 28-29
धृतव्रतेन हि मया छन्दांसि गुरवोऽग्नय: ।
मानिता निर्व्यलीकेन गृहीतं चानुशासनम् ॥ २८ ॥
भारतव्यपदेशेन ह्याम्नायार्थश्च प्रदर्शित: ।
द‍ृश्यते यत्र धर्मादि स्त्रीशूद्रादिभिरप्युत ॥ २९ ॥
dhṛta-vratena hi mayā
chandāṁsi guravo ’gnayaḥ
mānitā nirvyalīkena
gṛhītaṁ cānuśāsanam
bhārata-vyapadeśena
hy āmnāyārthaś ca pradarśitaḥ
dṛśyate yatra dharmādi
strī-śūdrādibhir apy uta
Synonyms
dhṛta-vratena — under a strict disciplinary vow; hi — certainly; mayā — by me; chandāṁsi — the Vedic hymns; guravaḥ — the spiritual masters; agnayaḥ — the sacrificial fire; mānitāḥ — properly worshiped; nirvyalīkena — without pretense; gṛhītam ca — also accepted; anuśāsanam — traditional discipline; bhārata — the Mahābhārata; vyapadeśena — by compilation of; hi — certainly; āmnāya-arthaḥ — import of disciplic succession; ca — and; pradarśitaḥ — properly explained; dṛśyate — by what is necessary; yatra — where; dharma-ādiḥ — the path of religion; strī-śūdra-ādibhiḥ api — even by women, śūdras, etc.; uta — spoken.

Translation
I have, under strict disciplinary vows, unpretentiously worshiped the Vedas, the spiritual masters and the altar of sacrifice. I have also abided by the rulings and have shown the import of disciplic succession through the explanation of the Mahābhārata, by which even women, śūdras and others [friends of the twice-born] can see the path of religion.

Text 30
तथापि बत मे दैह्यो ह्यात्मा चैवात्मना विभु: ।
असम्पन्न इवाभाति ब्रह्मवर्चस्य सत्तम: ॥ ३० ॥
tathāpi bata me daihyo
hy ātmā caivātmanā vibhuḥ
asampanna ivābhāti
brahma-varcasya sattamaḥ
Synonyms
tathāpi — although; bata — defect; me — mine; daihyaḥ — situated in the body; hi — certainly; ātmā — living being; ca — and; eva — even; ātmanā — myself; vibhuḥ — sufficient; asampannaḥ — wanting in; iva ābhāti — it appears to be; brahma-varcasya — of the Vedāntists; sattamaḥ — the supreme.

Translation
I am feeling incomplete, though I myself am fully equipped with everything required by the Vedas.

Text 31
किं वा भागवता धर्मा न प्रायेण निरूपिता: ।
प्रिया: परमहंसानां त एव ह्यच्युतप्रिया: ॥ ३१ ॥
kiṁ vā bhāgavatā dharmā
na prāyeṇa nirūpitāḥ
priyāḥ paramahaṁsānāṁ
ta eva hy acyuta-priyāḥ
Synonyms
kim vā — or; bhāgavatāḥ dharmāḥ — devotional activities of the living beings; na — not; prāyeṇa — almost; nirūpitāḥ — directed; priyāḥ — dear; paramahaṁsānām — of the perfect beings; te eva — that also; hi — certainly; acyuta — the infallible; priyāḥ — attractive.

Translation
This may be because I did not specifically point out the devotional service of the Lord, which is dear both to perfect beings and to the infallible Lord.

Text 32
तस्यैवं खिलमात्मानं मन्यमानस्य खिद्यत: ।
कृष्णस्य नारदोऽभ्यागादाश्रमं प्रागुदाहृतम् ॥ ३२ ॥
tasyaivaṁ khilam ātmānaṁ
manyamānasya khidyataḥ
kṛṣṇasya nārado ’bhyāgād
āśramaṁ prāg udāhṛtam
Synonyms
tasya — his; evam — thus; khilam — inferior; ātmānam — soul; manyamānasya — thinking within the mind; khidyataḥ — regretting; kṛṣṇasya — of Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana Vyāsa; nāradaḥ abhyāgāt — Nārada came there; āśramam — the cottage; prāk — before; udāhṛtam — said.

Translation
As mentioned before, Nārada reached the cottage of Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana Vyāsa on the banks of the Sarasvatī just as Vyāsadeva was regretting his defects.

Text 33
तमभिज्ञाय सहसा प्रत्युत्थायागतं मुनि: ।
पूजयामास विधिवन्नारदं सुरपूजितम् ॥ ३३ ॥
tam abhijñāya sahasā
pratyutthāyāgataṁ muniḥ
pūjayām āsa vidhivan
nāradaṁ sura-pūjitam
Synonyms
tam abhijñāya — seeing the good fortune of his (Nārada’s) arrival; sahasā — all of a sudden; pratyutthāya — getting up; āgatam — arrived at; muniḥ — Vyāsadeva; pūjayām āsa — worship; vidhi-vat — with the same respect as offered to Vidhi (Brahmā); nāradam — to Nārada; sura-pūjitam — worshiped by the demigods.

Translation
At the auspicious arrival of Śrī Nārada, Śrī Vyāsadeva got up respectfully and worshiped him, giving him veneration equal to that given to Brahmājī, the creator.