Text 1
सूत उवाच
अथ तं सुखमासीन उपासीनं बृहच्छ्रवा: ।
देवर्षि: प्राह विप्रर्षिं वीणापाणि: स्मयन्निव ॥ १ ॥
sūta uvāca
atha taṁ sukham āsīna
upāsīnaṁ bṛhac-chravāḥ
devarṣiḥ prāha viprarṣiṁ
vīṇā-pāṇiḥ smayann iva
Synonyms
sūtaḥ — Sūta; uvāca — said; atha — therefore; tam — him; sukham āsīnaḥ — comfortably seated; upāsīnam — unto one sitting nearby; bṛhat-śravāḥ — greatly respected; devarṣiḥ — the great ṛṣi among the gods; prāha — said; viprarṣim — unto the ṛṣi among the brāhmaṇas; vīṇā-pāṇiḥ — one who carries a vīṇā in his hand; smayan iva — apparently smiling.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī said: Thus the sage amongst the gods [Nārada], comfortably seated and apparently smiling, addressed the ṛṣi amongst the brāhmaṇas [Vedavyāsa].

Text 2
नारद उवाच
पाराशर्य महाभाग भवत: कच्चिदात्मना ।
परितुष्यति शारीर आत्मा मानस एव वा ॥ २ ॥
nārada uvāca
pārāśarya mahā-bhāga
bhavataḥ kaccid ātmanā
parituṣyati śārīra
ātmā mānasa eva vā
Synonyms
nāradaḥ — Nārada; uvāca — said; pārāśarya — O son of Parāśara; mahā-bhāga — the greatly fortunate; bhavataḥ — your; kaccit — if it is; ātmanā — by the self-realization of; parituṣyati — does it satisfy; śārīraḥ — identifying the body; ātmā — self; mānasaḥ — identifying the mind; eva — certainly; vā — and.

Translation
Addressing Vyāsadeva, the son of Parāśara, Nārada inquired: Are you satisfied by identifying with the body or the mind as objects of self-realization?

Text 3
जिज्ञासितं सुसम्पन्नमपि ते महदद्भ‍ुतम् ।
कृतवान् भारतं यस्त्वं सर्वार्थपरिबृंहितम् ॥ ३ ॥
jijñāsitaṁ susampannam
api te mahad-adbhutam
kṛtavān bhārataṁ yas tvaṁ
sarvārtha-paribṛṁhitam
Synonyms
jijñāsitam — fully inquired; susampannam — well versed; api — in spite of; te — your; mahat-adbhutam — great and wonderful; kṛtavān — prepared; bhāratam — the Mahābhārata; yaḥ tvam — what you have done; sarva-artha — including all sequences; paribṛṁhitam — elaborately explained.

Translation
Your inquiries were full and your studies were also well fulfilled, and there is no doubt that you have prepared a great and wonderful work, the Mahābhārata, which is full of all kinds of Vedic sequences elaborately explained.

Text 4
जिज्ञासितमधीतं च ब्रह्म यत्तत्सनातनम् ।
तथापि शोचस्यात्मानमकृतार्थ इव प्रभो ॥ ४ ॥
jijñāsitam adhītaṁ ca
brahma yat tat sanātanam
tathāpi śocasy ātmānam
akṛtārtha iva prabho
Synonyms
jijñāsitam — deliberated fully well; adhītam — the knowledge obtained; ca — and; brahma — the Absolute; yat — what; tat — that; sanātanam — eternal; tathāpi — in spite of that; śocasi — lamenting; ātmānam — unto the self; akṛta-arthaḥ — undone; iva — like; prabho — my dear sir.

Translation
You have fully delineated the subject of impersonal Brahman as well as the knowledge derived therefrom. Why should you be despondent in spite of all this, thinking that you are undone, my dear prabhu?

Text 5
व्यास उवाच
अस्त्येव मे सर्वमिदं त्वयोक्तं
तथापि नात्मा परितुष्यते मे ।
तन्मूलमव्यक्तमगाधबोधं
पृच्छामहे त्वात्मभवात्मभूतम् ॥ ५ ॥
vyāsa uvāca
asty eva me sarvam idaṁ tvayoktaṁ
tathāpi nātmā parituṣyate me
tan-mūlam avyaktam agādha-bodhaṁ
pṛcchāmahe tvātma-bhavātma-bhūtam
Synonyms
vyāsaḥ — Vyāsa; uvāca — said; asti — there is; eva — certainly; me — mine; sarvam — all; idam — this; tvayā — by you; uktam — uttered; tathāpi — and yet; na — not; ātmā — self; parituṣyate — does pacify; me — unto me; tat — of which; mūlam — root; avyaktam — undetected; agādha-bodham — the man of unlimited knowledge; pṛcchāmahe — do inquire; tvā — unto you; ātma-bhava — self-born; ātma-bhūtam — offspring.

Translation
Śrī Vyāsadeva said: All you have said about me is perfectly correct. Despite all this, I am not pacified. I therefore question you about the root cause of my dissatisfaction, for you are a man of unlimited knowledge due to your being the offspring of one [Brahmā] who is self-born [without mundane father and mother].

Text 6
स वै भवान् वेद समस्तगुह्य-
मुपासितो यत्पुरुष: पुराण: ।
परावरेशो मनसैव विश्वं
सृजत्यवत्यत्ति गुणैरसङ्ग: ॥ ६ ॥
sa vai bhavān veda samasta-guhyam
upāsito yat puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ
parāvareśo manasaiva viśvaṁ
sṛjaty avaty atti guṇair asaṅgaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — thus; vai — certainly; bhavān — yourself; veda — know; samasta — all-inclusive; guhyam — confidential; upāsitaḥ — devotee of; yat — because; puruṣaḥ — the Personality of Godhead; purāṇaḥ — the oldest; para-avara-īśaḥ — the controller of the material and spiritual worlds; manasā — mind; eva — only; viśvam — the universe; sṛjati — creates; avati atti — annihilates; guṇaiḥ — by the qualitative matter; asaṅgaḥ — unattached.

Translation
My lord! Everything that is mysterious is known to you because you worship the creator and destroyer of the material world and the maintainer of the spiritual world, the original Personality of Godhead, who is transcendental to the three modes of material nature.

Text 7
त्वं पर्यटन्नर्क इव त्रिलोकी-
मन्तश्चरो वायुरिवात्मसाक्षी ।
परावरे ब्रह्मणि धर्मतो व्रतै:
स्‍नातस्य मे न्यूनमलं विचक्ष्व ॥ ७ ॥
tvaṁ paryaṭann arka iva tri-lokīm
antaś-caro vāyur ivātma-sākṣī
parāvare brahmaṇi dharmato vrataiḥ
snātasya me nyūnam alaṁ vicakṣva
Synonyms
tvam — Your Goodness; paryaṭan — traveling; arkaḥ — the sun; iva — like; tri-lokīm — the three worlds; antaḥ-caraḥ — can penetrate into everyone’s heart; vāyuḥ iva — as good as the all-pervading air; ātma — self-realized; sākṣī — witness; para-avare — in the matter of cause and effect; brahmaṇi — in the Absolute; dharmataḥ — under disciplinary regulations; vrataiḥ — in vow; snātasya — having been absorbed in; me — mine; nyūnam — deficiency; alam — clearly; vicakṣva — search out.

Translation
Like the sun, Your Goodness can travel everywhere in the three worlds, and like the air you can penetrate the internal region of everyone. As such, you are as good as the all-pervasive Supersoul. Please, therefore, find out the deficiency in me, despite my being absorbed in transcendence under disciplinary regulations and vows.

Text 8
श्रीनारद उवाच
भवतानुदितप्रायं यशो भगवतोऽमलम् ।
येनैवासौ न तुष्येत मन्ये तद्दर्शनं खिलम् ॥ ८ ॥
śrī-nārada uvāca
bhavatānudita-prāyaṁ
yaśo bhagavato ’malam
yenaivāsau na tuṣyeta
manye tad darśanaṁ khilam
Synonyms
śrī-nāradaḥ — Śrī Nārada; uvāca — said; bhavatā — by you; anudita-prāyam — almost not praised; yaśaḥ — glories; bhagavataḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; amalam — spotless; yena — by which; eva — certainly; asau — He (the Personality of Godhead); na — does not; tuṣyeta — be pleased; manye — I think; tat — that; darśanam — philosophy; khilam — inferior.

Translation
Śrī Nārada said: You have not actually broadcast the sublime and spotless glories of the Personality of Godhead. That philosophy which does not satisfy the transcendental senses of the Lord is considered worthless.

Text 9
यथा धर्मादयश्चार्था मुनिवर्यानुकीर्तिता: ।
न तथा वासुदेवस्य महिमा ह्यनुवर्णित: ॥ ९ ॥
yathā dharmādayaś cārthā
muni-varyānukīrtitāḥ
na tathā vāsudevasya
mahimā hy anuvarṇitaḥ
Synonyms
yathā — as much as; dharma-ādayaḥ — all four principles of religious behavior; ca — and; arthāḥ — purposes; muni-varya — by yourself, the great sage; anukīrtitāḥ — repeatedly described; na — not; tathā — in that way; vāsudevasya — of the Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa; mahimā — glories; hi — certainly; anuvarṇitaḥ — so constantly described.

Translation
Although, great sage, you have very broadly described the four principles beginning with religious performances, you have not described the glories of the Supreme Personality, Vāsudeva.

Text 10
न यद्वचश्चित्रपदं हरेर्यशो
जगत्पवित्रं प्रगृणीत कर्हिचित् ।
तद्वायसं तीर्थमुशन्ति मानसा
न यत्र हंसा निरमन्त्युशिक्क्षया: ॥ १० ॥
na yad vacaś citra-padaṁ harer yaśo
jagat-pavitraṁ pragṛṇīta karhicit
tad vāyasaṁ tīrtham uśanti mānasā
na yatra haṁsā niramanty uśik-kṣayāḥ
Synonyms
na — not; yat — that; vacaḥ — vocabulary; citra-padam — decorative; hareḥ — of the Lord; yaśaḥ — glories; jagat — universe; pavitram — sanctified; pragṛṇīta — described; karhicit — hardly; tat — that; vāyasam — crows; tīrtham — place of pilgrimage; uśanti — think; mānasāḥ — saintly persons; na — not; yatra — where; haṁsāḥ — all-perfect beings; niramanti — take pleasure; uśik-kṣayāḥ — those who reside in the transcendental abode.

Translation
Those words which do not describe the glories of the Lord, who alone can sanctify the atmosphere of the whole universe, are considered by saintly persons to be like unto a place of pilgrimage for crows. Since the all-perfect persons are inhabitants of the transcendental abode, they do not derive any pleasure there.

Text 11
तद्वाग्विसर्गो जनताघविप्लवो
यस्मिन् प्रतिश्लोकमबद्धवत्यपि ।
नामान्यनन्तस्य यशोऽङ्कितानि यत्
श‍ृण्वन्ति गायन्ति गृणन्ति साधव: ॥ ११ ॥
tad-vāg-visargo janatāgha-viplavo
yasmin prati-ślokam abaddhavaty api
nāmāny anantasya yaśo ’ṅkitāni yat
śṛṇvanti gāyanti gṛṇanti sādhavaḥ
Synonyms
tat — that; vāk — vocabulary; visargaḥ — creation; janatā — the people in general; agha — sins; viplavaḥ — revolutionary; yasmin — in which; prati-ślokam — each and every stanza; abaddhavati — irregularly composed; api — in spite of; nāmāni — transcendental names, etc.; anantasya — of the unlimited Lord; yaśaḥ — glories; aṅkitāni — depicted; yat — what; śṛṇvanti — do hear; gāyanti — do sing; gṛṇanti — do accept; sādhavaḥ — the purified men who are honest.

Translation
On the other hand, that literature which is full of descriptions of the transcendental glories of the name, fame, forms, pastimes, etc., of the unlimited Supreme Lord is a different creation, full of transcendental words directed toward bringing about a revolution in the impious lives of this world’s misdirected civilization. Such transcendental literatures, even though imperfectly composed, are heard, sung and accepted by purified men who are thoroughly honest.

Text 12
नैष्कर्म्यमप्यच्युतभाववर्जितं
न शोभते ज्ञानमलं निरञ्जनम् ।
कुत: पुन: शश्वदभद्रमीश्वरे
न चार्पितं कर्म यदप्यकारणम् ॥ १२ ॥
naiṣkarmyam apy acyuta-bhāva-varjitaṁ
na śobhate jñānam alaṁ nirañjanam
kutaḥ punaḥ śaśvad abhadram īśvare
na cārpitaṁ karma yad apy akāraṇam
Synonyms
naiṣkarmyam — self-realization, being freed from the reactions of fruitive work; api — in spite of; acyuta — the infallible Lord; bhāva — conception; varjitam — devoid of; na — does not; śobhate — look well; jñānam — transcendental knowledge; alam — by and by; nirañjanam — free from designations; kutaḥ — where is; punaḥ — again; śaśvat — always; abhadram — uncongenial; īśvare — unto the Lord; na — not; ca — and; arpitam — offered; karma — fruitive work; yat api — what is; akāraṇam — not fruitive.

Translation
Knowledge of self-realization, even though free from all material affinity, does not look well if devoid of a conception of the Infallible [God]. What, then, is the use of fruitive activities, which are naturally painful from the very beginning and transient by nature, if they are not utilized for the devotional service of the Lord?

Text 13
अथो महाभाग भवानमोघद‍ृक्
शुचिश्रवा: सत्यरतो धृतव्रत: ।
उरुक्रमस्याखिलबन्धमुक्तये
समाधिनानुस्मर तद्विचेष्टितम् ॥ १३ ॥
atho mahā-bhāga bhavān amogha-dṛk
śuci-śravāḥ satya-rato dhṛta-vrataḥ
urukramasyākhila-bandha-muktaye
samādhinānusmara tad-viceṣṭitam
Synonyms
atho — therefore; mahā-bhāga — highly fortunate; bhavān — yourself; amogha-dṛk — the perfect seer; śuci — spotless; śravāḥ — famous; satya-rataḥ — having taken the vow of truthfulness; dhṛta-vrataḥ — fixed in spiritual qualities; urukramasya — of the one who performs supernatural activities (God); akhila — universal; bandha — bondage; muktaye — for liberation from; samādhinā — by trance; anusmara — think repeatedly and then describe them; tat-viceṣṭitam — various pastimes of the Lord.

Translation
O Vyāsadeva, your vision is completely perfect. Your good fame is spotless. You are firm in vow and situated in truthfulness. And thus you can think of the pastimes of the Lord in trance for the liberation of the people in general from all material bondage.

Text 14
ततोऽन्यथा किञ्चन यद्विवक्षत:
पृथग्दृशस्तत्कृतरूपनामभि: ।
न कर्हिचित्क्वापि च दु:स्थिता मति-
र्लभेत वाताहतनौरिवास्पदम् ॥ १४ ॥
tato ’nyathā kiñcana yad vivakṣataḥ
pṛthag dṛśas tat-kṛta-rūpa-nāmabhiḥ
na karhicit kvāpi ca duḥsthitā matir
labheta vātāhata-naur ivāspadam
Synonyms
tataḥ — from that; anyathā — apart; kiñcana — something; yat — whatsoever; vivakṣataḥ — desiring to describe; pṛthak — separately; dṛśaḥ — vision; tat-kṛta — reactionary to that; rūpa — form; nāmabhiḥ — by names; na karhicit — never; kvāpi — any; ca — and; duḥsthitā matiḥ — oscillating mind; labheta — gains; vāta-āhata — troubled by the wind; nauḥ — boat; iva — like; āspadam — place.

Translation
Whatever you desire to describe that is separate in vision from the Lord simply reacts, with different forms, names and results, to agitate the mind, as the wind agitates a boat which has no resting place.

Text 15
जुगुप्सितं धर्मकृतेऽनुशासत:
स्वभावरक्तस्य महान् व्यतिक्रम: ।
यद्वाक्यतो धर्म इतीतर: स्थितो
न मन्यते तस्य निवारणं जन: ॥ १५ ॥
jugupsitaṁ dharma-kṛte ’nuśāsataḥ
svabhāva-raktasya mahān vyatikramaḥ
yad-vākyato dharma itītaraḥ sthito
na manyate tasya nivāraṇaṁ janaḥ
Synonyms
jugupsitam — verily condemned; dharma-kṛte — for the matter of religion; anuśāsataḥ — instruction; svabhāva-raktasya — naturally inclined; mahān — great; vyatikramaḥ — unreasonable; yat-vākyataḥ — under whose instruction; dharmaḥ — religion; iti — it is thus; itaraḥ — the people in general; sthitaḥ — fixed; na — do not; manyate — think; tasya — of that; nivāraṇam — prohibition; janaḥ — they.

Translation
The people in general are naturally inclined to enjoy, and you have encouraged them in that way in the name of religion. This is verily condemned and is quite unreasonable. Because they are guided under your instructions, they will accept such activities in the name of religion and will hardly care for prohibitions.

Text 16
विचक्षणोऽस्यार्हति वेदितुं विभो-
रनन्तपारस्य निवृत्तित: सुखम् ।
प्रवर्तमानस्य गुणैरनात्मन-
स्ततो भवान्दर्शय चेष्टितं विभो: ॥ १६ ॥
vicakṣaṇo ’syārhati vedituṁ vibhor
ananta-pārasya nivṛttitaḥ sukham
pravartamānasya guṇair anātmanas
tato bhavān darśaya ceṣṭitaṁ vibhoḥ
Synonyms
vicakṣaṇaḥ — very expert; asya — of him; arhati — deserves; veditum — to understand; vibhoḥ — of the Lord; ananta-pārasya — of the unlimited; nivṛttitaḥ — retired from; sukham — material happiness; pravartamānasya — those who are attached to; guṇaiḥ — by the material qualities; anātmanaḥ — devoid of knowledge in spiritual value; tataḥ — therefore; bhavān — Your Goodness; darśaya — show the ways; ceṣṭitam — activities; vibhoḥ — of the Lord.

Translation
The Supreme Lord is unlimited. Only a very expert personality, retired from the activities of material happiness, deserves to understand this knowledge of spiritual values. Therefore those who are not so well situated, due to material attachment, should be shown the ways of transcendental realization, by Your Goodness, through descriptions of the transcendental activities of the Supreme Lord.

Text 17
त्यक्त्वा स्वधर्मं चरणाम्बुजं हरे-
र्भजन्नपक्‍वोऽथ पतेत्ततो यदि ।
यत्र क्‍व वाभद्रमभूदमुष्य किं
को वार्थ आप्तोऽभजतां स्वधर्मत: ॥ १७ ॥
tyaktvā sva-dharmaṁ caraṇāmbujaṁ harer
bhajann apakvo ’tha patet tato yadi
yatra kva vābhadram abhūd amuṣya kiṁ
ko vārtha āpto ’bhajatāṁ sva-dharmataḥ
Synonyms
tyaktvā — having forsaken; sva-dharmam — one’s own occupational engagement; caraṇa-ambujam — the lotus feet; hareḥ — of Hari (the Lord); bhajan — in the course of devotional service; apakvaḥ — immature; atha — for the matter of; patet — falls down; tataḥ — from that place; yadi — if; yatra — whereupon; kva — what sort of; vā — or (used sarcastically); abhadram — unfavorable; abhūt — shall happen; amuṣya — of him; kim — nothing; kaḥ vā arthaḥ — what interest; āptaḥ — obtained; abhajatām — of the nondevotee; sva-dharmataḥ — being engaged in occupational service.

Translation
One who has forsaken his material occupations to engage in the devotional service of the Lord may sometimes fall down while in an immature stage, yet there is no danger of his being unsuccessful. On the other hand, a nondevotee, though fully engaged in occupational duties, does not gain anything.

Text 18
तस्यैव हेतो: प्रयतेत कोविदो
न लभ्यते यद्भ्रमतामुपर्यध: ।
तल्लभ्यते दु:खवदन्यत: सुखं
कालेन सर्वत्र गभीररंहसा ॥ १८ ॥
tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido
na labhyate yad bhramatām upary adhaḥ
tal labhyate duḥkhavad anyataḥ sukhaṁ
kālena sarvatra gabhīra-raṁhasā
Synonyms
tasya — for that purpose; eva — only; hetoḥ — reason; prayateta — should endeavor; kovidaḥ — one who is philosophically inclined; na labhyate — is not obtained; yat — what; bhramatām — wandering; upari adhaḥ — from top to bottom; tat — that; labhyate — can be obtained; duḥkhavat — like the miseries; anyataḥ — as a result of previous work; sukham — sense enjoyment; kālena — in course of time; sarvatra — everywhere; gabhīra — subtle; raṁhasā — progress.

Translation
Persons who are actually intelligent and philosophically inclined should endeavor only for that purposeful end which is not obtainable even by wandering from the topmost planet [Brahmaloka] down to the lowest planet [Pātāla]. As far as happiness derived from sense enjoyment is concerned, it can be obtained automatically in course of time, just as in course of time we obtain miseries even though we do not desire them.

Text 19
न वै जनो जातु कथञ्चनाव्रजे-
न्मुकुन्दसेव्यन्यवदङ्ग संसृतिम् ।
स्मरन्मुकुन्दाङ्‌घ्र्युरपगूहनं पुन-
र्विहातुमिच्छेन्न रसग्रहो जन: ॥ १९ ॥
na vai jano jātu kathañcanāvrajen
mukunda-sevy anyavad aṅga saṁsṛtim
smaran mukundāṅghry-upagūhanaṁ punar
vihātum icchen na rasa-graho janaḥ
Synonyms
na — never; vai — certainly; janaḥ — a person; jātu — at any time; kathañcana — somehow or other; āvrajet — does not undergo; mukunda-sevī — the devotee of the Lord; anyavat — like others; aṅga — O my dear; saṁsṛtim — material existence; smaran — remembering; mukunda-aṅghri — the lotus feet of the Lord; upagūhanam — embracing; punaḥ — again; vihātum — willing to give up; icchet — desire; na — never; rasa-grahaḥ — one who has relished the mellow; janaḥ — person.

Translation
My dear Vyāsa, even though a devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa sometimes falls down somehow or other, he certainly does not undergo material existence like others [fruitive workers, etc.] because a person who has once relished the taste of the lotus feet of the Lord can do nothing but remember that ecstasy again and again.

Text 20
इदं हि विश्वं भगवानिवेतरो
यतो जगत्स्थाननिरोधसम्भवा: ।
तद्धि स्वयं वेद भवांस्तथापि ते
प्रादेशमात्रं भवत: प्रदर्शितम् ॥ २० ॥
idaṁ hi viśvaṁ bhagavān ivetaro
yato jagat-sthāna-nirodha-sambhavāḥ
tad dhi svayaṁ veda bhavāṁs tathāpi te
prādeśa-mātraṁ bhavataḥ pradarśitam
Synonyms
idam — this; hi — all; viśvam — cosmos; bhagavān — the Supreme Lord; iva — almost the same; itaraḥ — different from; yataḥ — from whom; jagat — the worlds; sthāna — exist; nirodha — annihilation; sambhavāḥ — creation; tat hi — all about; svayam — personally; veda — know; bhavān — your good self; tathā api — still; te — unto you; prādeśa-mātram — a synopsis only; bhavataḥ — unto you; pradarśitam — explained.

Translation
The Supreme Lord Personality of Godhead is Himself this cosmos, and still He is aloof from it. From Him only has this cosmic manifestation emanated, in Him it rests, and unto Him it enters after annihilation. Your good self knows all about this. I have given only a synopsis.

Text 21
त्वमात्मनात्मानमवेह्यमोघद‍ृक्
परस्य पुंस: परमात्मन: कलाम् ।
अजं प्रजातं जगत: शिवाय त-
न्महानुभावाभ्युदयोऽधिगण्यताम् ॥ २१ ॥
tvam ātmanātmānam avehy amogha-dṛk
parasya puṁsaḥ paramātmanaḥ kalām
ajaṁ prajātaṁ jagataḥ śivāya tan
mahānubhāvābhyudayo ’dhigaṇyatām
Synonyms
tvam — yourself; ātmanā — by your own self; ātmānam — the Supersoul; avehi — search out; amogha-dṛk — one who has perfect vision; parasya — of the Transcendence; puṁsaḥ — the Personality of Godhead; paramātmanaḥ — of the Supreme Lord; kalām — plenary part; ajam — birthless; prajātam — have taken birth; jagataḥ — of the world; śivāya — for the well-being; tat — that; mahā-anubhāva — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa; abhyudayaḥ — pastimes; adhigaṇya-tām — describe most vividly.

Translation
Your Goodness has perfect vision. You yourself can know the Supersoul Personality of Godhead because you are present as the plenary portion of the Lord. Although you are birthless, you have appeared on this earth for the well-being of all people. Please, therefore, describe the transcendental pastimes of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa more vividly.

Text 22
इदं हि पुंसस्तपस: श्रुतस्य वा
स्विष्टस्य सूक्तस्य च बुद्धिदत्तयो: ।
अविच्युतोऽर्थ: कविभिर्निरूपितो
यदुत्तमश्लोकगुणानुवर्णनम् ॥ २२ ॥
idaṁ hi puṁsas tapasaḥ śrutasya vā
sviṣṭasya sūktasya ca buddhi-dattayoḥ
avicyuto ’rthaḥ kavibhir nirūpito
yad-uttamaśloka-guṇānuvarṇanam
Synonyms
idam — this; hi — certainly; puṁsaḥ — of everyone; tapasaḥ — by dint of austerities; śrutasya — by dint of study of the Vedas; vā — or; sviṣṭasya — sacrifice; sūktasya — spiritual education; ca — and; buddhi — culture of knowledge; dattayoḥ — charity; avicyutaḥ — infallible; arthaḥ — interest; kavibhiḥ — by the recognized learned person; nirūpitaḥ — concluded; yat — what; uttamaśloka — the Lord, who is described by choice poetry; guṇa-anuvarṇanam — description of the transcendental qualities of.

Translation
Learned circles have positively concluded that the infallible purpose of the advancement of knowledge, namely austerities, study of the Vedas, sacrifice, chanting of hymns and charity, culminates in the transcendental descriptions of the Lord, who is defined in choice poetry.

Text 23
अहं पुरातीतभवेऽभवं मुने
दास्यास्तु कस्याश्चन वेदवादिनाम् ।
निरूपितो बालक एव योगिनां
शुश्रूषणे प्रावृषि निर्विविक्षताम् ॥ २३ ॥
ahaṁ purātīta-bhave ’bhavaṁ mune
dāsyās tu kasyāścana veda-vādinām
nirūpito bālaka eva yogināṁ
śuśrūṣaṇe prāvṛṣi nirvivikṣatām
Synonyms
aham — I; purā — formerly; atīta-bhave — in the previous millennium; abhavam — became; mune — O muni; dāsyāḥ — of the maidservant; tu — but; kasyāścana — certain; veda-vādinām — of the followers of Vedānta; nirūpitaḥ — engaged; bālakaḥ — boy servant; eva — only; yoginām — of the devotees; śuśrūṣaṇe — in the service of; prāvṛṣi — during the four months of the rainy season; nirvivikṣatām — living together.

Translation
O Muni, in the last millennium I was born as the son of a certain maidservant engaged in the service of brāhmaṇas who were following the principles of Vedānta. When they were living together during the four months of the rainy season, I was engaged in their personal service.

Text 24
ते मय्यपेताखिलचापलेऽर्भके
दान्तेऽधृतक्रीडनकेऽनुवर्तिनि ।
चक्रु: कृपां यद्यपि तुल्यदर्शना:
शुश्रूषमाणे मुनयोऽल्पभाषिणि ॥ २४ ॥
te mayy apetākhila-cāpale ’rbhake
dānte ’dhṛta-krīḍanake ’nuvartini
cakruḥ kṛpāṁ yadyapi tulya-darśanāḥ
śuśrūṣamāṇe munayo ’lpa-bhāṣiṇi
Synonyms
te — they; mayi — unto me; apeta — not having undergone; akhila — all kinds of; cāpale — proclivities; arbhake — unto a boy; dānte — having controlled the senses; adhṛta-krīḍanake — without being accustomed to sporting habits; anuvartini — obedient; cakruḥ — did bestow; kṛpām — causeless mercy; yadyapi — although; tulya-darśanāḥ — impartial by nature; śuśrūṣamāṇe — unto the faithful; munayaḥ — the muni followers of the Vedānta; alpa-bhāṣiṇi — one who does not speak more than required.

Translation
Although they were impartial by nature, those followers of the Vedānta blessed me with their causeless mercy. As far as I was concerned, I was self-controlled and had no attachment for sports, even though I was a boy. In addition, I was not naughty, and I did not speak more than required.

Text 25
उच्छिष्टलेपाननुमोदितो द्विजै:
सकृत्स्म भुञ्जे तदपास्तकिल्बिष: ।
एवं प्रवृत्तस्य विशुद्धचेतस-
स्तद्धर्म एवात्मरुचि: प्रजायते ॥ २५ ॥
ucchiṣṭa-lepān anumodito dvijaiḥ
sakṛt sma bhuñje tad-apāsta-kilbiṣaḥ
evaṁ pravṛttasya viśuddha-cetasas
tad-dharma evātma-ruciḥ prajāyate
Synonyms
ucchiṣṭa-lepān — the remnants of foodstuff; anumoditaḥ — being permitted; dvijaiḥ — by the Vedāntist brāhmaṇas; sakṛt — once upon a time; sma — in the past; bhuñje — took; tat — by that action; apāsta — eliminated; kilbiṣaḥ — all sins; evam — thus; pravṛttasya — being engaged; viśuddha-cetasaḥ — of one whose mind is purified; tat — that particular; dharmaḥ — nature; eva — certainly; ātma-ruciḥ — transcendental attraction; prajāyate — was manifested.

Translation
Once only, by their permission, I took the remnants of their food, and by so doing all my sins were at once eradicated. Thus being engaged, I became purified in heart, and at that time the very nature of the transcendentalist became attractive to me.

Text 26
तत्रान्वहं कृष्णकथा: प्रगायता-
मनुग्रहेणाश‍ृणवं मनोहरा: ।
ता: श्रद्धया मेऽनुपदं विश‍ृण्वत:
प्रियश्रवस्यङ्ग ममाभवद्रुचि: ॥ २६ ॥
tatrānvahaṁ kṛṣṇa-kathāḥ pragāyatām
anugraheṇāśṛṇavaṁ manoharāḥ
tāḥ śraddhayā me ’nupadaṁ viśṛṇvataḥ
priyaśravasy aṅga mamābhavad ruciḥ
Synonyms
tatra — thereupon; anu — every day; aham — I; kṛṣṇa-kathāḥ — narration of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s activities; pragāyatām — describing; anugraheṇa — by causeless mercy; aśṛṇavam — giving aural reception; manaḥ-harāḥ — attractive; tāḥ — those; śraddhayā — respectfully; me — unto me; anupadam — every step; viśṛṇvataḥ — hearing attentively; priyaśravasi — of the Personality of Godhead; aṅga — O Vyāsadeva; mama — mine; abhavat — it so became; ruciḥ — taste.

Translation
O Vyāsadeva, in that association and by the mercy of those great Vedāntists, I could hear them describe the attractive activities of Lord Kṛṣṇa. And thus listening attentively, my taste for hearing of the Personality of Godhead increased at every step.

Text 27
तस्मिंस्तदा लब्धरुचेर्महामते
प्रियश्रवस्यस्खलिता मतिर्मम ।
ययाहमेतत्सदसत्स्वमायया
पश्ये मयि ब्रह्मणि कल्पितं परे ॥ २७ ॥
tasmiṁs tadā labdha-rucer mahā-mate
priyaśravasy askhalitā matir mama
yayāham etat sad-asat sva-māyayā
paśye mayi brahmaṇi kalpitaṁ pare
Synonyms
tasmin — it being so; tadā — at that time; labdha — achieved; ruceḥ — taste; mahā-mate — O great sage; priyaśravasi — upon the Lord; askhalitā matiḥ — uninterrupted attention; mama — mine; yayā — by which; aham — I; etat — all these; sat-asat — gross and subtle; sva-māyayā — one’s own ignorance; paśye — see; mayi — in me; brahmaṇi — the Supreme; kalpitam — is accepted; pare — in the Transcendence.

Translation
O great sage, as soon as I got a taste of the Personality of Godhead, my attention to hear of the Lord was unflinching. And as my taste developed, I could realize that it was only in my ignorance that I had accepted gross and subtle coverings, for both the Lord and I are transcendental.

Text 28
इत्थं शरत्प्रावृषिकावृतू हरे-
र्विश‍ृण्वतो मेऽनुसवं यशोऽमलम् ।
सङ्कीर्त्यमानं मुनिभिर्महात्मभि-
र्भक्ति: प्रवृत्तात्मरजस्तमोपहा ॥ २८ ॥
itthaṁ śarat-prāvṛṣikāv ṛtū harer
viśṛṇvato me ’nusavaṁ yaśo ’malam
saṅkīrtyamānaṁ munibhir mahātmabhir
bhaktiḥ pravṛttātma-rajas-tamopahā
Synonyms
ittham — thus; śarat — autumn; prāvṛṣikau — rainy season; ṛtū — two seasons; hareḥ — of the Lord; viśṛṇvataḥ — continuously hearing; me — myself; anusavam — constantly; yaśaḥ amalam — unadulterated glories; saṅkīrtyamānam — chanted by; munibhiḥ — the great sages; mahā-ātmabhiḥ — great souls; bhaktiḥ — devotional service; pravṛttā — began to flow; ātma — living being; rajaḥ — mode of passion; tama — mode of ignorance; upahā — vanishing.

Translation
Thus during two seasons — the rainy season and autumn — I had the opportunity to hear these great-souled sages constantly chant the unadulterated glories of the Lord Hari. As the flow of my devotional service began, the coverings of the modes of passion and ignorance vanished.

Text 29
तस्यैवं मेऽनुरक्तस्य प्रश्रितस्य हतैनस: ।
श्रद्दधानस्य बालस्य दान्तस्यानुचरस्य च ॥ २९ ॥
tasyaivaṁ me ’nuraktasya
praśritasya hatainasaḥ
śraddadhānasya bālasya
dāntasyānucarasya ca
Synonyms
tasya — his; evam — thus; me — mine; anuraktasya — attached to them; praśritasya — obediently; hata — freed from; enasaḥ — sins; śraddadhānasya — of the faithful; bālasya — of the boy; dāntasya — subjugated; anucarasya — strictly following the instructions; ca — and.

Translation
I was very much attached to those sages. I was gentle in behavior, and all my sins were eradicated in their service. In my heart I had strong faith in them. I had subjugated the senses, and I was strictly following them with body and mind.

Text 30
ज्ञानं गुह्यतमं यत्तत्साक्षाद्भ‍गवतोदितम् । अन्ववोचन् गमिष्यन्त: कृपया दीनवत्सला: ॥ ३० ॥
jñānaṁ guhyatamaṁ yat tat
sākṣād bhagavatoditam
anvavocan gamiṣyantaḥ
kṛpayā dīna-vatsalāḥ
Synonyms
jñānam — knowledge; guhyatamam — most confidential; yat — what is; tat — that; sākṣāt — directly; bhagavatā uditam — propounded by the Lord Himself; anvavocan — gave instruction; gamiṣyantaḥ — while departing from; kṛpayā — by causeless mercy; dīna-vatsalāḥ — those who are very kind to the poor and meek.

Translation
As they were leaving, those bhakti-vedāntas, who are very kind to poor-hearted souls, instructed me in that most confidential subject which is instructed by the Personality of Godhead Himself.

Text 31
येनैवाहं भगवतो वासुदेवस्य वेधस: । मायानुभावमविदं येन गच्छन्ति तत्पदम् ॥ ३१ ॥
yenaivāhaṁ bhagavato
vāsudevasya vedhasaḥ
māyānubhāvam avidaṁ
yena gacchanti tat-padam
Synonyms
yena — by which; eva — certainly; aham — I; bhagavataḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; vāsudevasya — of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; vedhasaḥ — of the supreme creator; māyā — energy; anubhāvam — influence; avidam — easily understood; yena — by which; gacchanti — they go; tat-padam — at the lotus feet of the Lord.

Translation
By that confidential knowledge, I could understand clearly the influence of the energy of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the creator, maintainer and annihilator of everything. By knowing that, one can return to Him and personally meet Him.

Text 32
एतत्संसूचितं ब्रह्मंस्तापत्रयचिकित्सितम् ।
यदीश्वरे भगवति कर्म ब्रह्मणि भावितम् ॥ ३२ ॥
etat saṁsūcitaṁ brahmaṁs
tāpa-traya-cikitsitam
yad īśvare bhagavati
karma brahmaṇi bhāvitam
Synonyms
etat — this much; saṁsūcitam — decided by the learned; brahman — O brāhmaṇa Vyāsa; tāpa-traya — three kinds of miseries; cikitsitam — remedial measures; yat — what; īśvare — the supreme controller; bhagavati — unto the Personality of Godhead; karma — one’s prescribed activities; brahmaṇi — unto the great; bhāvitam — dedicated.

Translation
O Brāhmaṇa Vyāsadeva, it is decided by the learned that the best remedial measure for removing all troubles and miseries is to dedicate one’s activities to the service of the Supreme Lord Personality of Godhead [Śrī Kṛṣṇa].

Text 33
आमयो यश्च भूतानां जायते येन सुव्रत ।
तदेव ह्यामयं द्रव्यं न पुनाति चिकित्सितम् ॥ ३३ ॥
āmayo yaś ca bhūtānāṁ
jāyate yena suvrata
tad eva hy āmayaṁ dravyaṁ
na punāti cikitsitam
Synonyms
āmayaḥ — diseases; yaḥ ca — whatever; bhūtānām — of the living being; jāyate — become possible; yena — by the agency; suvrata — O good soul; tat — that; eva — very; hi — certainly; āmayam — disease; dravyam — thing; na — does it not; punāti — cure; cikitsitam — treated with.

Translation
O good soul, does not a thing, applied therapeutically, cure a disease which was caused by that very same thing?

Text 34
एवं नृणां क्रियायोगा: सर्वे संसृतिहेतव: ।
त एवात्मविनाशाय कल्पन्ते कल्पिता: परे ॥ ३४ ॥
evaṁ nṛṇāṁ kriyā-yogāḥ
sarve saṁsṛti-hetavaḥ
ta evātma-vināśāya
kalpante kalpitāḥ pare
Synonyms
evam — thus; nṛṇām — of the human being; kriyā-yogāḥ — all activities; sarve — everything; saṁsṛti — material existence; hetavaḥ — causes; te — that; eva — certainly; ātma — the tree of work; vināśāya — killing; kalpante — become competent; kalpitāḥ — dedicated; pare — unto the Transcendence.

Translation
Thus when all a man’s activities are dedicated to the service of the Lord, those very activities which caused his perpetual bondage become the destroyer of the tree of work.

Text 35
यदत्र क्रियते कर्म भगवत्परितोषणम् ।
ज्ञानं यत्तदधीनं हि भक्तियोगसमन्वितम् ॥ ३५ ॥
yad atra kriyate karma
bhagavat-paritoṣaṇam
jñānaṁ yat tad adhīnaṁ hi
bhakti-yoga-samanvitam
Synonyms
yat — whatever; atra — in this life or world; kriyate — does perform; karma — work; bhagavat — unto the Personality of Godhead; paritoṣaṇam — satisfaction of; jñānam — knowledge; yat tat — what is so called; adhīnam — dependent; hi — certainly; bhakti-yoga — devotional; samanvitam — dovetailed with bhakti-yoga.

Translation
Whatever work is done here in this life for the satisfaction of the mission of the Lord is called bhakti-yoga, or transcendental loving service to the Lord, and what is called knowledge becomes a concomitant factor.

Text 36
कुर्वाणा यत्र कर्माणि भगवच्छिक्षयासकृत् ।
गृणन्ति गुणनामानि कृष्णस्यानुस्मरन्ति च ॥ ३६ ॥
kurvāṇā yatra karmāṇi
bhagavac-chikṣayāsakṛt
gṛṇanti guṇa-nāmāni
kṛṣṇasyānusmaranti ca
Synonyms
kurvāṇāḥ — while performing; yatra — thereupon; karmāṇi — duties; bhagavat — the Personality of Godhead; śikṣayā — by the will of; asakṛt — constantly; gṛṇanti — takes on; guṇa — qualities; nāmāni — names; kṛṣṇasya — of Kṛṣṇa; anusmaranti — constantly remembers; ca — and.

Translation
While performing duties according to the order of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, one constantly remembers Him, His names and His qualities.

Text 37
ॐ नमो भगवते तुभ्यं वासुदेवाय धीमहि ।
प्रद्युम्नायानिरुद्धाय नम: सङ्कर्षणाय च ॥ ३७ ॥
oṁ namo bhagavate tubhyaṁ
vāsudevāya dhīmahi
pradyumnāyāniruddhāya
namaḥ saṅkarṣaṇāya ca
Synonyms
oṁ — the sign of chanting the transcendental glory of the Lord; namaḥ — offering obeisances unto the Lord; bhagavate — unto the Personality of Godhead; tubhyam — unto You; vāsudevāya — unto the Lord, the son of Vasudeva; dhīmahi — let us chant; pradyumnāya, aniruddhāya and saṅkarṣaṇāya — all plenary expansions of Vāsudeva; namaḥ — respectful obeisances; ca — and.

Translation
Let us all chant the glories of Vāsudeva along with His plenary expansions Pradyumna, Aniruddha and Saṅkarṣaṇa.

Text 38
इति मूर्त्यभिधानेन मन्त्रमूर्तिममूर्तिकम् ।
यजते यज्ञपुरुषं स सम्यग्दर्शन: पुमान् ॥ ३८ ॥
iti mūrty-abhidhānena
mantra-mūrtim amūrtikam
yajate yajña-puruṣaṁ
sa samyag-darśanaḥ pumān
Synonyms
iti — thus; mūrti — representation; abhidhānena — in sound; mantra-mūrtim — form representation of transcendental sound; amūrtikam — the Lord, who has no material form; yajate — worship; yajña — Viṣṇu; puruṣam — the Personality of Godhead; saḥ — he alone; samyak — perfectly; darśanaḥ — one who has seen; pumān — person.

Translation
Thus he is the actual seer who worships, in the form of transcendental sound representation, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, who has no material form.

Text 39
इमं स्वनिगमं ब्रह्मन्नवेत्य मदनुष्ठितम् ।
अदान्मे ज्ञानमैश्वर्यं स्वस्मिन् भावं च केशव: ॥ ३९ ॥
imaṁ sva-nigamaṁ brahmann
avetya mad-anuṣṭhitam
adān me jñānam aiśvaryaṁ
svasmin bhāvaṁ ca keśavaḥ
Synonyms
imam — thus; sva-nigamam — confidential knowledge of the Vedas in respect to the Supreme Personality of Godhead; brahman — O brāhmaṇa (Vyāsadeva); avetya — knowing it well; mat — by me; anuṣṭhitam — executed; adāt — bestowed upon me; me — me; jñānam — transcendental knowledge; aiśvaryam — opulence; svasmin — personal; bhāvam — intimate affection and love; ca — and; keśavaḥ — Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Translation
O brāhmaṇa, thus by the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa I was endowed first with the transcendental knowledge of the Lord as inculcated in the confidential parts of the Vedas, then with the spiritual opulences, and then with His intimate loving service.

Text 40
त्वमप्यदभ्रश्रुत विश्रुतं विभो:
समाप्यते येन विदां बुभुत्सितम् ।
प्राख्याहि दु:खैर्मुहुरर्दितात्मनां
सङ्‍क्लेशनिर्वाणमुशन्ति नान्यथा ॥ ४० ॥
tvam apy adabhra-śruta viśrutaṁ vibhoḥ
samāpyate yena vidāṁ bubhutsitam
prākhyāhi duḥkhair muhur arditātmanāṁ
saṅkleśa-nirvāṇam uśanti nānyathā
Synonyms
tvam — your good soul; api — also; adabhra — vast; śruta — Vedic literatures; viśrutam — have heard also; vibhoḥ — of the Almighty; samāpyate — satisfied; yena — by which; vidām — of the learned; bubhutsitam — who always desire to learn transcendental knowledge; prākhyāhi — describe; duḥkhaiḥ — by miseries; muhuḥ — always; ardita-ātmanām — suffering mass of people; saṅkleśa — sufferings; nirvāṇam — mitigation; uśanti na — do not get out of; anyathā — by other means.

Translation
Please, therefore, describe the almighty Lord’s activities which you have learned by your vast knowledge of the Vedas, for that will satisfy the hankerings of great learned men and at the same time mitigate the miseries of the masses of common people who are always suffering from material pangs. Indeed, there is no other way to get out of such miseries.