Text 1
शौनक उवाच
निर्गते नारदे सूत भगवान् बादरायण: ।
श्रुतवांस्तदभिप्रेतं तत: किमकरोद्विभु: ॥ १ ॥
śaunaka uvāca
nirgate nārade sūta
bhagavān bādarāyaṇaḥ
śrutavāṁs tad-abhipretaṁ
tataḥ kim akarod vibhuḥ
Synonyms
śaunakaḥ — Śrī Śaunaka; uvāca — said; nirgate — having gone; nārade — Nārada Muni; sūta — O Sūta; bhagavān — the transcendentally powerful; bādarāyaṇaḥ — Vedavyāsa; śrutavān — who heard; tat — his; abhipretam — desire of the mind; tataḥ — thereafter; kim — what; akarot — did he do; vibhuḥ — the great.

Translation
Ṛṣi Śaunaka asked: O Sūta, the great and transcendentally powerful Vyāsadeva heard everything from Śrī Nārada Muni. So after Nārada’s departure, what did Vyāsadeva do?

Text 2
सूत उवाच
ब्रह्मनद्यां सरस्वत्यामाश्रम: पश्चिमे तटे ।
शम्याप्रास इति प्रोक्त ऋषीणां सत्रवर्धन: ॥ २ ॥
sūta uvāca
brahma-nadyāṁ sarasvatyām
āśramaḥ paścime taṭe
śamyāprāsa iti prokta
ṛṣīṇāṁ satra-vardhanaḥ
Synonyms
sūtaḥ — Śrī Sūta; uvāca — said; brahma-nadyām — on the bank of the river intimately related with Vedas, brāhmaṇas, saints, and the Lord; sarasvatyām — Sarasvatī; āśramaḥ — cottage for meditation; paścime — on the west; taṭe — bank; śamyāprāsaḥ — the place named Śamyāprāsa; iti — thus; proktaḥ — said to be; ṛṣīṇām — of the sages; satra-vardhanaḥ — that which enlivens activities.

Translation
Śrī Sūta said: On the western bank of the river Sarasvatī, which is intimately related with the Vedas, there is a cottage for meditation at Śamyāprāsa which enlivens the transcendental activities of the sages.

Text 3
तस्मिन् स्व आश्रमे व्यासो बदरीषण्डमण्डिते ।
आसीनोऽप उपस्पृश्य प्रणिदध्यौ मन: स्वयम् ॥ ३ ॥
tasmin sva āśrame vyāso
badarī-ṣaṇḍa-maṇḍite
āsīno ’pa upaspṛśya
praṇidadhyau manaḥ svayam
Synonyms
tasmin — in that (āśrama); sve — own; āśrame — in the cottage; vyāsaḥ — Vyāsadeva; badarī — berry; ṣaṇḍa — trees; maṇḍite — surrounded by; āsīnaḥ — sitting; apaḥ upaspṛśya — touching water; praṇidadhyau — concentrated; manaḥ — the mind; svayam — himself.

Translation
In that place, Śrīla Vyāsadeva, in his own āśrama, which was surrounded by berry trees, sat down to meditate after touching water for purification.

Text 4
भक्तियोगेन मनसि सम्यक् प्रणिहितेऽमले ।
अपश्यत्पुरुषं पूर्णं मायां च तदपाश्रयम् ॥ ४ ॥
bhakti-yogena manasi
samyak praṇihite ’male
apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇaṁ
māyāṁ ca tad-apāśrayām
Synonyms
bhakti — devotional service; yogena — by the process of linking up; manasi — upon the mind; samyak — perfectly; praṇihite — engaged in and fixed upon; amale — without any matter; apaśyat — saw; puruṣam — the Personality of Godhead; pūrṇam — absolute; māyām — energy; ca — also; tat — His; apāśrayam — under full control.

Translation
Thus he fixed his mind, perfectly engaging it by linking it in devotional service [bhakti-yoga] without any tinge of materialism, and thus he saw the Absolute Personality of Godhead along with His external energy, which was under full control.

Text 5
यया सम्मोहितो जीव आत्मानं त्रिगुणात्मकम् ।
परोऽपि मनुतेऽनर्थं तत्कृतं चाभिपद्यते ॥ ५ ॥
yayā sammohito jīva
ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam
paro ’pi manute ’narthaṁ
tat-kṛtaṁ cābhipadyate
Synonyms
yayā — by whom; sammohitaḥ — illusioned; jīvaḥ — the living entities; ātmānam — self; tri-guṇa-ātmakam — conditioned by the three modes of nature, or a product of matter; paraḥ — transcendental; api — in spite of; manute — takes it for granted; anartham — things not wanted; tat — by that; kṛtam ca — reaction; abhipadyate — undergoes thereof.

Translation
Due to this external energy, the living entity, although transcendental to the three modes of material nature, thinks of himself as a material product and thus undergoes the reactions of material miseries.

Text 6
अनर्थोपशमं साक्षाद्भक्तियोगमधोक्षजे ।
लोकस्याजानतो विद्वांश्चक्रे सात्वतसंहिताम् ॥ ६ ॥
anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād
bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje
lokasyājānato vidvāṁś
cakre sātvata-saṁhitām
Synonyms
anartha — things which are superfluous; upaśamam — mitigation; sākṣāt — directly; bhakti-yogam — the linking process of devotional service; adhokṣaje — unto the Transcendence; lokasya — of the general mass of men; ajānataḥ — those who are unaware of; vidvān — the supremely learned; cakre — compiled; sātvata — in relation with the Supreme Truth; saṁhitām — Vedic literature.

Translation
The material miseries of the living entity, which are superfluous to him, can be directly mitigated by the linking process of devotional service. But the mass of people do not know this, and therefore the learned Vyāsadeva compiled this Vedic literature, which is in relation to the Supreme Truth.

Text 7
यस्यां वै श्रूयमाणायां कृष्णे परमपूरुषे ।
भक्तिरुत्पद्यते पुंस: शोकमोहभयापहा ॥ ७ ॥
yasyāṁ vai śrūyamāṇāyāṁ
kṛṣṇe parama-pūruṣe
bhaktir utpadyate puṁsaḥ
śoka-moha-bhayāpahā
Synonyms
yasyām — this Vedic literature; vai — certainly; śrūyamāṇāyām — simply by giving aural reception; kṛṣṇe — unto Lord Kṛṣṇa; parama — supreme; pūruṣe — unto the Personality of Godhead; bhaktiḥ — feelings of devotional service; utpadyate — sprout up; puṁsaḥ — of the living being; śoka — lamentation; moha — illusion; bhaya — fearfulness; apahā — that which extinguishes.

Translation
Simply by giving aural reception to this Vedic literature, the feeling for loving devotional service to Lord Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, sprouts up at once to extinguish the fire of lamentation, illusion and fearfulness.

Text 8
स संहितां भागवतीं कृत्वानुक्रम्य चात्मजम् ।
शुकमध्यापयामास निवृत्तिनिरतं मुनि: ॥ ८ ॥
sa saṁhitāṁ bhāgavatīṁ
kṛtvānukramya cātma-jam
śukam adhyāpayām āsa
nivṛtti-nirataṁ muniḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — that; saṁhitām — Vedic literature; bhāgavatīm — in relation with the Personality of Godhead; kṛtvā — having done; anukramya — by correction and repetition; ca — and; ātma-jam — his own son; śukam — Śukadeva Gosvāmī; adhyāpayām āsa — taught; nivṛtti — path of self-realization; niratam — engaged; muniḥ — the sage.

Translation
The great sage Vyāsadeva, after compiling the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and revising it, taught it to his own son, Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī, who was already engaged in self-realization.

Text 9
शौनक उवाच
स वै निवृत्तिनिरत: सर्वत्रोपेक्षको मुनि: ।
कस्य वा बृहतीमेतामात्माराम: समभ्यसत् ॥ ९ ॥
śaunaka uvāca
sa vai nivṛtti-nirataḥ
sarvatropekṣako muniḥ
kasya vā bṛhatīm etām
ātmārāmaḥ samabhyasat
Synonyms
śaunakaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śaunaka asked; saḥ — he; vai — of course; nivṛtti — on the path of self-realization; nirataḥ — always engaged; sarvatra — in every respect; upekṣakaḥ — indifferent; muniḥ — sage; kasya — for what reason; vā — or; bṛhatīm — vast; etām — this; ātma-ārāmaḥ — one who is pleased in himself; samabhyasat — undergo the studies.

Translation
Śrī Śaunaka asked Sūta Gosvāmī: Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī was already on the path of self-realization, and thus he was pleased with his own self. So why did he take the trouble to undergo the study of such a vast literature?

Text 10
सूत उवाच
आत्मारामाश्च मुनयो निर्ग्रन्था अप्युरुक्रमे ।
कुर्वन्त्यहैतुकीं भक्तिमित्थम्भूतगुणो हरि: ॥ १० ॥
sūta uvāca
ātmārāmāś ca munayo
nirgranthā apy urukrame
kurvanty ahaitukīṁ bhaktim
ittham-bhūta-guṇo hariḥ
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Sūta Gosvāmī said; ātmārāmāḥ — those who take pleasure in the ātmā (generally, spirit self); ca — also; munayaḥ — sages; nirgranthāḥ — freed from all bondage; api — in spite of; urukrame — unto the great adventurer; kurvanti — do; ahaitukīm — unalloyed; bhaktim — devotional service; ittham-bhūta — such wonderful; guṇaḥ — qualities; hariḥ — of the Lord.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī said: All different varieties of ātmārāmas [those who take pleasure in the ātmā, or spirit self], especially those established on the path of self-realization, though freed from all kinds of material bondage, desire to render unalloyed devotional service unto the Personality of Godhead. This means that the Lord possesses transcendental qualities and therefore can attract everyone, including liberated souls.

Text 11
हरेर्गुणाक्षिप्तमतिर्भगवान् बादरायणि: ।
अध्यगान्महदाख्यानं नित्यं विष्णुजनप्रिय: ॥ ११ ॥
harer guṇākṣipta-matir
bhagavān bādarāyaṇiḥ
adhyagān mahad ākhyānaṁ
nityaṁ viṣṇu-jana-priyaḥ
Synonyms
hareḥ — of Hari, the Personality of Godhead; guṇa — transcendental attributes; ākṣipta — being absorbed in; matiḥ — mind; bhagavān — powerful; bādarāyaṇiḥ — the son of Vyāsadeva; adhyagāt — underwent studies; mahat — great; ākhyānam — narration; nityam — regularly; viṣṇu-jana — devotees of the Lord; priyaḥ — beloved.

Translation
Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī, son of Śrīla Vyāsadeva, was not only transcendentally powerful. He was also very dear to the devotees of the Lord. Thus he underwent the study of this great narration [Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam].

Text 12
परीक्षितोऽथ राजर्षेर्जन्मकर्मविलापनम् ।
संस्थां च पाण्डुपुत्राणां वक्ष्ये कृष्णकथोदयम् ॥ १२ ॥
parīkṣito ’tha rājarṣer
janma-karma-vilāpanam
saṁsthāṁ ca pāṇḍu-putrāṇāṁ
vakṣye kṛṣṇa-kathodayam
Synonyms
parīkṣitaḥ — of King Parīkṣit; atha — thus; rājarṣeḥ — of the King who was the ṛṣi among the kings; janma — birth; karma — activities; vilāpanam — deliverance; saṁsthām — renunciation of the world; ca — and; pāṇḍu-putrāṇām — of the sons of Pāṇḍu; vakṣye — I shall speak; kṛṣṇa-kathā-udayam — that which gives rise to the transcendental narration of Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī thus addressed the ṛṣis headed by Śaunaka: Now I shall begin the transcendental narration of the Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa and topics of the birth, activities and deliverance of King Parīkṣit, the sage amongst kings, as well as topics of the renunciation of the worldly order by the sons of Pāṇḍu.

Texts 13-14
यदा मृधे कौरवसृञ्जयानां
वीरेष्वथो वीरगतिं गतेषु ।
वृकोदराविद्धगदाभिमर्श-
भग्नोरुदण्डे धृतराष्ट्रपुत्रे ॥ १३ ॥
भर्तु: प्रियं द्रौणिरिति स्म पश्यन्
कृष्णासुतानां स्वपतां शिरांसि ।
उपाहरद्विप्रियमेव तस्य
जुगुप्सितं कर्म विगर्हयन्ति ॥ १४ ॥
yadā mṛdhe kaurava-sṛñjayānāṁ
vīreṣv atho vīra-gatiṁ gateṣu
vṛkodarāviddha-gadābhimarśa-
bhagnoru-daṇḍe dhṛtarāṣṭra-putre
bhartuḥ priyaṁ drauṇir iti sma paśyan
kṛṣṇā-sutānāṁ svapatāṁ śirāṁsi
upāharad vipriyam eva tasya
jugupsitaṁ karma vigarhayanti
Synonyms
yadā — when; mṛdhe — in the battlefield; kaurava — the party of Dhṛtarāṣṭra; sṛñjayānām — of the party of the Pāṇḍavas; vīreṣu — of the warriors; atho — thus; vīra-gatim — the destination deserved by the warriors; gateṣu — being obtained; vṛkodara — Bhīma (the second Pāṇḍava); āviddha — beaten; gadā — by the club; abhimarśa — lamenting; bhagna — broken; uru-daṇḍe — spinal cord; dhṛtarāṣṭra-putre — the son of King Dhṛtarāṣṭra; bhartuḥ — of the master; priyam — pleasing; drauṇiḥ — the son of Droṇācārya; iti — thus; sma — shall be; paśyan — seeing; kṛṣṇā — Draupadī; sutānām — of the sons; svapatām — while sleeping; śirāṁsi — heads; upāharat — delivered as a prize; vipriyam — unpleasing; eva — like; tasya — his; jugupsitam — most heinous; karma — act; vigarhayanti — disapproving.

Translation
When the respective warriors of both camps, namely the Kauravas and the Pāṇḍavas, were killed on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra and the dead warriors obtained their deserved destinations, and when the son of Dhṛtarāṣṭra fell down lamenting, his spine broken, being beaten by the club of Bhīmasena, the son of Droṇācārya [Aśvatthāmā] beheaded the five sleeping sons of Draupadī and delivered the heads as a prize to his master, foolishly thinking that he would be pleased. Duryodhana, however, disapproved of the heinous act, and he was not pleased in the least.

Text 15
माता शिशूनां निधनं सुतानां
निशम्य घोरं परितप्यमाना ।
तदारुदद्वाष्पकलाकुलाक्षी
तां सान्‍त्वयन्नाह किरीटमाली ॥ १५ ॥
mātā śiśūnāṁ nidhanaṁ sutānāṁ
niśamya ghoraṁ paritapyamānā
tadārudad vāṣpa-kalākulākṣī
tāṁ sāntvayann āha kirīṭamālī
Synonyms
mātā — the mother; śiśūnām — of the children; nidhanam — massacre; sutānām — of the sons; niśamya — after hearing; ghoram — ghastly; paritapyamānā — lamenting; tadā — at that time; arudat — began to cry; vāṣpa-kala-ākula-akṣī — with tears in the eyes; tām — her; sāntvayan — pacifying; āha — said; kirīṭamālī — Arjuna.

Translation
Draupadī, the mother of the five children of the Pāṇḍavas, after hearing of the massacre of her sons, began to cry in distress with eyes full of tears. Trying to pacify her in her great loss, Arjuna spoke to her thus:

Text 16
तदा शुचस्ते प्रमृजामि भद्रे
यद्ब्रह्मबन्धो: शिर आततायिन: ।
गाण्डीवमुक्तैर्विशिखैरुपाहरे
त्वाक्रम्य यत्‍स्‍नास्यसि दग्धपुत्रा ॥ १६ ॥
tadā śucas te pramṛjāmi bhadre
yad brahma-bandhoḥ śira ātatāyinaḥ
gāṇḍīva-muktair viśikhair upāhare
tvākramya yat snāsyasi dagdha-putrā
Synonyms
tadā — at that time only; śucaḥ — tears in grief; te — your; pramṛjāmi — shall wipe away; bhadre — O gentle lady; yat — when; brahma-bandhoḥ — of a degraded brāhmaṇa; śiraḥ — head; ātatāyinaḥ — of the aggressor; gāṇḍīva-muktaiḥ — shot by the bow named Gāṇḍīva; viśikhaiḥ — by the arrows; upāhare — shall present to you; tvā — yourself; ākramya — riding on it; yat — which; snāsyasi — take your bath; dagdha-putrā — after burning the sons.

Translation
O gentle lady, when I present you with the head of that brāhmaṇa, after beheading him with arrows from my Gāṇḍīva bow, I shall then wipe the tears from your eyes and pacify you. Then, after burning your sons’ bodies, you can take your bath standing on his head.

Text 17
इति प्रियां वल्गुविचित्रजल्पै:
स सान्‍त्वयित्वाच्युतमित्रसूत: ।
अन्वाद्रवद्दंशित उग्रधन्वा
कपिध्वजो गुरुपुत्रं रथेन ॥ १७ ॥
iti priyāṁ valgu-vicitra-jalpaiḥ
sa sāntvayitvācyuta-mitra-sūtaḥ
anvādravad daṁśita ugra-dhanvā
kapi-dhvajo guru-putraṁ rathena
Synonyms
iti — thus; priyām — unto the dear; valgu — sweet; vicitra — variegated; jalpaiḥ — by statements; saḥ — he; sāntvayitvā — satisfying; acyuta-mitra-sūtaḥ — Arjuna, who is guided by the infallible Lord as a friend and driver; anvādravat — followed; daṁśitaḥ — being protected by kavaca; ugra-dhanvā — equipped with furious weapons; kapi-dhvajaḥ — Arjuna; guru-putram — the son of the martial teacher; rathena — getting on the chariot.

Translation
Arjuna, who is guided by the infallible Lord as friend and driver, thus satisfied the dear lady by such statements. Then he dressed in armor and armed himself with furious weapons, and getting into his chariot, he set out to follow Aśvatthāmā, the son of his martial teacher.

Text 18
तमापतन्तं स विलक्ष्य दूरात्
कुमारहोद्विग्नमना रथेन ।
पराद्रवत्प्राणपरीप्सुरुर्व्यां
यावद्गमं रुद्रभयाद्यथा क: ॥ १८ ॥
tam āpatantaṁ sa vilakṣya dūrāt
kumāra-hodvigna-manā rathena
parādravat prāṇa-parīpsur urvyāṁ
yāvad-gamaṁ rudra-bhayād yathā kaḥ
Synonyms
tam — him; āpatantam — coming over furiously; saḥ — he; vilakṣya — seeing; dūrāt — from a distance; kumāra-hā — the murderer of the princes; udvigna-manāḥ — disturbed in mind; rathena — on the chariot; parādravat — fled; prāṇa — life; parīpsuḥ — for protecting; urvyām — with great speed; yāvat-gamam — as he fled; rudra-bhayāt — by fear of Śiva; yathā — as; kaḥ — Brahmā (or arkaḥ – Sūrya).

Translation
Aśvatthāmā, the murderer of the princes, seeing from a great distance Arjuna coming at him with great speed, fled in his chariot, panic stricken, just to save his life, as Brahmā fled in fear from Śiva.

Text 19
यदाशरणमात्मानमैक्षत श्रान्तवाजिनम् ।
अस्त्रं ब्रह्मशिरो मेने आत्मत्राणं द्विजात्मज: ॥ १९ ॥
yadāśaraṇam ātmānam
aikṣata śrānta-vājinam
astraṁ brahma-śiro mene
ātma-trāṇaṁ dvijātmajaḥ
Synonyms
yadā — when; aśaraṇam — without being alternatively protected; ātmānam — his own self; aikṣata — saw; śrānta-vājinam — the horses being tired; astram — weapon; brahma-śiraḥ — the topmost or ultimate (nuclear); mene — applied; ātma-trāṇam — just to save himself; dvija-ātma-jaḥ — the son of a brāhmaṇa.

Translation
When the son of the brāhmaṇa [Aśvatthāmā] saw that his horses were tired, he considered that there was no alternative for protection outside of his using the ultimate weapon, the brahmāstra [nuclear weapon].

Text 20
अथोपस्पृश्य सलिलं सन्दधे तत्समाहित: ।
अजानन्नपि संहारं प्राणकृच्छ्र उपस्थिते ॥ २० ॥
athopaspṛśya salilaṁ
sandadhe tat samāhitaḥ
ajānann api saṁhāraṁ
prāṇa-kṛcchra upasthite
Synonyms
atha — thus; upaspṛśya — touching in sanctity; salilam — water; sandadhe — chanted the hymns; tat — that; samāhitaḥ — being in concentration; ajānan — without knowing; api — although; saṁhāram — withdrawal; prāṇa-kṛcchre — life being put in danger; upasthite — being placed in such a position.

Translation
Since his life was in danger, he touched water in sanctity and concentrated upon the chanting of the hymns for throwing nuclear weapons, although he did not know how to withdraw such weapons.

Text 21
तत: प्रादुष्कृतं तेज: प्रचण्डं सर्वतोदिशम् ।
प्राणापदमभिप्रेक्ष्य विष्णुं जिष्णुरुवाच ह ॥ २१ ॥
tataḥ prāduṣkṛtaṁ tejaḥ
pracaṇḍaṁ sarvato diśam
prāṇāpadam abhiprekṣya
viṣṇuṁ jiṣṇur uvāca ha
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereafter; prāduṣkṛtam — disseminated; tejaḥ — glare; pracaṇḍam — fierce; sarvataḥ — all around; diśam — directions; prāṇa-āpadam — affecting life; abhiprekṣya — having observed it; viṣṇum — unto the Lord; jiṣṇuḥ — Arjuna; uvāca — said; ha — in the past.

Translation
Thereupon a glaring light spread in all directions. It was so fierce that Arjuna thought his own life in danger, and so he began to address Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Text 22
अर्जुन उवाच
कृष्ण कृष्ण महाबाहो भक्तानामभयङ्कर ।
त्वमेको दह्यमानानामपवर्गोऽसि संसृते: ॥ २२ ॥
arjuna uvāca
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa mahā-bāho
bhaktānām abhayaṅkara
tvam eko dahyamānānām
apavargo ’si saṁsṛteḥ
Synonyms
arjunaḥ uvāca — Arjuna said; kṛṣṇa — O Lord Kṛṣṇa; kṛṣṇa — O Lord Kṛṣṇa; mahā-bāho — He who is the Almighty; bhaktānām — of the devotees; abhayaṅkara — eradicating the fears of; tvam — You; ekaḥ — alone; dahyamānānām — those who are suffering from; apavargaḥ — the path of liberation; asi — are; saṁsṛteḥ — in the midst of material miseries.

Translation
Arjuna said: O my Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, You are the almighty Personality of Godhead. There is no limit to Your different energies. Therefore only You are competent to instill fearlessness in the hearts of Your devotees. Everyone in the flames of material miseries can find the path of liberation in You only.

Text 23
त्वमाद्य: पुरुष: साक्षादीश्वर: प्रकृते: पर: ।
मायां व्युदस्य चिच्छक्त्या कैवल्ये स्थित आत्मनि ॥ २३ ॥
tvam ādyaḥ puruṣaḥ sākṣād
īśvaraḥ prakṛteḥ paraḥ
māyāṁ vyudasya cic-chaktyā
kaivalye sthita ātmani
Synonyms
tvam ādyaḥ — You are the original; puruṣaḥ — the enjoying personality; sākṣāt — directly; īśvaraḥ — the controller; prakṛteḥ — of material nature; paraḥ — transcendental; māyām — the material energy; vyudasya — one who has thrown aside; cit-śaktyā — by dint of internal potency; kaivalye — in pure eternal knowledge and bliss; sthitaḥ — placed; ātmani — own self.

Translation
You are the original Personality of Godhead who expands Himself all over the creations and is transcendental to material energy. You have cast away the effects of the material energy by dint of Your spiritual potency. You are always situated in eternal bliss and transcendental knowledge.

Text 24
स एव जीवलोकस्य मायामोहितचेतस: ।
विधत्से स्वेन वीर्येण श्रेयो धर्मादिलक्षणम् ॥ २४ ॥
sa eva jīva-lokasya
māyā-mohita-cetasaḥ
vidhatse svena vīryeṇa
śreyo dharmādi-lakṣaṇam
Synonyms
saḥ — that Transcendence; eva — certainly; jīva-lokasya — of the conditioned living beings; māyā-mohita — captivated by the illusory energy; cetasaḥ — by the heart; vidhatse — execute; svena — by Your own; vīryeṇa — influence; śreyaḥ — ultimate good; dharma-ādi — four principles of liberation; lakṣaṇam — characterized by.

Translation
And yet, though You are beyond the purview of the material energy, You execute the four principles of liberation characterized by religion and so on for the ultimate good of the conditioned souls.

Text 25
तथायं चावतारस्ते भुवो भारजिहीर्षया ।
स्वानां चानन्यभावानामनुध्यानाय चासकृत् ॥ २५ ॥
tathāyaṁ cāvatāras te
bhuvo bhāra-jihīrṣayā
svānāṁ cānanya-bhāvānām
anudhyānāya cāsakṛt
Synonyms
tathā — thus; ayam — this; ca — and; avatāraḥ — incarnation; te — Your; bhuvaḥ — of the material world; bhāra — burden; jihīrṣayā — for removing; svānām — of the friends; ca ananya-bhāvānām — and of the exclusive devotees; anudhyānāya — for remembering repeatedly; ca — and; asakṛt — fully satisfied.

Translation
Thus You descend as an incarnation to remove the burden of the world and to benefit Your friends, especially those who are Your exclusive devotees and are constantly rapt in meditation upon You.

Text 26
किमिदं स्वित्कुतो वेति देवदेव न वेद्‍म्यहम् ।
सर्वतोमुखमायाति तेज: परमदारुणम् ॥ २६ ॥
kim idaṁ svit kuto veti
deva-deva na vedmy aham
sarvato mukham āyāti
tejaḥ parama-dāruṇam
Synonyms
kim — what is; idam — this; svit — does it come; kutaḥ — wherefrom; vā iti — be either; deva-deva — O Lord of lords; na — not; vedmi — do I know; aham — I; sarvataḥ — all around; mukham — directions; āyāti — coming from; tejaḥ — effulgence; parama — very much; dāruṇam — dangerous.

Translation
O Lord of lords, how is it that this dangerous effulgence is spreading all around? Where does it come from? I do not understand it.

Text 27
श्रीभगवानुवाच
वेत्थेदं द्रोणपुत्रस्य ब्राह्ममस्त्रं प्रदर्शितम् ।
नैवासौ वेद संहारं प्राणबाध उपस्थिते ॥ २७ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
vetthedaṁ droṇa-putrasya
brāhmam astraṁ pradarśitam
naivāsau veda saṁhāraṁ
prāṇa-bādha upasthite
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; uvāca — said; vettha — just know from Me; idam — this; droṇa-putrasya — of the son of Droṇa; brāhmam astram — hymns of the brāhma (nuclear) weapon; pradarśitam — exhibited; na — not; eva — even; asau — he; veda — know it; saṁhāram — retraction; prāṇa-bādhe — extinction of life; upasthite — being imminent.

Translation
The Supreme Personality of Godhead said: Know from Me that this is the act of the son of Droṇa. He has thrown the hymns of nuclear energy [brahmāstra], and he does not know how to retract the glare. He has helplessly done this, being afraid of imminent death.

Text 28
न ह्यस्यान्यतमं किञ्चिदस्त्रं प्रत्यवकर्शनम् ।
जह्यस्त्रतेज उन्नद्धमस्त्रज्ञो ह्यस्त्रतेजसा ॥ २८ ॥
na hy asyānyatamaṁ kiñcid
astraṁ pratyavakarśanam
jahy astra-teja unnaddham
astra-jño hy astra-tejasā
Synonyms
na — not; hi — certainly; asya — of it; anyatamam — other; kiñcit — anything; astram — weapon; prati — counter; avakarśanam — reactionary; jahi — subdue it; astra-tejaḥ — the glare of this weapon; unnaddham — very powerful; astra-jñaḥ — expert in military science; hi — as a matter of fact; astra-tejasā — by the influence of your weapon.

Translation
O Arjuna, only another brahmāstra can counteract this weapon. Since you are expert in the military science, subdue this weapon’s glare with the power of your own weapon.

Text 29
सूत उवाच
श्रुत्वा भगवता प्रोक्तं फाल्गुन: परवीरहा ।
स्पृष्ट्वापस्तं परिक्रम्य ब्राह्मं ब्राह्मास्त्रं सन्दधे ॥ २९ ॥
sūta uvāca
śrutvā bhagavatā proktaṁ
phālgunaḥ para-vīra-hā
spṛṣṭvāpas taṁ parikramya
brāhmaṁ brāhmāstraṁ sandadhe
Synonyms
sūtaḥ — Sūta Gosvāmī; uvāca — said; śrutvā — after hearing; bhagavatā — by the Personality of Godhead; proktam — what was said; phālgunaḥ — another name of Śrī Arjuna; para-vīra-hā — the killer of the opposing warrior; spṛṣṭvā — after touching; āpaḥ — water; tam — Him; parikramya — circumambulating; brāhmam — the Supreme Lord; brāhma-astram — the supreme weapon; sandadhe — acted on.

Translation
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said: Hearing this from the Personality of Godhead, Arjuna touched water for purification, and after circumambulating Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, he cast his brahmāstra weapon to counteract the other one.

Text 30
संहत्यान्योन्यमुभयोस्तेजसी शरसंवृते ।
आवृत्य रोदसी खं च ववृधातेऽर्कवह्निवत् ॥ ३० ॥
saṁhatyānyonyam ubhayos
tejasī śara-saṁvṛte
āvṛtya rodasī khaṁ ca
vavṛdhāte ’rka-vahnivat
Synonyms
saṁhatya — by combination of; anyonyam — one another; ubhayoḥ — of both; tejasī — the glares; śara — weapons; saṁvṛte — covering; āvṛtya — covering; rodasī — the complete firmament; kham ca — outer space also; vavṛdhāte — increasing; arka — the sun globe; vahni-vat — like fire.

Translation
When the rays of the two brahmāstras combined, a great circle of fire, like the disc of the sun, covered all outer space and the whole firmament of planets.

Text 31
द‍ृष्ट्वास्त्रतेजस्तु तयोस्त्रील्लोकान् प्रदहन्महत् ।
दह्यमाना: प्रजा: सर्वा: सांवर्तकममंसत ॥ ३१ ॥
dṛṣṭvāstra-tejas tu tayos
trīl lokān pradahan mahat
dahyamānāḥ prajāḥ sarvāḥ
sāṁvartakam amaṁsata
Synonyms
dṛṣṭvā — thus seeing; astra — weapon; tejaḥ — heat; tu — but; tayoḥ — of both; trīn — three; lokān — planets; pradahat — blazing; mahat — severely; dahyamānāḥ — burning; prajāḥ — population; sarvāḥ — all over; sāṁvartakam — the name of the fire which devastates during the annihilation of the universe; amaṁsata — began to think.

Translation
All the population of the three worlds was scorched by the combined heat of the weapons. Everyone was reminded of the sāṁvartaka fire which takes place at the time of annihilation.

Text 32
प्रजोपद्रवमालक्ष्य लोकव्यतिकरं च तम् ।
मतं च वासुदेवस्य सञ्जहारार्जुनो द्वयम् ॥ ३२ ॥
prajopadravam ālakṣya
loka-vyatikaraṁ ca tam
mataṁ ca vāsudevasya
sañjahārārjuno dvayam
Synonyms
prajā — the people in general; upadravam — disturbance; ālakṣya — having seen it; loka — the planets; vyatikaram — destruction; ca — also; tam — that; matam ca — and the opinion; vāsudevasya — of Vāsudeva, Śrī Kṛṣṇa; sañjahāra — retracted; arjunaḥ — Arjuna; dvayam — both the weapons.

Translation
Thus seeing the disturbance of the general populace and the imminent destruction of the planets, Arjuna at once retracted both brahmāstra weapons, as Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa desired.

Text 33
तत आसाद्य तरसा दारुणं गौतमीसुतम् ।
बबन्धामर्षताम्राक्ष: पशुं रशनया यथा ॥ ३३ ॥
tata āsādya tarasā
dāruṇaṁ gautamī-sutam
babandhāmarṣa-tāmrākṣaḥ
paśuṁ raśanayā yathā
Synonyms
tataḥ — thereupon; āsādya — arrested; tarasā — dexterously; dāruṇam — dangerous; gautamī-sutam — the son of Gautamī; babandha — bound up; amarṣa — angry; tāmra-akṣaḥ — with copper-red eyes; paśum — animal; raśanayā — by ropes; yathā — as it were.

Translation
Arjuna, his eyes blazing in anger like two red balls of copper, dexterously arrested the son of Gautamī and bound him with ropes like an animal.

Text 34
शिबिराय निनीषन्तं रज्ज्वा बद्ध्वा रिपुं बलात् ।
प्राहार्जुनं प्रकुपितो भगवानम्बुजेक्षण: ॥ ३४ ॥
śibirāya ninīṣantaṁ
rajjvā baddhvā ripuṁ balāt
prāhārjunaṁ prakupito
bhagavān ambujekṣaṇaḥ
Synonyms
śibirāya — on the way to the military camp; ninīṣantam — while bringing him; rajjvā — by the ropes; baddhvā — bound up; ripum — the enemy; balāt — by force; prāha — said; arjunam — unto Arjuna; prakupitaḥ — in an angry mood; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; ambuja-īkṣaṇaḥ — who looks with His lotus eyes.

Translation
After binding Aśvatthāmā, Arjuna wanted to take him to the military camp. The Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa, looking on with His lotus eyes, spoke to Arjuna in an angry mood.

Text 35
मैनं पार्थार्हसि त्रातुं ब्रह्मबन्धुमिमं जहि ।
योऽसावनागस: सुप्तानवधीन्निशि बालकान् ॥ ३५ ॥
mainaṁ pārthārhasi trātuṁ
brahma-bandhum imaṁ jahi
yo ’sāv anāgasaḥ suptān
avadhīn niśi bālakān
Synonyms
mā enam — never unto him; pārtha — O Arjuna; arhasi — ought to; trātum — give release; brahma-bandhum — a relative of a brāhmaṇa; imam — him; jahi — kill; yaḥ — he (who has); asau — those; anāgasaḥ — faultless; suptān — while sleeping; avadhīt — killed; niśi — at night; bālakān — the boys.

Translation
Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa said: O Arjuna, you should not show mercy by releasing this relative of a brāhmaṇa [brahma-bandhu], for he has killed innocent boys in their sleep.

Text 36
मत्तं प्रमत्तमुन्मत्तं सुप्तं बालं स्त्रियं जडम् ।
प्रपन्नं विरथं भीतं न रिपुं हन्ति धर्मवित् ॥ ३६ ॥
mattaṁ pramattam unmattaṁ
suptaṁ bālaṁ striyaṁ jaḍam
prapannaṁ virathaṁ bhītaṁ
na ripuṁ hanti dharma-vit
Synonyms
mattam — careless; pramattam — intoxicated; unmattam — insane; suptam — asleep; bālam — boy; striyam — woman; jaḍam — foolish; prapannam — surrendered; viratham — one who has lost his chariot; bhītam — afraid; na — not; ripum — enemy; hanti — kill; dharma-vit — one who knows the principles of religion.

Translation
A person who knows the principles of religion does not kill an enemy who is careless, intoxicated, insane, asleep, afraid or devoid of his chariot. Nor does he kill a boy, a woman, a foolish creature or a surrendered soul.

Text 37
स्वप्राणान् य: परप्राणै: प्रपुष्णात्यघृण: खल: ।
तद्वधस्तस्य हि श्रेयो यद्दोषाद्यात्यध: पुमान् ॥ ३७ ॥
sva-prāṇān yaḥ para-prāṇaiḥ
prapuṣṇāty aghṛṇaḥ khalaḥ
tad-vadhas tasya hi śreyo
yad-doṣād yāty adhaḥ pumān
Synonyms
sva-prāṇān — one’s own life; yaḥ — one who; para-prāṇaiḥ — at the cost of others’ lives; prapuṣṇāti — maintains properly; aghṛṇaḥ — shameless; khalaḥ — wretched; tat-vadhaḥ — killing of him; tasya — his; hi — certainly; śreyaḥ — well-being; yat — by which; doṣāt — by the fault; yāti — goes; adhaḥ — downwards; pumān — a person.

Translation
A cruel and wretched person who maintains his existence at the cost of others’ lives deserves to be killed for his own well-being, otherwise he will go down by his own actions.

Text 38
प्रतिश्रुतं च भवता पाञ्चाल्यै श‍ृण्वतो मम ।
आहरिष्ये शिरस्तस्य यस्ते मानिनि पुत्रहा ॥ ३८ ॥
pratiśrutaṁ ca bhavatā
pāñcālyai śṛṇvato mama
āhariṣye śiras tasya
yas te mānini putra-hā
Synonyms
pratiśrutam — it is promised; ca — and; bhavatā — by you; pāñcālyai — unto the daughter of the King of Pāñcāla (Draupadī); śṛṇvataḥ — which was heard; mama — by Me personally; āhariṣye — must I bring; śiraḥ — the head; tasya — of him; yaḥ — whom; te — your; mānini — consider; putra-hā — the killer of your sons.

Translation
Furthermore, I have personally heard you promise Draupadī that you would bring forth the head of the killer of her sons.

Text 39
तदसौ वध्यतां पाप आतताय्यात्मबन्धुहा ।
भर्तुश्च विप्रियं वीर कृतवान् कुलपांसन: ॥ ३९ ॥
tad asau vadhyatāṁ pāpa
ātatāyy ātma-bandhu-hā
bhartuś ca vipriyaṁ vīra
kṛtavān kula-pāṁsanaḥ
Synonyms
tat — therefore; asau — this man; vadhyatām — will be killed; pāpaḥ — the sinner; ātatāyī — assaulter; ātma — own; bandhu-hā — killer of sons; bhartuḥ — of the master; ca — also; vipriyam — having not satisfied; vīra — O warrior; kṛtavān — one who has done it; kula-pāṁsanaḥ — the burnt remnants of the family.

Translation
This man is an assassin and murderer of your own family members. Not only that, but he has also dissatisfied his master. He is but the burnt remnants of his family. Kill him immediately.

Text 40
सूत उवाच
एवं परीक्षता धर्मं पार्थ: कृष्णेन चोदित: ।
नैच्छद्धन्तुं गुरुसुतं यद्यप्यात्महनं महान् ॥ ४० ॥
sūta uvāca
evaṁ parīkṣatā dharmaṁ
pārthaḥ kṛṣṇena coditaḥ
naicchad dhantuṁ guru-sutaṁ
yadyapy ātma-hanaṁ mahān
Synonyms
sūtaḥ — Sūta Gosvāmī; uvāca — said; evam — this; parīkṣatā — being examined; dharmam — in the matter of duty; pārthaḥ — Śrī Arjuna; kṛṣṇena — by Lord Kṛṣṇa; coditaḥ — being encouraged; na aicchat — did not like; hantum — to kill; guru-sutam — the son of his teacher; yadyapi — although; ātma-hanam — murderer of sons; mahān — very great.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī said: Although Kṛṣṇa, who was examining Arjuna in religion, encouraged Arjuna to kill the son of Droṇācārya, Arjuna, a great soul, did not like the idea of killing him, although Aśvatthāmā was a heinous murderer of Arjuna’s family members.

Text 41
अथोपेत्य स्वशिबिरं गोविन्दप्रियसारथि: ।
न्यवेदयत्तं प्रियायै शोचन्त्या आत्मजान् हतान् ॥ ४१ ॥
athopetya sva-śibiraṁ
govinda-priya-sārathiḥ
nyavedayat taṁ priyāyai
śocantyā ātma-jān hatān
Synonyms
atha — thereafter; upetya — having reached; sva — own; śibiram — camp; govinda — one who enlivens the senses (Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa); priya — dear; sārathiḥ — the charioteer; nyavedayat — entrusted to; tam — him; priyāyai — unto the dear; śocantyai — lamenting for; ātma-jān — own sons; hatān — murdered.

Translation
After reaching his own camp, Arjuna, along with his dear friend and charioteer [Śrī Kṛṣṇa], entrusted the murderer unto his dear wife, who was lamenting for her murdered sons.

Text 42
तथाहृतं पशुवत् पाशबद्ध-
मवाङ्‍मुखं कर्मजुगुप्सितेन ।
निरीक्ष्य कृष्णापकृतं गुरो: सुतं
वामस्वभावा कृपया ननाम च ॥ ४२ ॥
tathāhṛtaṁ paśuvat pāśa-baddham
avāṅ-mukhaṁ karma-jugupsitena
nirīkṣya kṛṣṇāpakṛtaṁ guroḥ sutaṁ
vāma-svabhāvā kṛpayā nanāma ca
Synonyms
tathā — thus; āhṛtam — brought in; paśu-vat — like an animal; pāśa-baddham — tied with ropes; avāk-mukham — without a word in his mouth; karma — activities; jugupsitena — being heinous; nirīkṣya — by seeing; kṛṣṇā — Draupadī; apakṛtam — the doer of the degrading; guroḥ — the teacher; sutam — son; vāma — beautiful; svabhāvā — nature; kṛpayā — out of compassion; nanāma — offered obeisances; ca — and.

Translation
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī said: Draupadī then saw Aśvatthāmā, who was bound with ropes like an animal and silent for having enacted the most inglorious murder. Due to her female nature, and due to her being naturally good and well-behaved, she showed him due respects as a brāhmaṇa.

Text 43
उवाच चासहन्त्यस्य बन्धनानयनं सती ।
मुच्यतां मुच्यतामेष ब्राह्मणो नितरां गुरु: ॥ ४३ ॥
uvāca cāsahanty asya
bandhanānayanaṁ satī
mucyatāṁ mucyatām eṣa
brāhmaṇo nitarāṁ guruḥ
Synonyms
uvāca — said; ca — and; asahantī — being unbearable for her; asya — his; bandhana — being bound; ānayanam — bringing him; satī — the devoted; mucyatām mucyatām — just get him released; eṣaḥ — this; brāhmaṇaḥ — a brāhmaṇa; nitarām — our; guruḥ — teacher.

Translation
She could not tolerate Aśvatthāmā’s being bound by ropes, and being a devoted lady, she said: Release him, release him, for he is a brāhmaṇa, our spiritual master.

Text 44
सरहस्यो धनुर्वेद: सविसर्गोपसंयम: ।
अस्त्रग्रामश्च भवता शिक्षितो यदनुग्रहात् ॥ ४४ ॥
sarahasyo dhanur-vedaḥ
savisargopasaṁyamaḥ
astra-grāmaś ca bhavatā
śikṣito yad-anugrahāt
Synonyms
sa-rahasyaḥ — confidential; dhanuḥ-vedaḥ — knowledge in the art of manipulating bows and arrows; sa-visarga — releasing; upasaṁyamaḥ — controlling; astra — weapons; grāmaḥ — all kinds of; ca — and; bhavatā — by yourself; śikṣitaḥ — learned; yat — by whose; anugrahāt — mercy of.

Translation
It was by Droṇācārya’s mercy that you learned the military art of throwing arrows and the confidential art of controlling weapons.

Text 45
स एष भगवान्द्रोण: प्रजारूपेण वर्तते ।
तस्यात्मनोऽर्धं पत्‍न्‍यास्ते नान्वगाद्वीरसू: कृपी ॥ ४५ ॥
sa eṣa bhagavān droṇaḥ
prajā-rūpeṇa vartate
tasyātmano ’rdhaṁ patny āste
nānvagād vīrasūḥ kṛpī
Synonyms
saḥ — he; eṣaḥ — certainly; bhagavān — lord; droṇaḥ — Droṇācārya; prajā-rūpeṇa — in the form of his son Aśvatthāmā; vartate — is existing; tasya — his; ātmanaḥ — of the body; ardham — half; patnī — wife; āste — living; na — not; anvagāt — undertook; vīrasūḥ — having the son present; kṛpī — the sister of Kṛpācārya.

Translation
He [Droṇācārya] is certainly still existing, being represented by his son. His wife Kṛpī did not undergo a satī with him because she had a son.

Text 46
तद् धर्मज्ञ महाभाग भवद्भ‍िर्गौरवं कुलम् ।
वृजिनं नार्हति प्राप्तुं पूज्यं वन्द्यमभीक्ष्णश: ॥ ४६ ॥
tad dharmajña mahā-bhāga
bhavadbhir gauravaṁ kulam
vṛjinaṁ nārhati prāptuṁ
pūjyaṁ vandyam abhīkṣṇaśaḥ
Synonyms
tat — therefore; dharma-jña — one who is aware of the principles of religion; mahā-bhāga — the most fortunate; bhavadbhiḥ — by your good self; gauravam — glorified; kulam — the family; vṛjinam — that which is painful; na — not; arhati — does deserve; prāptum — for obtaining; pūjyam — the worshipable; vandyam — respectable; abhīkṣṇaśaḥ — constantly.

Translation
O most fortunate one who know the principles of religion, it is not good for you to cause grief to glorious family members who are always respectable and worshipful.

Text 47
मा रोदीदस्य जननी गौतमी पतिदेवता ।
यथाहं मृतवत्सार्ता रोदिम्यश्रुमुखी मुहु: ॥ ४७ ॥
mā rodīd asya jananī
gautamī pati-devatā
yathāhaṁ mṛta-vatsārtā
rodimy aśru-mukhī muhuḥ
Synonyms
mā — do not; rodīt — make cry; asya — his; jananī — mother; gautamī — the wife of Droṇa; pati-devatā — chaste; yathā — as has; aham — myself; mṛta-vatsā — one whose child is dead; ārtā — distressed; rodimi — crying; aśru-mukhī — tears in the eyes; muhuḥ — constantly.

Translation
My lord, do not make the wife of Droṇācārya cry like me. I am aggrieved for the death of my sons. She need not cry constantly like me.

Text 48
यै: कोपितं ब्रह्मकुलं राजन्यैरजितात्मभि: ।
तत् कुलं प्रदहत्याशु सानुबन्धं शुचार्पितम् ॥ ४८ ॥
yaiḥ kopitaṁ brahma-kulaṁ
rājanyair ajitātmabhiḥ
tat kulaṁ pradahaty āśu
sānubandhaṁ śucārpitam
Synonyms
yaiḥ — by those; kopitam — enraged; brahma-kulam — the order of the brāhmaṇas; rājanyaiḥ — by the administrative order; ajita — unrestricted; ātmabhiḥ — by oneself; tat — that; kulam — family; pradahati — is burnt up; āśu — within no time; sa-anubandham — together with family members; śucā-arpitam — being put into grief.

Translation
If the kingly administrative order, being unrestricted in sense control, offends the brāhmaṇa order and enrages them, then the fire of that rage burns up the whole body of the royal family and brings grief upon them all.

Text 49
सूत उवाच
धर्म्यं न्याय्यं सकरुणं निर्व्यलीकं समं महत् ।
राजा धर्मसुतो राज्ञ्या: प्रत्यनन्दद्वचो द्विजा: ॥ ४९ ॥
sūta uvāca
dharmyaṁ nyāyyaṁ sakaruṇaṁ
nirvyalīkaṁ samaṁ mahat
rājā dharma-suto rājñyāḥ
pratyanandad vaco dvijāḥ
Synonyms
sūtaḥ uvāca — Sūta Gosvāmī said; dharmyam — in accordance with the principles of religion; nyāyyam — justice; sa-karuṇam — full of mercy; nirvyalīkam — without duplicity in dharma; samam — equity; mahat — glorious; rājā — the King; dharma-sutaḥ — son; rājñyāḥ — by the Queen; pratyanandat — supported; vacaḥ — statements; dvijāḥ — O brāhmaṇas.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī said: O brāhmaṇas, King Yudhiṣṭhira fully supported the statements of the Queen, which were in accordance with the principles of religion and were justified, glorious, full of mercy and equity, and without duplicity.

Text 50
नकुल: सहदेवश्च युयुधानो धनञ्जय: ।
भगवान् देवकीपुत्रो ये चान्ये याश्च योषित: ॥ ५० ॥
nakulaḥ sahadevaś ca
yuyudhāno dhanañjayaḥ
bhagavān devakī-putro
ye cānye yāś ca yoṣitaḥ
Synonyms
nakulaḥ — Nakula; sahadevaḥ — Sahadeva; ca — and; yuyudhānaḥ — Sātyaki; dhanañjayaḥ — Arjuna; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; devakī-putraḥ — the son of Devakī, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa; ye — those; ca — and; anye — others; yāḥ — those; ca — and; yoṣitaḥ — ladies.

Translation
Nakula and Sahadeva [the younger brothers of the King] and also Sātyaki, Arjuna, the Personality of Godhead Lord Sri Kṛṣṇa, son of Devakī, and the ladies and others all unanimously agreed with the King.

Text 51
तत्राहामर्षितो भीमस्तस्य श्रेयान् वध: स्मृत: ।
न भर्तुर्नात्मनश्चार्थे योऽहन् सुप्तान् शिशून् वृथा ॥ ५१ ॥
tatrāhāmarṣito bhīmas
tasya śreyān vadhaḥ smṛtaḥ
na bhartur nātmanaś cārthe
yo ’han suptān śiśūn vṛthā
Synonyms
tatra — thereupon; āha — said; amarṣitaḥ — in an angry mood; bhīmaḥ — Bhīma; tasya — his; śreyān — ultimate good; vadhaḥ — killing; smṛtaḥ — recorded; na — not; bhartuḥ — of the master; na — nor; ātmanaḥ — of his own self; ca — and; arthe — for the sake of; yaḥ — one who; ahan — killed; suptān — sleeping; śiśūn — children; vṛthā — without purpose.

Translation
Bhīma, however, angrily disagreed with them and recommended killing this culprit, who had murdered sleeping children for no purpose and for neither his nor his master’s interest.

Text 52
निशम्य भीमगदितं द्रौपद्याश्च चतुर्भुज: ।
आलोक्य वदनं सख्युरिदमाहहसन्निव ॥ ५२ ॥
niśamya bhīma-gaditaṁ
draupadyāś ca catur-bhujaḥ
ālokya vadanaṁ sakhyur
idam āha hasann iva
Synonyms
niśamya — just after hearing; bhīma — Bhīma; gaditam — spoken by; draupadyāḥ — of Draupadī; ca — and; catuḥ-bhujaḥ — the four-handed (Personality of Godhead); ālokya — having seen; vadanam — the face; sakhyuḥ — of His friend; idam — this; āha — said; hasan — smiling; iva — as if.

Translation
Caturbhuja [the four-armed one], or the Personality of Godhead, after hearing the words of Bhīma, Draupadī and others, saw the face of His dear friend Arjuna, and He began to speak as if smiling.

Texts 53-54
श्रीभगवानुवाच
ब्रह्मबन्धुर्न हन्तव्य आततायी वधार्हण: ।
मयैवोभयमाम्नातं परिपाह्यनुशासनम् ॥ ५३ ॥
कुरु प्रतिश्रुतं सत्यं यत्तत्सान्‍त्वयता प्रियाम् ।
प्रियं च भीमसेनस्य पाञ्चाल्या मह्यमेव च ॥ ५४ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
brahma-bandhur na hantavya
ātatāyī vadhārhaṇaḥ
mayaivobhayam āmnātaṁ
paripāhy anuśāsanam
kuru pratiśrutaṁ satyaṁ
yat tat sāntvayatā priyām
priyaṁ ca bhīmasenasya
pāñcālyā mahyam eva ca
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; uvāca — said; brahma-bandhuḥ — the relative of a brāhmaṇa; na — not; hantavyaḥ — to be killed; ātatāyī — the aggressor; vadha-arhaṇaḥ — is due to be killed; mayā — by Me; eva — certainly; ubhayam — both; āmnātam — described according to rulings of the authority; paripāhi — carry out; anuśāsanam — rulings; kuru — abide by; pratiśrutam — as promised by; satyam — truth; yat tat — that which; sāntvayatā — while pacifying; priyām — dear wife; priyam — satisfaction; ca — also; bhīmasenasya — of Śrī Bhīmasena; pāñcālyāḥ — of Draupadī; mahyam — unto Me also; eva — certainly; ca — and.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa said: A friend of a brāhmaṇa is not to be killed, but if he is an aggressor he must be killed. All these rulings are in the scriptures, and you should act accordingly. You have to fulfill your promise to your wife, and you must also act to the satisfaction of Bhīmasena and Me.

Text 55
सूत उवाच
अर्जुन: सहसाज्ञाय हरेर्हार्दमथासिना ।
मणिं जहार मूर्धन्यं द्विजस्य सहमूर्धजम् ॥ ५५ ॥
sūta uvāca
arjunaḥ sahasājñāya
harer hārdam athāsinā
maṇiṁ jahāra mūrdhanyaṁ
dvijasya saha-mūrdhajam
Synonyms
sūtaḥ — Sūta Gosvāmī; uvāca — said; arjunaḥ — Arjuna; sahasā — just at that time; ājñāya — knowing it; hareḥ — of the Lord; hārdam — motive; atha — thus; asinā — by the sword; maṇim — the jewel; jahāra — separated; mūrdhanyam — on the head; dvijasya — of the twice-born; saha — with; mūrdhajam — hairs.

Translation
Sūta Gosvāmī said: Just then Arjuna could understand the motive of the Lord by His equivocal orders, and thus with his sword he severed both hair and jewel from the head of Aśvatthāmā.

Text 56
विमुच्य रशनाबद्धं बालहत्याहतप्रभम् ।
तेजसा मणिना हीनं शिबिरान्निरयापयत् ॥ ५६ ॥
vimucya raśanā-baddhaṁ
bāla-hatyā-hata-prabham
tejasā maṇinā hīnaṁ
śibirān nirayāpayat
Synonyms
vimucya — after releasing him; raśanā-baddham — from the bondage of ropes; bāla-hatyā — infanticide; hata-prabham — loss of bodily luster; tejasā — of the strength of; maṇinā — by the jewel; hīnam — being deprived of; śibirāt — from the camp; nirayāpayat — drove him out.

Translation
He [Aśvatthāmā] had already lost his bodily luster due to infanticide, and now, moreover, having lost the jewel from his head, he lost even more strength. Thus he was unbound and driven out of the camp.

Text 57
वपनं द्रविणादानं स्थानान्निर्यापणं तथा ।
एष हि ब्रह्मबन्धूनां वधो नान्योऽस्ति दैहिक: ॥ ५७ ॥
vapanaṁ draviṇādānaṁ
sthānān niryāpaṇaṁ tathā
eṣa hi brahma-bandhūnāṁ
vadho nānyo ’sti daihikaḥ
Synonyms
vapanam — cleaving the hairs from the head; draviṇa — wealth; adānam — forfeiting; sthānāt — from the residence; niryāpaṇam — driving away; tathā — also; eṣaḥ — all these; hi — certainly; brahma-bandhūnām — of the relatives of a brāhmaṇa; vadhaḥ — killing; na — not; anyaḥ — any other method; asti — there is; daihikaḥ — in the matter of the body.

Translation
Cutting the hair from his head, depriving him of his wealth and driving him from his residence are the prescribed punishments for the relative of a brāhmaṇa. There is no injunction for killing the body.

Text 58
पुत्रशोकातुरा: सर्वे पाण्डवा: सह कृष्णया ।
स्वानां मृतानां यत्कृत्यं चक्रुर्निर्हरणादिकम् ॥ ५८ ॥
putra-śokāturāḥ sarve
pāṇḍavāḥ saha kṛṣṇayā
svānāṁ mṛtānāṁ yat kṛtyaṁ
cakrur nirharaṇādikam
Synonyms
putra — son; śoka — bereavement; āturāḥ — overwhelmed with; sarve — all of them; pāṇḍavāḥ — the sons of Pāṇḍu; saha — along with; kṛṣṇayā — with Draupadī; svānām — of the kinsmen; mṛtānām — of the dead; yat — what; kṛtyam — ought to be done; cakruḥ — did perform; nirharaṇa-ādikam — undertakable.

Translation
Thereafter, the sons of Pāṇḍu, and Draupadī, overwhelmed with grief, performed the proper rituals for the dead bodies of their relatives.