Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
वरीयानेष ते प्रश्न: कृतो लोकहितं
नृप ।
आत्मवित्सम्मत: पुंसां श्रोतव्यादिषु य: पर: ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
varīyān eṣa te praśnaḥ
kṛto loka-hitaṁ nṛpa
ātmavit-sammataḥ puṁsāṁ
śrotavyādiṣu yaḥ paraḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; varīyān — glorious; eṣaḥ — this; te — your; praśnaḥ — question; kṛtaḥ — made by you; loka-hitam — beneficial for all men; nṛpa — O King; ātmavit — transcendentalist; sammataḥ — approved; puṁsām — of all men; śrotavya-ādiṣu — in all kinds of hearing; yaḥ — what is; paraḥ — the supreme.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: My dear King, your question is glorious because it is very beneficial to all kinds of people. The answer to this question is the prime subject matter for hearing, and it is approved by all transcendentalists.

Text 2
श्रोतव्यादीनि राजेन्द्र नृणां सन्ति
सहस्रश: ।
अपश्यतामात्मतत्त्वं गृहेषु गृहमेधिनाम् ॥ २ ॥
śrotavyādīni rājendra
nṛṇāṁ santi sahasraśaḥ
apaśyatām ātma-tattvaṁ
gṛheṣu gṛha-medhinām
Synonyms
śrotavya-ādīni — subject matters for hearing; rājendra — O Emperor; nṛṇām — of human society; santi — there are; sahasraśaḥ — hundreds and thousands; apaśyatām — of the blind; ātma-tattvam — knowledge of self, the ultimate truth; gṛheṣu — at home; gṛha-medhinām — of persons too materially engrossed.

Translation
Those persons who are materially engrossed, being blind to the knowledge of ultimate truth, have many subject matters for hearing in human society, O Emperor.

Text 3
निद्रया ह्रियते नक्तं व्यवायेन च वा वय: ।
दिवा चार्थेहया राजन् कुटुम्बभरणेन वा ॥ ३ ॥
nidrayā hriyate naktaṁ
vyavāyena ca vā vayaḥ
divā cārthehayā rājan
kuṭumba-bharaṇena vā
Synonyms
nidrayā — by sleeping; hriyate — wastes; naktam — night; vyavāyena — sex indulgence; ca — also; vā — either; vayaḥ — duration of life; divā — days; ca — and; artha — economic; īhayā — development; rājan — O King; kuṭumba — family members; bharaṇena — maintaining; vā — either.

Translation
The lifetime of such an envious householder is passed at night either in sleeping or in sex indulgence, and in the daytime either in making money or maintaining family members.

Text 4
देहापत्यकलत्रादिष्वात्मसैन्येष्वसत्स्वपि ।
तेषां प्रमत्तो निधनं पश्यन्नपि न पश्यति ॥ ४ ॥
dehāpatya-kalatrādiṣv
ātma-sainyeṣv asatsv api
teṣāṁ pramatto nidhanaṁ
paśyann api na paśyati
Synonyms
deha — body; apatya — children; kalatra — wife; ādiṣu — and in everything in relation to them; ātma — own; sainyeṣu — fighting soldiers; asatsu — fallible; api — in spite of; teṣām — of all of them; pramattaḥ — too attached; nidhanam — destruction; paśyan — having been experienced; api — although; na — does not; paśyati — see it.

Translation
Persons devoid of ātma-tattva do not inquire into the problems of life, being too attached to the fallible soldiers like the body, children and wife. Although sufficiently experienced, they still do not see their inevitable destruction.

Text 5
तस्माद्भारत सर्वात्मा भगवानीश्वरो हरि: ।
श्रोतव्य: कीर्तितव्यश्च स्मर्तव्यश्चेच्छताभयम् ॥ ५ ॥
tasmād bhārata sarvātmā
bhagavān īśvaro hariḥ
śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca
smartavyaś cecchatābhayam
Synonyms
tasmāt — for this reason; bhārata — O descendant of Bharata; sarvātmā — the Supersoul; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; īśvaraḥ — the controller; hariḥ — the Lord, who vanquishes all miseries; śrotavyaḥ — is to be heard; kīrtitavyaḥ — to be glorified; ca — also; smartavyaḥ — to be remembered; ca — and; icchatā — of one who desires; abhayam — freedom.

Translation
O descendant of King Bharata, one who desires to be free from all miseries must hear about, glorify and also remember the Personality of Godhead, who is the Supersoul, the controller and the savior from all miseries.

Text 6
एतावान् सांख्ययोगाभ्यां स्वधर्मपरिनिष्ठया ।
जन्मलाभ: पर: पुंसामन्ते नारायणस्मृति: ॥ ६ ॥
etāvān sāṅkhya-yogābhyāṁ
sva-dharma-pariniṣṭhayā
janma-lābhaḥ paraḥ puṁsām
ante nārāyaṇa-smṛtiḥ
Synonyms
etāvān — all these; sāṅkhya — complete knowledge of matter and spirit; yogābhyām — knowledge of mystic power; sva-dharma — particular occupational duty; pariniṣṭhayā — by full perception; janma — birth; lābhaḥ — gain; paraḥ — the supreme; puṁsām — of a person; ante — at the end; nārāyaṇa — the Personality of Godhead; smṛtiḥ — remembrance.

Translation
The highest perfection of human life, achieved either by complete knowledge of matter and spirit, by practice of mystic powers, or by perfect discharge of occupational duty, is to remember the Personality of Godhead at the end of life.

Text 7
प्रायेण मुनयो राजन्निवृत्ता विधिषेधत: ।
नैर्गुण्यस्था रमन्ते स्म गुणानुकथने हरे: ॥ ७ ॥
prāyeṇa munayo rājan
nivṛttā vidhi-ṣedhataḥ
nairguṇya-sthā ramante sma
guṇānukathane hareḥ
Synonyms
prāyeṇa — mainly; munayaḥ — all sages; rājan — O King; nivṛttāḥ — above; vidhi — regulative principles; ṣedhataḥ — from restrictions; nairguṇya-sthāḥ — transcendentally situated; ramante — take pleasure in; sma — distinctly; guṇa-anukathane — describing the glories; hareḥ — of the Lord.

Translation
O King Parīkṣit, mainly the topmost transcendentalists, who are above the regulative principles and restrictions, take pleasure in describing the glories of the Lord.

Text 8
इदं भागवतं नाम पुराणं ब्रह्मसम्मितम् ।
अधीतवान् द्वापरादौ पितुर्द्वैपायनादहम् ॥ ८ ॥
idaṁ bhāgavataṁ nāma
purāṇaṁ brahma-sammitam
adhītavān dvāparādau
pitur dvaipāyanād aham
Synonyms
idam — this; bhāgavatam — Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; nāma — of the name; purāṇam — Vedic supplement; brahma-sammitam — approved as the essence of the Vedas; adhītavān — studied; dvāpara-ādau — at the end of the Dvāpara-yuga; pituḥ — from my father; dvaipāyanāt — Dvaipāyana Vyāsadeva; aham — myself.

Translation
At the end of the Dvāpara-yuga, I studied this great supplement of Vedic literature named Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which is equal to all the Vedas, from my father, Śrīla Dvaipāyana Vyāsadeva.

Text 9
परिनिष्ठितोऽपि नैर्गुण्य उत्तमश्लोकलीलया ।
गृहीतचेता राजर्षे आख्यानं यदधीतवान् ॥ ९ ॥
pariniṣṭhito ’pi nairguṇya
uttama-śloka-līlayā
gṛhīta-cetā rājarṣe
ākhyānaṁ yad adhītavān
Synonyms
pariniṣṭhitaḥ — fully realized; api — in spite of; nairguṇye — in transcendence; uttama — enlightened; śloka — verse; līlayā — by the pastimes; gṛhīta — being attracted; cetāḥ — attention; rājarṣe — O saintly King; ākhyānam — delineation; yat — that; adhītavān — I have studied.

Translation
O saintly King, I was certainly situated perfectly in transcendence, yet I was still attracted by the delineation of the pastimes of the Lord, who is described by enlightened verses.

Text 10
तदहं तेऽभिधास्यामि महापौरुषिको भवान् ।
यस्य श्रद्दधतामाशु स्यान्मुकुन्दे मति: सती ॥ १० ॥
tad ahaṁ te ’bhidhāsyāmi
mahā-pauruṣiko bhavān
yasya śraddadhatām āśu
syān mukunde matiḥ satī
Synonyms
tat — that; aham — I; te — unto you; abhidhāsyāmi — shall recite; mahā-pauruṣikaḥ — the most sincere devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa; bhavān — your good self; yasya — of which; śraddadhatām — of one who gives full respect and attention; āśu — very soon; syāt — it so becomes; mukunde — unto the Lord, who awards salvation; matiḥ — faith; satī — unflinching.

Translation
That very Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam I shall recite before you because you are the most sincere devotee of Lord Kṛṣṇa. One who gives full attention and respect to hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam achieves unflinching faith in the Supreme Lord, the giver of salvation.

Text 11
एतन्निर्विद्यमानानामिच्छतामकुतोभयम् ।
योगिनां नृप निर्णीतं हरेर्नामानुकीर्तनम् ॥ ११ ॥
etan nirvidyamānānām
icchatām akuto-bhayam
yogināṁ nṛpa nirṇītaṁ
harer nāmānukīrtanam
Synonyms
etat — it is; nirvidyamānānām — of those who are completely free from all material desires; icchatām — of those who are desirous of all sorts of material enjoyment; akutaḥ-bhayam — free from all doubts and fear; yoginām — of all who are self-satisfied; nṛpa — O King; nirṇītam — decided truth; hareḥ — of the Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa; nāma — holy name; anu — after someone, always; kīrtanam — chanting.

Translation
O King, constant chanting of the holy name of the Lord after the ways of the great authorities is the doubtless and fearless way of success for all, including those who are free from all material desires, those who are desirous of all material enjoyment, and also those who are self-satisfied by dint of transcendental knowledge.

Text 12
किं प्रमत्तस्य बहुभि: परोक्षैर्हायनैरिह ।
वरं मुहूर्तं विदितं घटते श्रेयसे यत: ॥ १२ ॥
kiṁ pramattasya bahubhiḥ
parokṣair hāyanair iha
varaṁ muhūrtaṁ viditaṁ
ghaṭate śreyase yataḥ
Synonyms
kim — what is; pramattasya — of the bewildered; bahubhiḥ — by many; parokṣaiḥ — inexperienced; hāyanaiḥ — years; iha — in this world; varam — better; muhūrtam — a moment; viditam — conscious; ghaṭate — one can try for; śreyase — in the matter of the supreme interest; yataḥ — by that.

Translation
What is the value of a prolonged life which is wasted, inexperienced by years in this world? Better a moment of full consciousness, because that gives one a start in searching after his supreme interest.

Text 13
खट्‍वाङ्गो नाम राजर्षिर्ज्ञात्वेयत्तामिहायुष: ।
मुहूर्तात्सर्वमुत्सृज्य गतवानभयं हरिम् ॥ १३ ॥
khaṭvāṅgo nāma rājarṣir
jñātveyattām ihāyuṣaḥ
muhūrtāt sarvam utsṛjya
gatavān abhayaṁ harim
Synonyms
khaṭvāṅgaḥ — King Khaṭvāṅga; nāma — name; rāja-ṛṣiḥ — saintly king; jñātvā — by knowing; iyattām — duration; iha — in this world; āyuṣaḥ — of one’s life; muhūrtāt — within only a moment; sarvam — everything; utsṛjya — leaving aside; gatavān — had undergone; abhayam — fully safe; harim — the Personality of Godhead.

Translation
The saintly King Khaṭvāṅga, after being informed that the duration of his life would be only a moment more, at once freed himself from all material activities and took shelter of the supreme safety, the Personality of Godhead.

Text 14
तवाप्येतर्हि कौरव्य सप्ताहं जीवितावधि: ।
उपकल्पय तत्सर्वं तावद्यत्साम्परायिकम् ॥ १४ ॥
tavāpy etarhi kauravya
saptāhaṁ jīvitāvadhiḥ
upakalpaya tat sarvaṁ
tāvad yat sāmparāyikam
Synonyms
tava — your; api — also; etarhi — therefore; kauravya — O one born in the family of Kuru; saptāham — seven days; jīvita — duration of life; avadhiḥ — up to the limit of; upakalpaya — get them performed; tat — those; sarvam — all; tāvat — so long; yat — which are; sāmparāyikam — rituals for the next life.

Translation
Mahārāja Parīkṣit, now your duration of life is limited to seven more days, so during this time you can perform all those rituals which are needed for the best purpose of your next life.

Text 15
अन्तकाले तु पुरुष आगते गतसाध्वस: ।
छिन्द्यादसङ्गशस्त्रेण स्पृहां देहेऽनु ये च तम् ॥ १५ ॥
anta-kāle tu puruṣa
āgate gata-sādhvasaḥ
chindyād asaṅga-śastreṇa
spṛhāṁ dehe ’nu ye ca tam
Synonyms
anta-kāle — at the last stage of life; tu — but; puruṣaḥ — a person; āgate — having arrived; gata-sādhvasaḥ — without any fear of death; chindyāt — must cut off; asaṅga — nonattachment; śastreṇa — by the weapon of; spṛhām — all desires; dehe — in the matter of the material tabernacle; anu — pertaining; ye — all that; ca — also; tam — them.

Translation
At the last stage of one’s life, one should be bold enough not to be afraid of death. But one must cut off all attachment to the material body and everything pertaining to it and all desires thereof.

Text 16
गृहात् प्रव्रजितो धीर: पुण्यतीर्थजलाप्लुत: ।
शुचौ विविक्त आसीनो विधिवत्कल्पितासने ॥ १६ ॥
gṛhāt pravrajito dhīraḥ
puṇya-tīrtha-jalāplutaḥ
śucau vivikta āsīno
vidhivat kalpitāsane
Synonyms
gṛhāt — from one’s home; pravrajitaḥ — having gone out; dhīraḥ — self-controlled; puṇya — pious; tīrtha — sacred place; jala-āplutaḥ — fully washed; śucau — cleansed; vivikte — solitary; āsīnaḥ — seated; vidhivat — according to regulations; kalpita — having done; āsane — on a sitting place.

Translation
One should leave home and practice self-control. In a sacred place he should bathe regularly and sit down in a lonely place duly sanctified.

Text 17
अभ्यसेन्मनसा शुद्धं त्रिवृद्ब्रह्माक्षरं परम् ।
मनो यच्छेज्जितश्वासो ब्रह्मबीजमविस्मरन् ॥ १७ ॥
abhyasen manasā śuddhaṁ
trivṛd-brahmākṣaraṁ param
mano yacchej jita-śvāso
brahma-bījam avismaran
Synonyms
abhyaset — one should practice; manasā — by the mind; śuddham — sacred; tri-vṛt — composed of the three; brahma-akṣaram — transcendental letters; param — the supreme; manaḥ — mind; yacchet — get under control; jita-śvāsaḥ — by regulating the breathing air; brahma — absolute; bījam — seed; avismaran — without being forgotten.

Translation
After sitting in the above manner, make the mind remember the three transcendental letters [a-u-m], and by regulating the breathing process, control the mind so as not to forget the transcendental seed.

Text 18
नियच्छेद्विषयेभ्योऽक्षान्मनसा बुद्धिसारथि: ।
मन: कर्मभिराक्षिप्तं शुभार्थे धारयेद्धिया ॥ १८ ॥
niyacched viṣayebhyo ’kṣān
manasā buddhi-sārathiḥ
manaḥ karmabhir ākṣiptaṁ
śubhārthe dhārayed dhiyā
Synonyms
niyacchet — withdraw; viṣayebhyaḥ — from sense engagements; akṣān — the senses; manasā — by dint of the mind; buddhi — intelligence; sārathiḥ — driver; manaḥ — the mind; karmabhiḥ — by the fruitive work; ākṣiptam — being absorbed in; śubha-arthe — for the sake of the Lord; dhārayet — hold up; dhiyā — in full consciousness.

Translation
Gradually, as the mind becomes progressively spiritualized, withdraw it from sense activities, and by intelligence the senses will be controlled. The mind too absorbed in material activities can be engaged in the service of the Personality of Godhead and become fixed in full transcendental consciousness.

Text 19
तत्रैकावयवं ध्यायेदव्युच्छिन्नेन चेतसा ।
मनो निर्विषयं युक्त्वा तत: किञ्चन न स्मरेत् ।
पदं तत्परमं विष्णोर्मनो यत्र प्रसीदति ॥ १९ ॥
tatraikāvayavaṁ dhyāyed
avyucchinnena cetasā
mano nirviṣayaṁ yuktvā
tataḥ kiñcana na smaret
padaṁ tat paramaṁ viṣṇor
mano yatra prasīdati
Synonyms
tatra — thereafter; eka — one by one; avayavam — limbs of the body; dhyāyet — should be concentrated upon; avyucchinnena — without being deviated from the complete form; cetasā — by the mind; manaḥ — mind; nirviṣayam — without being contaminated by sense objects; yuktvā — being dovetailed; tataḥ — after that; kiñcana — anything; na — do not; smaret — think of; padam — personality; tat — that; paramam — Supreme; viṣṇoḥ — of Viṣṇu; manaḥ — the mind; yatra — whereupon; prasīdati — becomes reconciled.

Translation
Thereafter, you should meditate upon the limbs of Viṣṇu, one after another, without being deviated from the conception of the complete body. Thus the mind becomes free from all sense objects. There should be no other thing to be thought upon. Because the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Viṣṇu, is the Ultimate Truth, the mind becomes completely reconciled in Him only.

Text 20
रजस्तमोभ्यामाक्षिप्तं विमूढं मन आत्मन: ।
यच्छेद्धारणया धीरो हन्ति या तत्कृतं मलम् ॥ २० ॥
rajas-tamobhyām ākṣiptaṁ
vimūḍhaṁ mana ātmanaḥ
yacched dhāraṇayā dhīro
hanti yā tat-kṛtaṁ malam
Synonyms
rajaḥ — the passionate mode of nature; tamobhyām — as well as by the ignorant mode of material nature; ākṣiptam — agitated; vimūḍham — bewildered; manaḥ — the mind; ātmanaḥ — of one’s own; yacchet — get it rectified; dhāraṇayā — by conception (of Viṣṇu); dhīraḥ — the pacified; hanti — destroys; yā — all those; tat-kṛtam — done by them; malam — dirty things.

Translation
One’s mind is always agitated by the passionate mode of material nature and bewildered by the ignorant mode of nature. But one can rectify such conceptions by the relation of Viṣṇu and thus become pacified by cleansing the dirty things created by them.

Text 21
यस्यां सन्धार्यमाणायां योगिनो भक्तिलक्षण: ।
आशु सम्पद्यते योग आश्रयं भद्रमीक्षत: ॥ २१ ॥
yasyāṁ sandhāryamāṇāyāṁ
yogino bhakti-lakṣaṇaḥ
āśu sampadyate yoga
āśrayaṁ bhadram īkṣataḥ
Synonyms
yasyām — by such systematic remembrance; sandhāryamāṇāyām — and thus being fixed in the habit of; yoginaḥ — the mystics; bhakti-lakṣaṇaḥ — being practiced to the devotional system; āśu — very soon; sampadyate — attains success; yogaḥ — connection by devotional service; āśrayam — under the shelter of; bhadram — the all-good; īkṣataḥ — which seeing that.

Translation
O King, by this system of remembrance and by being fixed in the habit of seeing the all-good personal conception of the Lord, one can very soon attain devotional service to the Lord, under His direct shelter.

Text 22
राजोवाच
यथा सन्धार्यते ब्रह्मन् धारणा यत्र सम्मता ।
याद‍ृशी वा हरेदाशु पुरुषस्य मनोमलम् ॥ २२ ॥
rājovāca
yathā sandhāryate brahman
dhāraṇā yatra sammatā
yādṛśī vā hared āśu
puruṣasya mano-malam
Synonyms
rājā uvāca — the fortunate King said; yathā — as it is; sandhāryate — the conception is made; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; dhāraṇā — conception; yatra — where and how; sammatā — in a summary; yādṛśī — the way by which; vā — or; haret — extricated; āśu — without delay; puruṣasya — of a person; manaḥ — of the mind; malam — dirty things.

Translation
The fortunate King Parīkṣit, inquiring further, said: O brāhmaṇa, please describe in full detail how and where the mind has to be applied and how the conception can be fixed so that the dirty things in a person’s mind can be removed.

Text 23
श्रीशुक उवाच
जितासनो जितश्वासो जितसङ्गो जितेन्द्रिय: ।
स्थूले भगवतो रूपे मन: सन्धारयेद्धिया ॥ २३ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
jitāsano jita-śvāso
jita-saṅgo jitendriyaḥ
sthūle bhagavato rūpe
manaḥ sandhārayed dhiyā
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; jita-āsanaḥ — controlled sitting posture; jita-śvāsaḥ — controlled breathing process; jita-saṅgaḥ — controlled association; jita-indriyaḥ — controlled senses; sthūle — in the gross matter; bhagavataḥ — unto the Personality of Godhead; rūpe — in the feature of; manaḥ — the mind; sandhārayet — must apply; dhiyā — by intelligence.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī answered: One should control the sitting posture, regulate the breathing process by the yogic prāṇāyāma and thus control the mind and senses and with intelligence apply the mind to the gross potencies of the Lord [called the virāṭ-rūpa].

Text 24
विशेषस्तस्य देहोऽयं स्थविष्ठश्च स्थवीयसाम् ।
यत्रेदं व्यज्यते विश्वं भूतं भव्यं भवच्च सत् ॥ २४ ॥
viśeṣas tasya deho ’yaṁ
sthaviṣṭhaś ca sthavīyasām
yatredaṁ vyajyate viśvaṁ
bhūtaṁ bhavyaṁ bhavac ca sat
Synonyms
viśeṣaḥ — personal; tasya — His; dehaḥ — body; ayam — this; sthaviṣṭhaḥ — grossly material; ca — and; sthavīyasām — of all matter; yatra — wherein; idam — all these phenomena; vyajyate — is experienced; viśvam — universe; bhūtam — past; bhavyam — future; bhavat — present; ca — and; sat — resultant.

Translation
This gigantic manifestation of the phenomenal material world as a whole is the personal body of the Absolute Truth, wherein the universal resultant past, present and future of material time is experienced.

Text 25
अण्डकोशे शरीरेऽस्मिन् सप्तावरणसंयुते ।
वैराज: पुरुषो योऽसौ भगवान् धारणाश्रय: ॥ २५ ॥
aṇḍa-kośe śarīre ’smin
saptāvaraṇa-saṁyute
vairājaḥ puruṣo yo ’sau
bhagavān dhāraṇāśrayaḥ
Synonyms
aṇḍa-kośe — within the universal shell; śarīre — in the body of; asmin — this; sapta — sevenfold; āvaraṇa — coverings; saṁyute — having so done; vairājaḥ — the gigantic universal; puruṣaḥ — form of the Lord; yaḥ — that; asau — He; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; dhāraṇā — conception; āśrayaḥ — object of.

Translation
The gigantic universal form of the Personality of Godhead, within the body of the universal shell, which is covered by sevenfold material elements, is the subject for the virāṭ conception.

Text 26
पातालमेतस्य हि पादमूलं
पठन्ति पार्ष्णिप्रपदे रसातलम् ।
महातलं विश्वसृजोऽथ गुल्फौ
तलातलं वै पुरुषस्य जङ्घे ॥ २६ ॥
pātālam etasya hi pāda-mūlaṁ
paṭhanti pārṣṇi-prapade rasātalam
mahātalaṁ viśva-sṛjo ’tha gulphau
talātalaṁ vai puruṣasya jaṅghe
Synonyms
pātālam — the planets at the bottom of the universe; etasya — of His; hi — exactly; pāda-mūlam — soles of the feet; paṭhanti — they study it; pārṣṇi — the heels; prapade — the toes; rasātalam — the planets named Rasātala; mahātalam — the planets named Mahātala; viśva-sṛjaḥ — of the creator of the universe; atha — thus; gulphau — the ankles; talātalam — the planets named Talātala; vai — as they are; puruṣasya — of the gigantic person; jaṅghe — the shanks.

Translation
Persons who have realized it have studied that the planets known as Pātāla constitute the bottoms of the feet of the universal Lord, and the heels and the toes are the Rasātala planets. The ankles are the Mahātala planets, and His shanks constitute the Talātala planets.

Text 27
द्वे जानुनी सुतलं विश्वमूर्ते-
रूरुद्वयं वितलं चातलं च ।
महीतलं तज्जघनं महीपते
नभस्तलं नाभिसरो गृणन्ति ॥ २७ ॥
dve jānunī sutalaṁ viśva-mūrter
ūru-dvayaṁ vitalaṁ cātalaṁ ca
mahītalaṁ taj-jaghanaṁ mahīpate
nabhastalaṁ nābhi-saro gṛṇanti
Synonyms
dve — two; jānunī — two knees; sutalam — the planetary system named Sutala; viśva-mūrteḥ — of the universal form; ūru-dvayam — the two thighs; vitalam — the planetary system named Vitala; ca — also; atalam — the planets named Atala; ca — and; mahītalam — the planetary system named Mahītala; tat — of that; jaghanam — the hips; mahīpate — O King; nabhastalam — outer space; nābhi-saraḥ — the depression of the navel; gṛṇanti — they take it so.

Translation
The knees of the universal form are the planetary system of the name Sutala, and the two thighs are the Vitala and Atala planetary systems. The hips are Mahītala, and outer space is the depression of His navel.

Text 28
उर:स्थलं ज्योतिरनीकमस्य
ग्रीवा महर्वदनं वै जनोऽस्य ।
तपो वराटीं विदुरादिपुंस:
सत्यं तु शीर्षाणि सहस्रशीर्ष्ण: ॥ २८ ॥
uraḥ-sthalaṁ jyotir-anīkam asya
grīvā mahar vadanaṁ vai jano ’sya
tapo varāṭīṁ vidur ādi-puṁsaḥ
satyaṁ tu śīrṣāṇi sahasra-śīrṣṇaḥ
Synonyms
uraḥ — high; sthalam — place (the chest); jyotiḥ-anīkam — the luminary planets; asya — of Him; grīvā — the neck; mahaḥ — the planetary system above the luminaries; vadanam — mouth; vai — exactly; janaḥ — the planetary system above Mahar; asya — of Him; tapaḥ — the planetary system above the Janas; varāṭīm — forehead; viduḥ — is known; ādi — the original; puṁsaḥ — personality; satyam — the topmost planetary system; tu — but; śīrṣāṇi — the head; sahasra — one thousand; śīrṣṇaḥ — one with heads.

Translation
The chest of the Original Personality of the gigantic form is the luminary planetary system, His neck is the Mahar planets, His mouth is the Janas planets, and His forehead is the Tapas planetary system. The topmost planetary system, known as Satyaloka, is the head of He who has one thousand heads.

Text 29
इन्द्रादयो बाहव आहुरुस्रा:
कर्णौ दिश:श्रोत्रममुष्य शब्द: ।
नासत्यदस्रौ परमस्य नासे
घ्राणोऽस्य गन्धो मुखमग्निरिद्ध: ॥ २९ ॥
indrādayo bāhava āhur usrāḥ
karṇau diśaḥ śrotram amuṣya śabdaḥ
nāsatya-dasrau paramasya nāse
ghrāṇo ’sya gandho mukham agnir iddhaḥ
Synonyms
indra-ādayaḥ — demigods headed by the heavenly king, Indra; bāhavaḥ — arms; āhuḥ — are called; usrāḥ — the demigods; karṇau — the ears; diśaḥ — the four directions; śrotram — the sense of hearing; amuṣya — of the Lord; śabdaḥ — sound; nāsatya-dasrau — the demigods known as the Aśvinī-kumāras; paramasya — of the Supreme; nāse — nostrils; ghrāṇaḥ — the sense of smell; asya — of Him; gandhaḥ — fragrance; mukham — the mouth; agniḥ — fire; iddhaḥ — blazing.

Translation
His arms are the demigods headed by Indra, the ten directional sides are His ears, and physical sound is His sense of hearing. His nostrils are the two Aśvinī-kumāras, and material fragrance is His sense of smell. His mouth is the blazing fire.

Text 30
द्यौरक्षिणी चक्षुरभूत्पतङ्ग:
पक्ष्माणि विष्णोरहनी उभे च ।
तद्भ्रूविजृम्भ: परमेष्ठिधिष्ण्य-
मापोऽस्य तालु रस एव जिह्वा ॥ ३० ॥
dyaur akṣiṇī cakṣur abhūt pataṅgaḥ
pakṣmāṇi viṣṇor ahanī ubhe ca
tad-bhrū-vijṛmbhaḥ parameṣṭhi-dhiṣṇyam
āpo ’sya tālū rasa eva jihvā
Synonyms
dyauḥ — the sphere of outer space; akṣiṇī — the eyeballs; cakṣuḥ — of eyes (senses); abhūt — it so became; pataṅgaḥ — the sun; pakṣmāṇi — eyelids; viṣṇoḥ — of the Personality of Godhead, Śrī Viṣṇu; ahanī — day and night; ubhe — both; ca — and; tat — His; bhrū — eyebrows; vijṛmbhaḥ — movements; parameṣṭhi — the supreme entity (Brahmā); dhiṣṇyam — post; āpaḥ — Varuṇa, the director of water; asya — His; tālū — palate; rasaḥ — juice; eva — certainly; jihvā — the tongue.

Translation
The sphere of outer space constitutes His eyepits, and the eyeball is the sun as the power of seeing. His eyelids are both the day and night, and in the movements of His eyebrows, Brahmā and similar supreme personalities reside. His palate is the director of water, Varuṇa, and the juice or essence of everything is His tongue.

Text 31
छन्दांस्यनन्तस्य शिरो गृणन्ति
दंष्ट्रा यम: स्‍नेहकला द्विजानि ।
हासो जनोन्मादकरी च माया
दुरन्तसर्गो यदपाङ्गमोक्ष: ॥ ३१ ॥
chandāṁsy anantasya śiro gṛṇanti
daṁṣṭrā yamaḥ sneha-kalā dvijāni
hāso janonmāda-karī ca māyā
duranta-sargo yad-apāṅga-mokṣaḥ
Synonyms
chandāṁsi — the Vedic hymns; anantasya — of the Supreme; śiraḥ — the cerebral passage; gṛṇanti — they say; daṁṣṭrāḥ — the jaws of teeth; yamaḥ — Yamarāja, the director of sinners; sneha-kalāḥ — the art of affection; dvijāni — the set of teeth; hāsaḥ — smile; jana-unmāda-karī — the most alluring; ca — also; māyā — illusory energy; duranta — unsurpassable; sargaḥ — the material creation; yat-apāṅga — whose glance; mokṣaḥ — casting over.

Translation
They say that the Vedic hymns are the cerebral passage of the Lord, and His jaws of teeth are Yama, god of death, who punishes the sinners. The art of affection is His set of teeth, and the most alluring illusory material energy is His smile. This great ocean of material creation is but the casting of His glance over us.

Text 32
व्रीडोत्तरौष्ठोऽधर एव लोभो
धर्म: स्तनोऽधर्मपथोऽस्य पृष्ठम् ।
कस्तस्य मेढ्रं वृषणौ च मित्रौ
कुक्षि: समुद्रा गिरयोऽस्थिसङ्घा: ॥ ३२ ॥
vrīḍottarauṣṭho ’dhara eva lobho
dharmaḥ stano ’dharma-patho ’sya pṛṣṭham
kas tasya meḍhraṁ vṛṣaṇau ca mitrau
kukṣiḥ samudrā girayo ’sthi-saṅghāḥ
Synonyms
vrīḍa — modesty; uttara — upper; oṣṭha — lip; adharaḥ — chin; eva — certainly; lobhaḥ — hankering; dharmaḥ — religion; stanaḥ — breast; adharma — irreligion; pathaḥ — way; asya — His; pṛṣṭham — back; kaḥ — Brahmā; tasya — His; meḍhram — genitals; vṛṣaṇau — testicles; ca — also; mitrau — the Mitrā-varuṇas; kukṣiḥ — waist; samudrāḥ — the oceans; girayaḥ — the hills; asthi — bones; saṅghāḥ — stack.

Translation
Modesty is the upper portion of His lips, hankering is His chin, religion is the breast of the Lord, and irreligion is His back. Brahmājī, who generates all living beings in the material world, is His genitals, and the Mitrā-varuṇas are His two testicles. The ocean is His waist, and the hills and mountains are the stacks of His bones.

Text 33
नद्योऽस्य नाड्योऽथ तनूरुहाणि
महीरुहा विश्वतनोर्नृपेन्द्र ।
अनन्तवीर्य: श्वसितं मातरिश्वा
गतिर्वय: कर्म गुणप्रवाह: ॥ ३३ ॥
nadyo ’sya nāḍyo ’tha tanū-ruhāṇi
mahī-ruhā viśva-tanor nṛpendra
ananta-vīryaḥ śvasitaṁ mātariśvā
gatir vayaḥ karma guṇa-pravāhaḥ
Synonyms
nadyaḥ — the rivers; asya — of Him; nāḍyaḥ — veins; atha — and thereafter; tanū-ruhāṇi — hairs on the body; mahī-ruhāḥ — the plants and trees; viśva-tanoḥ — of the universal form; nṛpa-indra — O King; ananta-vīryaḥ — of the omnipotent; śvasitam — breathing; mātariśvā — air; gatiḥ — movement; vayaḥ — passing ages; karma — activity; guṇa-pravāhaḥ — reactions of the modes of nature.

Translation
O King, the rivers are the veins of the gigantic body, the trees are the hairs of His body, and the omnipotent air is His breath. The passing ages are His movements, and His activities are the reactions of the three modes of material nature.

Text 34
ईशस्य केशान् विदुरम्बुवाहान्
वासस्तु सन्ध्यां कुरुवर्य भूम्न: ।
अव्यक्तमाहुर्हृदयं मनश्च
स चन्द्रमा: सर्वविकारकोश: ॥ ३४ ॥
īśasya keśān vidur ambuvāhān
vāsas tu sandhyāṁ kuru-varya bhūmnaḥ
avyaktam āhur hṛdayaṁ manaś ca
sa candramāḥ sarva-vikāra-kośaḥ
Synonyms
īśasya — of the supreme controller; keśān — hairs on the head; viduḥ — you may know it from me; ambu-vāhān — the clouds which carry water; vāsaḥ tu — the dress; sandhyām — termination of day and night; kuru-varya — O best of the Kurus; bhūmnaḥ — of the Almighty; avyaktam — the prime cause of material creation; āhuḥ — it is said; hṛdayam — intelligence; manaḥ ca — and the mind; saḥ — He; candramāḥ — the moon; sarva-vikāra-kośaḥ — the reservoir of all changes.

Translation
O best amongst the Kurus, the clouds which carry water are the hairs on His head, the terminations of days or nights are His dress, and the supreme cause of material creation is His intelligence. His mind is the moon, the reservoir of all changes.

Text 35
विज्ञानशक्तिं महिमामनन्ति
सर्वात्मनोऽन्त:करणं गिरित्रम् ।
अश्वाश्वतर्युष्ट्रगजा नखानि
सर्वे मृगा: पशव: श्रोणिदेशे ॥ ३५ ॥
vijñāna-śaktiṁ mahim āmananti
sarvātmano ’ntaḥ-karaṇaṁ giritram
aśvāśvatary-uṣṭra-gajā nakhāni
sarve mṛgāḥ paśavaḥ śroṇi-deśe
Synonyms
vijñāna-śaktim — consciousness; mahim — the principle of matter; āmananti — they call it so; sarva-ātmanaḥ — of the omnipresent; antaḥ-karaṇam — ego; giritram — Rudra (Śiva); aśva — horse; aśvatari — mule; uṣṭra — camel; gajāḥ — elephant; nakhāni — nails; sarve — all other; mṛgāḥ — stags; paśavaḥ — quadrupeds; śroṇi-deśe — on the region of the belt.

Translation
The principle of matter [mahat-tattva] is the consciousness of the omnipresent Lord, as asserted by the experts, and Rudradeva is His ego. The horse, mule, camel and elephant are His nails, and wild animals and all quadrupeds are situated in the belt zone of the Lord.

Text 36
वयांसि तद्व्याकरणं विचित्रं
मनुर्मनीषा मनुजो निवास: ।
गन्धर्वविद्याधरचारणाप्सर:
स्वरस्मृतीरसुरानीकवीर्य: ॥ ३६ ॥
vayāṁsi tad-vyākaraṇaṁ vicitraṁ
manur manīṣā manujo nivāsaḥ
gandharva-vidyādhara-cāraṇāpsaraḥ
svara-smṛtīr asurānīka-vīryaḥ
Synonyms
vayāṁsi — varieties of birds; tat-vyākaraṇam — vocables; vicitram — artistic; manuḥ — the father of mankind; manīṣā — thoughts; manujaḥ — mankind (the sons of Manu); nivāsaḥ — residence; gandharva — the human beings named Gandharvas; vidyādhara — the Vidyādharas; cāraṇa — the Cāraṇas; apsaraḥ — the angels; svara — musical rhythm; smṛtīḥ — remembrance; asura-anīka — the demoniac soldiers; vīryaḥ — prowess.

Translation
Varieties of birds are indications of His masterful artistic sense. Manu, the father of mankind, is the emblem of His standard intelligence, and humanity is His residence. The celestial species of human beings, like the Gandharvas, Vidyādharas, Cāraṇas and angels, all represent His musical rhythm, and the demoniac soldiers are representations of His wonderful prowess.

Text 37
ब्रह्माननं क्षत्रभुजो महात्मा
विडूरुरङ्‌घ्रिश्रितकृष्णवर्ण: ।
नानाभिधाभीज्यगणोपपन्नो
द्रव्यात्मक: कर्म वितानयोग: ॥ ३७ ॥
brahmānanaṁ kṣatra-bhujo mahātmā
viḍ ūrur aṅghri-śrita-kṛṣṇa-varṇaḥ
nānābhidhābhījya-gaṇopapanno
dravyātmakaḥ karma vitāna-yogaḥ
Synonyms
brahma — the brāhmaṇas; ānanam — the face; kṣatra — the kṣatriyas; bhujaḥ — the arms; mahātmā — the virāṭ-puruṣa; viṭ — the vaiśyas; ūruḥ — the thighs; aṅghri-śrita — under the protection of His feet; kṛṣṇa-varṇaḥ — the śūdras; nānā — various; abhidhā — by names; abhījya-gaṇa — the demigods; upapannaḥ — being overtaken; dravya-ātmakaḥ — with feasible goods; karma — activities; vitāna-yogaḥ — performances of sacrifice.

Translation
The virāṭ-puruṣa’s face is the brāhmaṇas, His arms are the kṣatriyas, His thighs are the vaiśyas, and the śūdras are under the protection of His feet. All the worshipable demigods are also overtaken by Him, and it is the duty of everyone to perform sacrifices with feasible goods to appease the Lord.

Text 38
इयानसावीश्वरविग्रहस्य
य: सन्निवेष: कथितो मया ते ।
सन्धार्यतेऽस्मिन् वपुषि स्थविष्ठे
मन: स्वबुद्ध्या न यतोऽस्ति किञ्चित् ॥ ३८ ॥
iyān asāv īśvara-vigrahasya
yaḥ sanniveśaḥ kathito mayā te
sandhāryate ’smin vapuṣi sthaviṣṭhe
manaḥ sva-buddhyā na yato ’sti kiñcit
Synonyms
iyān — all these; asau — that; īśvara — Supreme Lord; vigrahasya — of the form; yaḥ — whatsoever; sanniveśaḥ — as they are located; kathitaḥ — explained; mayā — by me; te — unto you; sandhāryate — one may concentrate; asmin — in this; vapuṣi — form of virāṭ; sthaviṣṭhe — in the gross; manaḥ — mind; sva-buddhyā — by one’s intelligence; na — not; yataḥ — beyond Him; asti — there is; kiñcit — anything else.

Translation
I have thus explained to you the gross material gigantic conception of the Personality of Godhead. One who seriously desires liberation concentrates his mind on this form of the Lord, because there is nothing more than this in the material world.

Text 39
स सर्वधीवृत्त्यनुभूतसर्व
आत्मा यथा स्वप्नजनेक्षितैक: ।
तं सत्यमानन्दनिधिं भजेत
नान्यत्र सज्जेद् यत आत्मपात: ॥ ३९ ॥
sa sarva-dhī-vṛtty-anubhūta-sarva
ātmā yathā svapna-janekṣitaikaḥ
taṁ satyam ānanda-nidhiṁ bhajeta
nānyatra sajjed yata ātma-pātaḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — He (the Supreme Person); sarva-dhī-vṛtti — the process of realization by all sorts of intelligence; anubhūta — cognizant; sarve — everyone; ātmā — the Supersoul; yathā — as much as; svapna-jana — a person dreaming; īkṣita — seen by; ekaḥ — one and the same; tam — unto Him; satyam — the Supreme Truth; ānanda-nidhim — the ocean of bliss; bhajeta — must one worship; na — never; anyatra — anything else; sajjet — be attached; yataḥ — whereby; ātma-pātaḥ — degradation of oneself.

Translation
One should concentrate his mind upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, who alone distributes Himself in so many manifestations just as ordinary persons create thousands of manifestations in dreams. One must concentrate the mind on Him, the only all-blissful Absolute Truth. Otherwise one will be misled and will cause his own degradation.