Text 1
नारद उवाच
देवदेव नमस्तेऽस्तु भूतभावन पूर्वज ।
तद् विजानीहि यज्ज्ञानमात्मतत्त्वनिदर्शनम् ॥ १ ॥
nārada uvāca
deva-deva namas te ’stu
bhūta-bhāvana pūrvaja
tad vijānīhi yaj jñānam
ātma-tattva-nidarśanam
Synonyms
nāradaḥ uvāca — Śrī Nārada said; deva — of all demigods; deva — the demigod; namaḥ — obeisances; te — unto you as; astu — are; bhūta-bhāvana — the generator of all living beings; pūrva-ja — the firstborn; tat vijānīhi — please explain that knowledge; yat jñānam — which knowledge; ātma-tattva — transcendental; nidarśanam — specifically directs.

Translation
Śrī Nārada Muni asked Brahmājī: O chief amongst the demigods, O firstborn living entity, I beg to offer my respectful obeisances unto you. Please tell me that transcendental knowledge which specifically directs one to the truth of the individual soul and the Supersoul.

Text 2
यद्रूपं यदधिष्ठानं यत: सृष्टमिदं प्रभो ।
यत्संस्थं यत्परं यच्च तत् तत्त्वं वद तत्त्वत: ॥ २ ॥
yad rūpaṁ yad adhiṣṭhānaṁ
yataḥ sṛṣṭam idaṁ prabho
yat saṁsthaṁ yat paraṁ yac ca
tat tattvaṁ vada tattvataḥ
Synonyms
yat — what; rūpam — the symptoms of manifestation; yat — what; adhiṣṭhānam — background; yataḥ — from where; sṛṣṭam — created; idam — this world; prabho — O my father; yat — in which; saṁstham — conserved; yat — what; param — under control; yat — what are; ca — and; tat — of this; tattvam — the symptoms; vada — please describe; tattvataḥ — factually.

Translation
My dear father, please describe factually the symptoms of this manifest world. What is its background? How is it created? How is it conserved? And under whose control is all this being done?

Text 3
सर्वं ह्येतद् भवान् वेद भूतभव्यभवत्प्रभु: ।
करामलकवद् विश्वं विज्ञानावसितं तव ॥ ३ ॥
sarvaṁ hy etad bhavān veda
bhūta-bhavya-bhavat-prabhuḥ
karāmalaka-vad viśvaṁ
vijñānāvasitaṁ tava
Synonyms
sarvam — all and everything; hi — certainly; etat — this; bhavān — your good self; veda — know; bhūta — all that is created or born; bhavya — all that will be created or born; bhavat — all that is being created; prabhuḥ — you, the master of everything; kara-āmalaka-vat — just like a walnut within your grip; viśvam — the universe; vijñāna-avasitam — within your knowledge scientifically; tava — your.

Translation
My dear father, all this is known to you scientifically because whatever was created in the past, whatever will be created in the future, or whatever is being created at present, as well as everything within the universe, is within your grip, just like a walnut.

Text 4
यद्विज्ञानो यदाधारो यत्परस्त्वं यदात्मक: ।
एक: सृजसि भूतानि भूतैरेवात्ममायया ॥ ४ ॥
yad-vijñāno yad-ādhāro
yat-paras tvaṁ yad-ātmakaḥ
ekaḥ sṛjasi bhūtāni
bhūtair evātma-māyayā
Synonyms
yat-vijñānaḥ — the source of knowledge; yat-ādhāraḥ — under whose protection; yat-paraḥ — under whose subordination; tvam — you; yat-ātmakaḥ — in what capacity; ekaḥ — alone; sṛjasi — you are creating; bhūtāni — the living entities; bhūtaiḥ — with the help of the material elements; eva — certainly; ātma — self; māyayā — by potency.

Translation
My dear father, what is the source of your knowledge? Under whose protection are you standing? And under whom are you working? What is your real position? Do you alone create all entities with material elements by your personal energy?

Text 5
आत्मन् भावयसे तानी न पराभावयन् स्वयम् ।
आत्मशक्तिमवष्टभ्य ऊर्णनाभिरिवाक्लम: ॥ ५ ॥
ātman bhāvayase tāni
na parābhāvayan svayam
ātma-śaktim avaṣṭabhya
ūrṇanābhir ivāklamaḥ
Synonyms
ātman (ātmani) — by self; bhāvayase — manifest; tāni — all those; na — not; parābhāvayan — being defeated; svayam — yourself; ātma-śaktim — self-sufficient power; avaṣṭabhya — being employed; ūrṇa-nābhiḥ — the spider; iva — like; aklamaḥ — without help.

Translation
As the spider very easily creates the network of its cobweb and manifests its power of creation without being defeated by others, so also you yourself, by employment of your self-sufficient energy, create without any other’s help.

Text 6
नाहं वेद परं ह्यस्मिन्नापरं न समं विभो ।
नामरूपगुणैर्भाव्यं सदसत् किञ्चिदन्यत: ॥ ६ ॥
nāhaṁ veda paraṁ hy asmin
nāparaṁ na samaṁ vibho
nāma-rūpa-guṇair bhāvyaṁ
sad-asat kiñcid anyataḥ
Synonyms
na — do not; aham — myself; veda — know; param — superior; hi — for; asmin — in this world; na — neither; aparam — inferior; na — nor; samam — equal; vibho — O great one; nāma — name; rūpa — characteristics; guṇaiḥ — by qualification; bhāvyam — all that is created; sat — eternal; asat — temporary; kiñcit — or anything like that; anyataḥ — from any other source.

Translation
Whatever we can understand by the nomenclature, characteristics and features of a particular thing — superior, inferior or equal, eternal or temporary — is not created from any source other than that of Your Lordship, thou so great.

Text 7
स भवानचरद् घोरं यत् तप: सुसमाहित: ।
तेन खेदयसे नस्त्वं पराशङ्कां च यच्छसि ॥ ७ ॥
sa bhavān acarad ghoraṁ
yat tapaḥ susamāhitaḥ
tena khedayase nas tvaṁ
parā-śaṅkāṁ ca yacchasi
Synonyms
saḥ — he; bhavān — your good self; acarat — undertook; ghoram — severe; yat tapaḥ — meditation; su-samāhitaḥ — in perfect discipline; tena — for that reason; khedayase — gives pain; naḥ — ourselves; tvam — your good self; parā — the ultimate truth; śaṅkām — doubts; ca — and; yacchasi — giving us a chance.

Translation
Yet we are moved to wonder about the existence of someone more powerful than you when we think of your great austerities in perfect discipline, although your good self is so powerful in the matter of creation.

Text 8
एतन्मे पृच्छत: सर्वं सर्वज्ञ सकलेश्वर ।
विजानीहि यथैवेदमहं बुध्येऽनुशासित: ॥ ८ ॥
etan me pṛcchataḥ sarvaṁ
sarva-jña sakaleśvara
vijānīhi yathaivedam
ahaṁ budhye ’nuśāsitaḥ
Synonyms
etat — all those; me — unto me; pṛcchataḥ — inquisitive; sarvam — all that is inquired; sarva-jña — one who knows everything; sakala — over all; īśvara — the controller; vijānīhi — kindly explain; yathā — as; eva — they are; idam — this; aham — myself; budhye — can understand; anuśāsitaḥ — just learning from you.

Translation
My dear father, you know everything, and you are the controller of all. Therefore, may all that I have inquired from you be kindly instructed to me so that I may be able to understand it as your student.

Text 9
ब्रह्मोवाच
सम्यक् कारुणिकस्येदं वत्स ते विचिकित्सितम् ।
यदहं चोदित: सौम्य भगवद्वीर्यदर्शने ॥ ९ ॥
brahmovāca
samyak kāruṇikasyedaṁ
vatsa te vicikitsitam
yad ahaṁ coditaḥ saumya
bhagavad-vīrya-darśane
Synonyms
brahmā uvāca — Lord Brahmā said; samyak — perfectly; kāruṇikasya — of you, who are very kind; idam — this; vatsa — my dear boy; te — your; vicikitsitam — inquisitiveness; yat — by which; aham — myself; coditaḥ — inspired; saumya — O gentle one; bhagavat — of the Personality of Godhead; vīrya — prowess; darśane — in the matter of.

Translation
Lord Brahmā said: My dear boy Nārada, being merciful to all (including me) you have asked all these questions because I have been inspired to see into the prowess of the Almighty Personality of Godhead.

Text 10
नानृतं तव तच्चापि यथा मां प्रब्रवीषि भो: ।
अविज्ञाय परं मत्त एतावत्त्वं यतो हि मे ॥ १० ॥
nānṛtaṁ tava tac cāpi
yathā māṁ prabravīṣi bhoḥ
avijñāya paraṁ matta
etāvat tvaṁ yato hi me
Synonyms
na — not; anṛtam — false; tava — of yours; tat — that; ca — also; api — as you have stated; yathā — in the matter of; mām — of myself; prabravīṣi — as you describe; bhoḥ — O my son; avijñāya — without knowing; param — the Supreme; mattaḥ — beyond myself; etāvat — all that you have spoken; tvam — yourself; yataḥ — for the reason of; hi — certainly; me — about me.

Translation
Whatever you have spoken about me is not false because unless and until one is aware of the Personality of Godhead, who is the ultimate truth beyond me, one is sure to be illusioned by observing my powerful activities.

Text 11
येन स्वरोचिषा विश्वं रोचितं रोचयाम्यहम् ।
यथार्कोऽग्निर्यथा सोमो यथर्क्षग्रहतारका: ॥ ११ ॥
yena sva-rociṣā viśvaṁ
rocitaṁ rocayāmy aham
yathārko ’gnir yathā somo
yatharkṣa-graha-tārakāḥ
Synonyms
yena — by whom; sva-rociṣā — by His own effulgence; viśvam — all the world; rocitam — already created by His potency; rocayāmi — do manifest; aham — I; yathā — as much; arkaḥ — the sun; agniḥ — fire; yathā — as; somaḥ — the moon; yathā — as also; ṛkṣa — the firmament; graha — the influential planets; tārakāḥ — the stars.

Translation
I create after the Lord’s creation by His personal effulgence [known as the brahmajyoti], just as when the sun manifests its fire, the moon, the firmament, the influential planets and the twinkling stars also manifest their brightness.

Text 12
तस्मै नमो भगवते वासुदेवाय धीमहि ।
यन्मायया दुर्जयया मां वदन्ति जगद्गुरुम् ॥ १२ ॥
tasmai namo bhagavate
vāsudevāya dhīmahi
yan-māyayā durjayayā
māṁ vadanti jagad-gurum
Synonyms
tasmai — unto Him; namaḥ — offer my obeisances; bhagavate — unto the Personality of Godhead; vāsudevāya — unto Lord Kṛṣṇa; dhīmahi — do meditate upon Him; yat — by whose; māyayā — potencies; durjayayā — invincible; mām — unto me; vadanti — they say; jagat — the world; gurum — the master.

Translation
I offer my obeisances and meditate upon Lord Kṛṣṇa [Vāsudeva], the Personality of Godhead, whose invincible potency influences them [the less intelligent class of men] to call me the supreme controller.

Text 13
विलज्जमानया यस्य स्थातुमीक्षापथेऽमुया ।
विमोहिता विकत्थन्ते ममाहमिति दुर्धिय: ॥ १३ ॥
vilajjamānayā yasya
sthātum īkṣā-pathe ’muyā
vimohitā vikatthante
mamāham iti durdhiyaḥ
Synonyms
vilajjamānayā — by one who is ashamed; yasya — whose; sthātum — to stay; īkṣā-pathe — in front; amuyā — by the bewildering energy; vimohitāḥ — those who are bewildered; vikatthante — talk nonsense; mama — it is mine; aham — I am everything; iti — thus vituperating; durdhiyaḥ — thus ill conceived.

Translation
The illusory energy of the Lord cannot take precedence, being ashamed of her position, but those who are bewildered by her always talk nonsense, being absorbed in thoughts of “It is I” and “It is mine.”

Text 14
द्रव्यं कर्म च कालश्च स्वभावो जीव एव च ।
वासुदेवात्परो ब्रह्मन्न च चान्योऽर्थोऽस्ति तत्त्वत: ॥ १४ ॥
dravyaṁ karma ca kālaś ca
svabhāvo jīva eva ca
vāsudevāt paro brahman
na cānyo ’rtho ’sti tattvataḥ
Synonyms
dravyam — the ingredients (earth, water, fire, air and sky); karma — the interaction; ca — and; kālaḥ — eternal time; ca — also; sva-bhāvaḥ — intuition or nature; jīvaḥ — the living being; eva — certainly; ca — and; vāsudevāt — from Vāsudeva; paraḥ — differentiated parts; brahman — O brāhmaṇa; na — never; ca — also; anyaḥ — separate; arthaḥ — value; asti — there is; tattvataḥ — in truth.

Translation
The five elementary ingredients of creation, the interaction thereof set up by eternal time, and the intuition or nature of the individual living beings are all differentiated parts and parcels of the Personality of Godhead, Vāsudeva, and in truth there is no other value in them.

Text 15
नारायणपरा वेदा देवा नारायणाङ्गजा: ।
नारायणपरा लोका नारायणपरा मखा: ॥ १५ ॥
nārāyaṇa-parā vedā
devā nārāyaṇāṅgajāḥ
nārāyaṇa-parā lokā
nārāyaṇa-parā makhāḥ
Synonyms
nārāyaṇa — the Supreme Lord; parāḥ — is the cause and is meant for; vedāḥ — knowledge; devāḥ — the demigods; nārāyaṇa — the Supreme Lord; aṅga-jāḥ — assisting hands; nārāyaṇa — the Personality of Godhead; parāḥ — for the sake of; lokāḥ — the planets; nārāyaṇa — the Supreme Lord; parāḥ — just to please Him; makhāḥ — all sacrifices.

Translation
The Vedic literatures are made by and are meant for the Supreme Lord, the demigods are also meant for serving the Lord as parts of His body, the different planets are also meant for the sake of the Lord, and different sacrifices are performed just to please Him.

Text 16
नारायणपरो योगो नारायणपरं तप: ।
नारायणपरं ज्ञानं नारायणपरा गति: ॥ १६ ॥
nārāyaṇa-paro yogo
nārāyaṇa-paraṁ tapaḥ
nārāyaṇa-paraṁ jñānaṁ
nārāyaṇa-parā gatiḥ
Synonyms
nārāyaṇa-paraḥ — just to know Nārāyaṇa; yogaḥ — concentration of mind; nārāyaṇa-param — just with an aim to achieve Nārāyaṇa; tapaḥ — austerity; nārāyaṇa-param — just to realize a glimpse of Nārāyaṇa; jñānam — culture of transcendental knowledge; nārāyaṇa-parā — the path of salvation ends by entering the kingdom of Nārāyaṇa; gatiḥ — progressive path.

Translation
All different types of meditation or mysticism are means for realizing Nārāyaṇa. All austerities are aimed at achieving Nārāyaṇa. Culture of transcendental knowledge is for getting a glimpse of Nārāyaṇa, and ultimately salvation is entering the kingdom of Nārāyaṇa.

Text 17
तस्यापि द्रष्टुरीशस्य कूटस्थस्याखिलात्मन: ।
सृज्यं सृजामि सृष्टोऽहमीक्षयैवाभिचोदित: ॥ १७ ॥
tasyāpi draṣṭur īśasya
kūṭa-sthasyākhilātmanaḥ
sṛjyaṁ sṛjāmi sṛṣṭo ’ham
īkṣayaivābhicoditaḥ
Synonyms
tasya — His; api — certainly; draṣṭuḥ — of the seer; īśasya — of the controller; kūṭa-sthasya — of the one who is over everyone’s intelligence; akhila-ātmanaḥ — of the Supersoul; sṛjyam — that which is already created; sṛjāmi — do I discover; sṛṣṭaḥ — created; aham — myself; īkṣayā — by glance over; eva — exactly; abhicoditaḥ — being inspired by Him.

Translation
Inspired by Him only, I discover what is already created by Him [Nārāyaṇa] under His vision as the all-pervading Supersoul, and I also am created by Him only.

Text 18
सत्त्वं रजस्तम इति निर्गुणस्य गुणास्त्रय: ।
स्थितिसर्गनिरोधेषु गृहीता मायया विभो: ॥ १८ ॥
sattvaṁ rajas tama iti
nirguṇasya guṇās trayaḥ
sthiti-sarga-nirodheṣu
gṛhītā māyayā vibhoḥ
Synonyms
sattvam — the mode of goodness; rajaḥ — the mode of passion; tamaḥ — the mode of ignorance; iti — all these; nirguṇasya — of the Transcendence; guṇāḥ trayaḥ — are three qualities; sthiti — maintenance; sarga — creation; nirodheṣu — in destruction; gṛhītāḥ — accepted; māyayā — by the external energy; vibhoḥ — of the Supreme.

Translation
The Supreme Lord is pure, spiritual form, transcendental to all material qualities, yet for the sake of the creation of the material world and its maintenance and annihilation, He accepts through His external energy the material modes of nature called goodness, passion and ignorance.

Text 19
कार्यकारणकर्तृत्वे द्रव्यज्ञानक्रियाश्रया: ।
बध्नन्ति नित्यदा मुक्तं मायिनं पुरुषं गुणा: ॥ १९ ॥
kārya-kāraṇa-kartṛtve
dravya-jñāna-kriyāśrayāḥ
badhnanti nityadā muktaṁ
māyinaṁ puruṣaṁ guṇāḥ
Synonyms
kārya — effect; kāraṇa — cause; kartṛtve — in activities; dravya — material; jñāna — knowledge; kriyā-āśrayāḥ — manifested by such symptoms; badhnanti — conditions; nityadā — eternally; muktam — transcendental; māyinam — affected by material energy; puruṣam — the living entity; guṇāḥ — the material modes.

Translation
These three modes of material nature, being further manifested as matter, knowledge and activities, put the eternally transcendental living entity under conditions of cause and effect and make him responsible for such activities.

Text 20
स एष भगवाल्लिंङ्गैस्त्रिभिरेतैरधोक्षज: ।
स्वलक्षितगतिर्ब्रह्मन् सर्वेषां मम चेश्वर: ॥ २० ॥
sa eṣa bhagavāḻ liṅgais
tribhir etair adhokṣajaḥ
svalakṣita-gatir brahman
sarveṣāṁ mama ceśvaraḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — He; eṣaḥ — this; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; liṅgaiḥ — by the symptoms; tribhiḥ — by the three; etaiḥ — by all these; adhokṣajaḥ — the Superseer Transcendence; su-alakṣita — veritably unseen; gatiḥ — movement; brahman — O Nārada; sarveṣām — of everyone; mama — mine; ca — as also; īśvaraḥ — the controller.

Translation
O Brāhmaṇa Nārada, the Superseer, the transcendent Lord, is beyond the perception of the material senses of the living entities because of the above-mentioned three modes of nature. But He is the controller of everyone, including me.

Text 21
कालं कर्म स्वभावं च मायेशो मायया स्वया ।
आत्मन् यद‍ृच्छया प्राप्तं विबुभूषुरुपाददे ॥ २१ ॥
kālaṁ karma svabhāvaṁ ca
māyeśo māyayā svayā
ātman yadṛcchayā prāptaṁ
vibubhūṣur upādade
Synonyms
kālam — eternal time; karma — the fate of the living entity; svabhāvam — nature; ca — also; māyā — potency; īśaḥ — the controller; māyayā — by the energy; svayā — of His own; ātman (ātmani) — unto His Self; yadṛcchayā — independently; prāptam — being merged in; vibubhūṣuḥ — appearing differently; upādade — accepted for being created again.

Translation
The Lord, who is the controller of all energies, thus creates, by His own potency, eternal time, the fate of all living entities, and their particular nature, for which they were created, and He again merges them independently.

Text 22
कालाद् गुणव्यतिकर: परिणाम: स्वभावत: ।
कर्मणो जन्म महत: पुरुषाधिष्ठितादभूत् ॥ २२ ॥
kālād guṇa-vyatikaraḥ
pariṇāmaḥ svabhāvataḥ
karmaṇo janma mahataḥ
puruṣādhiṣṭhitād abhūt
Synonyms
kālāt — from eternal time; guṇa-vyatikaraḥ — transformation of the modes by reaction; pariṇāmaḥ — transformation; svabhāvataḥ — from the nature; karmaṇaḥ — of activities; janma — creation; mahataḥ — of the mahat-tattva; puruṣa-adhiṣṭhitāt — because of the puruṣa incarnation of the Lord; abhūt — it took place.

Translation
After the incarnation of the first puruṣa [Kāraṇārṇavaśāyī Viṣṇu], the mahat-tattva, or the principles of material creation, take place, and then time is manifested, and in course of time the three qualities appear. Nature means the three qualitative appearances. They transform into activities.

Text 23
महतस्तु विकुर्वाणाद्रज:सत्त्वोपबृंहितात् ।
तम:प्रधानस्त्वभवद् द्रव्यज्ञानक्रियात्मक: ॥ २३ ॥
mahatas tu vikurvāṇād
rajaḥ-sattvopabṛṁhitāt
tamaḥ-pradhānas tv abhavad
dravya-jñāna-kriyātmakaḥ
Synonyms
mahataḥ — of the mahat-tattva; tu — but; vikurvāṇāt — being transformed; rajaḥ — the material mode of passion; sattva — the mode of goodness; upabṛṁhitāt — because of being increased; tamaḥ — the mode of darkness; pradhānaḥ — being prominent; tu — but; abhavat — took place; dravya — matter; jñāna — material knowledge; kriyā-ātmakaḥ — predominantly material activities.

Translation
Material activities are caused by the mahat-tattva’s being agitated. At first there is transformation of the modes of goodness and passion, and later — due to the mode of ignorance — matter, its knowledge, and different activities of material knowledge come into play.

Text 24
सोऽहङ्कार इति प्रोक्तो विकुर्वन् समभूत्‍त्रिधा ।
वैकारिकस्तैजसश्च तामसश्चेति यद्भिदा ।
द्रव्यशक्ति: क्रियाशक्तिर्ज्ञानशक्तिरिति प्रभो ॥ २४ ॥
so ’haṅkāra iti prokto
vikurvan samabhūt tridhā
vaikārikas taijasaś ca
tāmasaś ceti yad-bhidā
dravya-śaktiḥ kriyā-śaktir
jñāna-śaktir iti prabho
Synonyms
saḥ — the very same thing; ahaṅkāraḥ — ego; iti — thus; proktaḥ — said; vikurvan — being transformed; samabhūt — became manifested; tridhā — in three features; vaikārikaḥ — in the mode of goodness; taijasaḥ — in the mode of passion; ca — and; tāmasaḥ — in the mode of ignorance; ca — also; iti — thus; yat — what is; bhidā — divided; dravya-śaktiḥ — powers that evolve matter; kriyā-śaktiḥ — initiation that creates; jñāna-śaktiḥ — intelligence that guides; iti — thus; prabho — O master.

Translation
The self-centered materialistic ego, thus being transformed into three features, becomes known as the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance in three divisions, namely the powers that evolve matter, knowledge of material creations, and the intelligence that guides such materialistic activities. Nārada, you are quite competent to understand this.

Text 25
तामसादपि भूतादेर्विकुर्वाणादभून्नभ: ।
तस्य मात्रा गुण: शब्दो लिङ्गं यद् द्रष्टृद‍ृश्ययो: ॥ २५ ॥
tāmasād api bhūtāder
vikurvāṇād abhūn nabhaḥ
tasya mātrā guṇaḥ śabdo
liṅgaṁ yad draṣṭṛ-dṛśyayoḥ
Synonyms
tāmasāt — from the darkness of false ego; api — certainly; bhūta-ādeḥ — of the material elements; vikurvāṇāt — because of transformation; abhūt — generated; nabhaḥ — the sky; tasya — its; mātrā — subtle form; guṇaḥ — quality; śabdaḥ — sound; liṅgam — characteristics; yat — as its; draṣṭṛ — the seer; dṛśyayoḥ — of what is seen.

Translation
From the darkness of false ego, the first of the five elements, namely the sky, is generated. Its subtle form is the quality of sound, exactly as the seer is in relationship with the seen.

Texts 26-29
नभसोऽथ विकुर्वाणादभूत् स्पर्शगुणोऽनिल: ।
परान्वयाच्छब्दवांश्च प्राण ओज: सहो बलम् ॥ २६ ॥
वायोरपि विकुर्वाणात् कालकर्मस्वभावत: ।
उदपद्यत तेजो वै रूपवत् स्पर्शशब्दवत् ॥ २७ ॥
तेजसस्तु विकुर्वाणादासीदम्भो रसात्मकम् ।
रूपवत् स्पर्शवच्चाम्भो घोषवच्च परान्वयात् ॥ २८ ॥
विशेषस्तु विकुर्वाणादम्भसो गन्धवानभूत् ।
परान्वयाद् रसस्पर्शशब्दरूपगुणान्वित: ॥ २९ ॥
nabhaso ’tha vikurvāṇād
abhūt sparśa-guṇo ’nilaḥ
parānvayāc chabdavāṁś ca
prāṇa ojaḥ saho balam
vāyor api vikurvāṇāt
kāla-karma-svabhāvataḥ
udapadyata tejo vai
rūpavat sparśa-śabdavat
tejasas tu vikurvāṇād
āsīd ambho rasātmakam
rūpavat sparśavac cāmbho
ghoṣavac ca parānvayāt
viśeṣas tu vikurvāṇād
ambhaso gandhavān abhūt
parānvayād rasa-sparśa-
śabda-rūpa-guṇānvitaḥ
Synonyms
nabhasaḥ — of the sky; atha — thus; vikurvāṇāt — being transformed; abhūt — generated; sparśa — touch; guṇaḥ — quality; anilaḥ — air; para — previous; anvayāt — by succession; śabdavān — full of sound; ca — also; prāṇaḥ — life; ojaḥ — sense perception; sahaḥ — fat; balam — strength; vāyoḥ — of the air; api — also; vikurvāṇāt — by transformation; kāla — time; karma — reaction of the past; svabhāvataḥ — on the basis of nature; udapadyata — generated; tejaḥ — fire; vai — duly; rūpavat — with form; sparśa — touch; śabdavat — with sound also; tejasaḥ — of the fire; tu — but; vikurvāṇāt — on being transformed; āsīt — it so happened; ambhaḥ — water; rasa-ātmakam — composed of juice; rūpavat — with form; sparśavat — with touch; ca — and; ambhaḥ — water; ghoṣavat — with sound; ca — and; para — previous; anvayāt — by succession; viśeṣaḥ — variegatedness; tu — but; vikurvāṇāt — by transformation; ambhasaḥ — of water; gandhavān — odorous; abhūt — became; para — previous; anvayāt — by succession; rasa — juice; sparśa — touch; śabda — sound; rūpa-guṇa-anvitaḥ — qualitative.

Translation
Because the sky is transformed, the air is generated with the quality of touch, and by previous succession the air is also full of sound and the basic principles of duration of life: sense perception, mental power and bodily strength. When the air is transformed in course of time and nature’s course, fire is generated, taking shape with the sense of touch and sound. Since fire is also transformed, there is a manifestation of water, full of juice and taste. As previously, it also has form and touch and is also full of sound. And water, being transformed from all variegatedness on earth, appears odorous and, as previously, becomes qualitatively full of juice, touch, sound and form respectively.

Text 30
वैकारिकान्मनो जज्ञे देवा वैकारिका दश ।
दिग्वातार्कप्रचेतोऽश्विवह्नीन्द्रोपेन्द्रमित्रका: ॥ ३० ॥
vaikārikān mano jajñe
devā vaikārikā daśa
dig-vātārka-praceto ’śvi-
vahnīndropendra-mitra-kāḥ
Synonyms
vaikārikāt — from the mode of goodness; manaḥ — the mind; jajñe — generated; devāḥ — demigods; vaikārikāḥ — in the mode of goodness; daśa — ten; dik — the controller of directions; vāta — the controller of air; arka — the sun; pracetaḥ — Varuṇa; aśvi — the Aśvinī-kumāras; vahni — the fire-god; indra — the King of heaven; upendra — the deity in heaven; mitra — one of the twelve Ādityas; kāḥ — Prajāpati Brahmā.

Translation
From the mode of goodness the mind is generated and becomes manifest, as also the ten demigods controlling the bodily movements. Such demigods are known as the controller of directions, the controller of air, the sun-god, the father of Dakṣa Prajāpati, the Aśvinī-kumāras, the fire-god, the King of heaven, the worshipable deity in heaven, the chief of the Ādityas, and Brahmājī, the Prajāpati. All come into existence.

Text 31
तैजसात् तु विकुर्वाणादिन्द्रियाणि दशाभवन् ।
ज्ञानशक्ति: क्रियाशक्तिर्बुद्धि: प्राणश्च तैजसौ ।
श्रोत्रं त्वग्घ्राणद‍ृग्जिह्वा वागदोर्मेढ्राङ्‌घ्रिपायव: ॥ ३१ ॥
taijasāt tu vikurvāṇād
indriyāṇi daśābhavan
jñāna-śaktiḥ kriyā-śaktir
buddhiḥ prāṇaś ca taijasau
śrotraṁ tvag-ghrāṇa-dṛg-jihvā
vāg-dor-meḍhrāṅghri-pāyavaḥ
Synonyms
taijasāt — by the passionate egoism; tu — but; vikurvāṇāt — transformation of; indriyāṇi — the senses; daśa — ten; abhavan — generated; jñāna-śaktiḥ — the five senses for acquiring knowledge; kriyā-śaktiḥ — the five senses of activities; buddhiḥ — intelligence; prāṇaḥ — the living energy; ca — also; taijasau — all products of the mode of passion; śrotram — the sense for hearing; tvak — the sense for touching; ghrāṇa — the sense for smelling; dṛk — the sense for seeing; jihvāḥ — the sense for tasting; vāk — the sense for speaking; doḥ — the sense for handling; meḍhra — the genitals; aṅghri — the legs; pāyavaḥ — the sense for evacuating.

Translation
By further transformation of the mode of passion, the sense organs like the ear, skin, nose, eyes, tongue, mouth, hands, genitals, legs, and the outlet for evacuating, together with intelligence and living energy, are all generated.

Text 32
यदैतेऽसङ्गता भावा भूतेन्द्रियमनोगुणा: ।
यदायतननिर्माणे न शेकुर्ब्रह्मवित्तम ॥ ३२ ॥
yadaite ’saṅgatā bhāvā
bhūtendriya-mano-guṇāḥ
yadāyatana-nirmāṇe
na śekur brahma-vittama
Synonyms
yadā — as long as; ete — all these; asaṅgatāḥ — without being assembled; bhāvāḥ — remained so situated; bhūta — elements; indriya — senses; manaḥ — mind; guṇāḥ — modes of nature; yadā — so long; āyatana — the body; nirmāṇe — in being formed; na śekuḥ — was not possible; brahma-vit-tama — O Nārada, the best knower of transcendental knowledge.

Translation
O Nārada, best of the transcendentalists, the forms of the body cannot take place as long as these created parts, namely the elements, senses, mind and modes of nature, are not assembled.

Text 33
तदा संहृत्य चान्योन्यं भगवच्छक्तिचोदिता: ।
सदसत्त्वमुपादाय चोभयं ससृजुर्ह्यद: ॥ ३३ ॥
tadā saṁhatya cānyonyaṁ
bhagavac-chakti-coditāḥ
sad-asattvam upādāya
cobhayaṁ sasṛjur hy adaḥ
Synonyms
tadā — all those; saṁhatya — being assembled; ca — also; anyonyam — one another; bhagavat — by the Personality of Godhead; śakti — energy; coditāḥ — being applied; sat-asattvam — primarily and secondarily; upādāya — accepting; ca — also; ubhayam — both; sasṛjuḥ — came into existence; hi — certainly; adaḥ — this universe.

Translation
Thus when all these became assembled by force of the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, this universe certainly came into being by accepting both the primary and secondary causes of creation.

Text 34
वर्षपूगसहस्रान्ते तदण्डमुदकेशयम् ।
कालकर्मस्वभावस्थो जीवोऽजीवमजीवयत् ॥ ३४ ॥
varṣa-pūga-sahasrānte
tad aṇḍam udake śayam
kāla-karma-svabhāva-stho
jīvo ’jīvam ajīvayat
Synonyms
varṣa-pūga — many years; sahasra-ante — of thousands of years; tat — that; aṇḍam — the universal globe; udake — in the causal water; śayam — being drowned; kāla — eternal time; karma — action; svabhāva-sthaḥ — according to the modes of nature; jīvaḥ — the Lord of the living beings; ajīvam — nonanimated; ajīvayat — caused to be animated.

Translation
Thus all the universes remained thousands of aeons within the water [the Causal Ocean], and the Lord of living beings, entering in each of them, caused them to be fully animated.

Text 35
स एव पुरुषस्तस्मादण्डं निर्भिद्य निर्गत: ।
सहस्रोर्वङ्‌घ्रिबाह्वक्ष: सहस्राननशीर्षवान् ॥ ३५ ॥
sa eva puruṣas tasmād
aṇḍaṁ nirbhidya nirgataḥ
sahasrorv-aṅghri-bāhv-akṣaḥ
sahasrānana-śīrṣavān
Synonyms
saḥ — He (the Lord); eva — Himself; puruṣaḥ — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; tasmāt — from within the universe; aṇḍam — Hiraṇyagarbha; nirbhidya — dividing; nirgataḥ — came out; sahasra — thousands; ūru — thighs; aṅghri — legs; bāhu — arms; akṣaḥ — eyes; sahasra — thousands of; ānana — mouths; śīrṣavān — with heads also.

Translation
The Lord [Mahā-Viṣṇu], although lying in the Causal Ocean, came out of it, and dividing Himself as Hiraṇyagarbha, He entered into each universe and assumed the virāṭ-rūpa, with thousands of legs, arms, mouths, heads, etc.

Text 36
यस्येहावयवैर्लोकान् कल्पयन्ति मनीषिण: ।
कट्यादिभिरध: सप्त सप्तोर्ध्वं जघनादिभि: ॥ ३६ ॥
yasyehāvayavair lokān
kalpayanti manīṣiṇaḥ
kaṭya-ādibhir adhaḥ sapta
saptordhvaṁ jaghanādibhiḥ
Synonyms
yasya — whose; iha — in the universe; avayavaiḥ — by the limbs of the body; lokān — all the planets; kalpayanti — imagine; manīṣiṇaḥ — great philosophers; kaṭi-ādibhiḥ — down from the waist; adhaḥ — downwards; sapta — seven systems; sapta ūrdhvam — and seven systems upwards; jaghana-ādibhiḥ — front portion.

Translation
Great philosophers imagine that the complete planetary systems in the universe are displays of the different upper and lower limbs of the universal body of the Lord.

Text 37
पुरुषस्य मुखं ब्रह्म क्षत्रमेतस्य बाहव: ।
ऊर्वोर्वैश्यो भगवत: पद्‍भ्यां शूद्रो व्यजायत ॥ ३७ ॥
puruṣasya mukhaṁ brahma
kṣatram etasya bāhavaḥ
ūrvor vaiśyo bhagavataḥ
padbhyāṁ śūdro vyajāyata
Synonyms
puruṣasya — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead; mukham — mouth; brahma — is the brāhmaṇas; kṣatram — the royal order; etasya — of Him; bāhavaḥ — the arms; ūrvoḥ — the thighs; vaiśyaḥ — are the mercantile men; bhagavataḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; padbhyām — from His legs; śūdraḥ — the laborer class; vyajāyata — became manifested.

Translation
The brāhmaṇas represent His mouth, the kṣatriyas His arms, the vaiśyas His thighs, and the śūdras are born of His legs.

Text 38
भूर्लोक: कल्पित: पद्‍भ्यां भुवर्लोकोऽस्य नाभित: ।
हृदा स्वर्लोक उरसा महर्लोको महात्मन: ॥ ३८ ॥
bhūrlokaḥ kalpitaḥ padbhyāṁ
bhuvarloko ’sya nābhitaḥ
hṛdā svarloka urasā
maharloko mahātmanaḥ
Synonyms
bhūḥ — the lower planetary systems up to the stratum of the earth; lokaḥ — the planets; kalpitaḥ — it is so imagined or said; padbhyām — out of the legs; bhuvaḥ — the upper; lokaḥ — the planetary system; asya — of Him (the Lord); nābhitaḥ — from the navel abdomen; hṛdā — by the heart; svarlokaḥ — the planetary systems occupied by the demigods; urasā — by the chest; maharlokaḥ — the planetary system occupied by great sages and saints; mahā-ātmanaḥ — of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

Translation
The lower planetary systems, up to the limit of the earthly stratum, are said to be situated in His legs. The middle planetary systems, beginning from Bhuvarloka, are situated in His navel. And the still higher planetary systems, occupied by the demigods and highly cultured sages and saints, are situated in the chest of the Supreme Lord.

Text 39
ग्रीवायां जनलोकोऽस्य तपोलोक: स्तनद्वयात् ।
मूर्धभि: सत्यलोकस्तु ब्रह्मलोक: सनातन: ॥ ३९ ॥
grīvāyāṁ janaloko ’sya
tapolokaḥ stana-dvayāt
mūrdhabhiḥ satyalokas tu
brahmalokaḥ sanātanaḥ
Synonyms
grīvāyām — up to the neck; janalokaḥ — the Janaloka planetary system; asya — of Him; tapolokaḥ — the Tapoloka planetary system; stana-dvayāt — beginning from the breast; mūrdhabhiḥ — by the head; satyalokaḥ — the Satyaloka planetary system; tu — but; brahmalokaḥ — the spiritual planets; sanātanaḥ — eternal.

Translation
From the forefront of the chest up to the neck of the universal form of the Lord are situated the planetary systems named Janaloka and Tapoloka, whereas Satyaloka, the topmost planetary system, is situated on the head of the form. The spiritual planets, however, are eternal.

Texts 40-41
तत्कट्यां चातलं क्लृप्तमूरुभ्यां वितलं विभो: ।
जानुभ्यां सुतलं शुद्धं जङ्घाभ्यां तु तलातलम् ॥ ४० ॥
महातलं तु गुल्फाभ्यां प्रपदाभ्यां रसातलम् ।
पातालं पादतलत इति लोकमय: पुमान् ॥ ४१ ॥
tat-kaṭyāṁ cātalaṁ kḷptam
ūrubhyāṁ vitalaṁ vibhoḥ
jānubhyāṁ sutalaṁ śuddhaṁ
jaṅghābhyāṁ tu talātalam
mahātalaṁ tu gulphābhyāṁ
prapadābhyāṁ rasātalam
pātālaṁ pāda-talata
iti lokamayaḥ pumān
Synonyms
tat — in His; kaṭyām — waist; ca — also; atalam — the first planetary system below the earth; kḷptam — situated; ūrubhyām — on the thighs; vitalam — the second planetary system below; vibhoḥ — of the Lord; jānubhyām — on the ankles; sutalam — the third planetary system below; śuddham — purified; jaṅghābhyām — on the joints; tu — but; talātalam — the fourth planetary system below; mahātalam — the fifth planetary system below; tu — but; gulphābhyām — situated on the calves; prapadābhyām — on the upper or front portion of the feet; rasātalam — the sixth planetary system below; pātālam — the seventh planetary system below; pāda-talataḥ — on the bottom or soles of the feet; iti — thus; loka-mayaḥ — full of planetary systems; pumān — the Lord.

Translation
My dear son Nārada, know from me that there are seven lower planetary systems out of the total fourteen. The first planetary system, known as Atala, is situated on the waist; the second, Vitala, is situated on the thighs; the third, Sutala, on the knees; the fourth, Talātala, on the shanks; the fifth, Mahātala, on the ankles; the sixth, Rasātala, on the upper portion of the feet; and the seventh, Pātāla, on the soles of the feet. Thus the virāṭ form of the Lord is full of all planetary systems.

Text 42
भूर्लोक: कल्पित: पद्‍भ्यां भुवर्लोकोऽस्य नाभित: ।
स्वर्लोक: कल्पितो मूर्ध्ना इति वा लोककल्पना ॥ ४२ ॥
bhūrlokaḥ kalpitaḥ padbhyāṁ
bhuvarloko ’sya nābhitaḥ
svarlokaḥ kalpito mūrdhnā
iti vā loka-kalpanā
Synonyms
bhūrlokaḥ — the entire planetary system from Pātāla to the earthly planetary system; kalpitaḥ — imagined; padbhyām — situated on the legs; bhuvarlokaḥ — the Bhuvarloka planetary system; asya — of the universal form of the Lord; nābhitaḥ — out of the navel abdomen; svarlokaḥ — the higher planetary system, beginning with the heavenly planets; kalpitaḥ — imagined; mūrdhnā — from the chest to the head; iti — thus; vā — either; loka — the planetary systems; kalpanā — imagination.

Translation
Others may divide the whole planetary system into three divisions, namely the lower planetary systems on the legs [up to the earth], the middle planetary systems on the navel, and the upper planetary systems [Svarloka] from the chest to the head of the Supreme Personality.