Text 1
श्रीशुक उवाच
आत्ममायामृते राजन् परस्यानुभवात्मन: ।
न घटेतार्थसम्बन्ध: स्वप्नद्रष्टुरिवाञ्जसा ॥ १ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
ātma-māyām ṛte rājan
parasyānubhavātmanaḥ
na ghaṭetārtha-sambandhaḥ
svapna-draṣṭur ivāñjasā
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; ātma — the Supreme Personality of Godhead; māyām — energy; ṛte — without; rājan — O King; parasya — of the pure soul; anubhava-ātmanaḥ — of the purely conscious; na — never; ghaṭeta — it can so happen; artha — meaning; sambandhaḥ — relation with the material body; svapna — dream; draṣṭuḥ — of the seer; iva — like; añjasā — completely.

Translation
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said: O King, unless one is influenced by the energy of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, there is no meaning to the relationship of the pure soul in pure consciousness with the material body. That relationship is just like a dreamer’s seeing his own body working.

Text 2
बहुरूप इवाभाति मायया बहुरूपया ।
रममाणो गुणेष्वस्या ममाहमिति मन्यते ॥ २ ॥
bahu-rūpa ivābhāti
māyayā bahu-rūpayā
ramamāṇo guṇeṣv asyā
mamāham iti manyate
Synonyms
bahu-rūpaḥ — multiforms; iva — as it were; ābhāti — manifested; māyayā — by the influence of the exterior energy; bahu-rūpayā — in multifarious forms; ramamāṇaḥ — enjoying as it were; guṇeṣu — in the modes of different qualities; asyāḥ — of the external energy; mama — mine; aham — I; iti — thus; manyate — thinks.

Translation
The illusioned living entity appears in so many forms offered by the external energy of the Lord. While enjoying in the modes of material nature, the encaged living entity misconceives, thinking in terms of “I” and “mine.”

Text 3
यर्हि वाव महिम्नि स्वे परस्मिन् कालमाययो: ।
रमेत गतसम्मोहस्त्यक्त्वोदास्ते तदोभयम् ॥ ३ ॥
yarhi vāva mahimni sve
parasmin kāla-māyayoḥ
rameta gata-sammohas
tyaktvodāste tadobhayam
Synonyms
yarhi — at any time; vāva — certainly; mahimni — in the glory; sve — of himself; parasmin — in the Supreme; kāla — time; māyayoḥ — of the material energy; rameta — enjoys; gata-sammohaḥ — being freed from the misconception; tyaktvā — giving up; udāste — in fullness; tadā — then; ubhayam — both (the misconceptions of I and mine).

Translation
As soon as the living entity becomes situated in his constitutional glory and begins to enjoy the transcendence beyond time and material energy, he at once gives up the two misconceptions of life [I and mine] and thus becomes fully manifested as the pure self.

Text 4
आत्मतत्त्वविशुद्ध्यर्थं यदाह भगवानृतम् ।
ब्रह्मणे दर्शयन् रूपमव्यलीकव्रताद‍ृत: ॥ ४ ॥
ātma-tattva-viśuddhy-arthaṁ
yad āha bhagavān ṛtam
brahmaṇe darśayan rūpam
avyalīka-vratādṛtaḥ
Synonyms
ātma-tattva — the science of God or that of the living entity; viśuddhi — purification; artham — goal; yat — that which; āha — said; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; ṛtam — in reality; brahmaṇe — unto Lord Brahmā; darśayan — by showing; rūpam — eternal form; avyalīka — without any deceptive motive; vrata — vow; ādṛtaḥ — worshiped.

Translation
O King, the Personality of Godhead, being very much pleased with Lord Brahmā because of his nondeceptive penance in bhakti-yoga, presented His eternal and transcendental form before Brahmā. And that is the objective goal for purifying the conditioned soul.

Text 5
स आदिदेवो जगतां परो गुरु:
स्वधिष्ण्यमास्थाय सिसृक्षयैक्षत ।
तां नाध्यगच्छद् द‍ृशमत्र सम्मतां
प्रपञ्चनिर्माणविधिर्यया भवेत् ॥ ५ ॥
sa ādi-devo jagatāṁ paro guruḥ
svadhiṣṇyam āsthāya sisṛkṣayaikṣata
tāṁ nādhyagacchad dṛśam atra sammatāṁ
prapañca-nirmāṇa-vidhir yayā bhavet
Synonyms
saḥ — he; ādi-devaḥ — the first demigod; jagatām — of the universe; paraḥ — supreme; guruḥ — spiritual master; svadhiṣṇyam — his lotus seat; āsthāya — to find the source of it; sisṛkṣayā — for the matter of creating the universal affairs; aikṣata — began to think; tām — in that matter; na — could not; adhyagacchat — understand; dṛśam — the direction; atra — therein; sammatām — just the proper way; prapañca — material; nirmāṇa — construction; vidhiḥ — process; yayā — as much as; bhavet — should be.

Translation
Lord Brahmā, the first spiritual master, supreme in the universe, could not trace out the source of his lotus seat, and while thinking of creating the material world, he could not understand the proper direction for such creative work, nor could he find out the process for such creation.

Text 6
स चिन्तयन् द्वय‍क्षरमेकदाम्भ-
स्युपाश‍ृणोद् द्विर्गदितं वचो विभु: ।
स्पर्शेषु यत्षोडशमेकविंशं
निष्किञ्चनानां नृप यद् धनं विदु: ॥ ६ ॥
sa cintayan dvy-akṣaram ekadāmbhasy
upāśṛṇod dvir-gaditaṁ vaco vibhuḥ
sparśeṣu yat ṣoḍaśam ekaviṁśaṁ
niṣkiñcanānāṁ nṛpa yad dhanaṁ viduḥ
Synonyms
saḥ — he; cintayan — while thus thinking; dvi — two; akṣaram — syllables; ekadā — once upon a time; ambhasi — in the water; upāśṛṇot — heard it nearby; dviḥ — twice; gaditam — uttered; vacaḥ — words; vibhuḥ — the great; sparśeṣu — in the sparśa letters; yat — which; ṣoḍaśam — the sixteenth; ekaviṁśam — and the twenty-first; niṣkiñcanānām — of the renounced order of life; nṛpa — O King; yat — what is; dhanam — wealth; viduḥ — as it is known.

Translation
While thus engaged in thinking, in the water, Brahmājī heard twice from nearby two syllables joined together. One of the syllables was taken from the sixteenth and the other from the twenty-first of the sparśa alphabets, and both joined to become the wealth of the renounced order of life.

Text 7
निशम्य तद्वक्तृदिद‍ृक्षया दिशो
विलोक्य तत्रान्यदपश्यमान: ।
स्वधिष्ण्यमास्थाय विमृश्य तद्धितं
तपस्युपादिष्ट इवादधे मन: ॥ ७ ॥
niśamya tad-vaktṛ-didṛkṣayā diśo
vilokya tatrānyad apaśyamānaḥ
svadhiṣṇyam āsthāya vimṛśya tad-dhitaṁ
tapasy upādiṣṭa ivādadhe manaḥ
Synonyms
niśamya — after hearing; tat — that; vaktṛ — the speaker; didṛkṣayā — just to find out who spoke; diśaḥ — all sides; vilokya — seeing; tatra — there; anyat — any other; apaśyamānaḥ — not to be found; svadhiṣṇyam — on his lotus seat; āsthāya — sit down; vimṛśya — thinking; tat — it; hitam — welfare; tapasi — in penance; upādiṣṭaḥ — as he was instructed; iva — in pursuance of; ādadhe — gave; manaḥ — attention.

Translation
When he heard the sound, he tried to find the speaker, searching on all sides. But when he was unable to find anyone besides himself, he thought it wise to sit down on his lotus seat firmly and give his attention to the execution of penance, as he was instructed.

Text 8
दिव्यं सहस्राब्दममोघदर्शनो
जितानिलात्मा विजितोभयेन्द्रिय: ।
अतप्यत स्माखिललोकतापनं
तपस्तपीयांस्तपतां समाहित: ॥ ८ ॥
divyaṁ sahasrābdam amogha-darśano
jitānilātmā vijitobhayendriyaḥ
atapyata smākhila-loka-tāpanaṁ
tapas tapīyāṁs tapatāṁ samāhitaḥ
Synonyms
divyam — pertaining to the demigods in the higher planets; sahasra — one thousand; abdam — years; amogha — spotless, without a tinge of impurity; darśanaḥ — one who has such a vision of life; jita — controlled; anila — life; ātmā — mind; vijita — controlled over; ubhaya — both; indriyaḥ — one who has such senses; atapyata — executed penance; sma — in the past; akhila — all; loka — planet; tāpanam — enlightening; tapaḥ — penance; tapīyān — extremely hard penance; tapatām — of all the executors of penances; samāhitaḥ — thus situated.

Translation
Lord Brahmā underwent penances for one thousand years by the calculations of the demigods. He heard this transcendental vibration from the sky, and he accepted it as divine. Thus he controlled his mind and senses, and the penances he executed were a great lesson for the living entities. Thus he is known as the greatest of all ascetics.

Text 9
तस्मै स्वलोकं भगवान् सभाजित:
सन्दर्शयामास परं न यत्परम् ।
व्यपेतसंक्लेशविमोहसाध्वसं
स्वद‍ृष्टवद्भिर्पुरुषैरभिष्टुतम् ॥ ९ ॥
tasmai sva-lokaṁ bhagavān sabhājitaḥ
sandarśayām āsa paraṁ na yat-param
vyapeta-saṅkleśa-vimoha-sādhvasaṁ
sva-dṛṣṭavadbhir puruṣair abhiṣṭutam
Synonyms
tasmai — unto him; sva-lokam — His own planet or abode; bhagavān — the Personality of Godhead; sabhājitaḥ — being pleased by the penance of Brahmā; sandarśayām āsa — manifested; param — the supreme; na — not; yat — of which; param — further supreme; vyapeta — completely given up; saṅkleśa — five kinds of material afflictions; vimoha — without illusion; sādhvasam — fear of material existence; sva-dṛṣṭa-vadbhiḥ — by those who have perfectly realized the self; puruṣaiḥ — by persons; abhiṣṭutam — worshiped by.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead, being thus very much satisfied with the penance of Lord Brahmā, was pleased to manifest His personal abode, Vaikuṇṭha, the supreme planet above all others. This transcendental abode of the Lord is adored by all self-realized persons freed from all kinds of miseries and fear of illusory existence.

Text 10
प्रवर्तते यत्र रजस्तमस्तयो:
सत्त्वं च मिश्रं न च कालविक्रम: ।
न यत्र माया किमुतापरे हरे-
रनुव्रता यत्र सुरासुरार्चिता: ॥ १० ॥
pravartate yatra rajas tamas tayoḥ
sattvaṁ ca miśraṁ na ca kāla-vikramaḥ
na yatra māyā kim utāpare harer
anuvratā yatra surāsurārcitāḥ
Synonyms
pravartate — prevail; yatra — wherein; rajaḥ tamaḥ — the modes of passion and ignorance; tayoḥ — of both of them; sattvam — the mode of goodness; ca — and; miśram — mixture; na — never; ca — and; kāla — time; vikramaḥ — influence; na — neither; yatra — therein; māyā — illusory, external energy; kim — what; uta — there is; apare — others; hareḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; anuvratāḥ — devotees; yatra — wherein; sura — by the demigods; asura — and the demons; arcitāḥ — worshiped.

Translation
In that personal abode of the Lord, the material modes of ignorance and passion do not prevail, nor is there any of their influence in goodness. There is no predominance of the influence of time, so what to speak of the illusory, external energy; it cannot enter that region. Without discrimination, both the demigods and the demons worship the Lord as devotees.

Text 11
श्यामावदाता: शतपत्रलोचना:
पिशङ्गवस्त्रा: सुरुच: सुपेशस: ।
सर्वे चतुर्बाहव उन्मिषन्मणि-
प्रवेकनिष्काभरणा: सुवर्चस: ॥ ११ ॥
śyāmāvadātāḥ śata-patra-locanāḥ
piśaṅga-vastrāḥ surucaḥ supeśasaḥ
sarve catur-bāhava unmiṣan-maṇi-
praveka-niṣkābharaṇāḥ suvarcasaḥ
Synonyms
śyāma — sky-bluish; avadātāḥ — glowing; śata-patra — lotus flower; locanāḥ — eyes; piśaṅga — yellowish; vastrāḥ — clothing; su-rucaḥ — greatly attractive; su-peśasaḥ — growing youthful; sarve — all of them; catuḥ — four; bāhavaḥ — hands; unmiṣan — rising luster; maṇi — pearls; praveka — superior quality; niṣka-ābharaṇāḥ — ornamental medallions; su-varcasaḥ — effulgent.

Translation
The inhabitants of the Vaikuṇṭha planets are described as having a glowing sky-bluish complexion. Their eyes resemble lotus flowers, their dress is of yellowish color, and their bodily features very attractive. They are just the age of growing youths, they all have four hands, they are all nicely decorated with pearl necklaces with ornamental medallions, and they all appear to be effulgent.

Text 12
प्रवालवैदूर्यमृणालवर्चस: ।
परिस्फुरत्कुण्डलमौलिमालिन: ॥ १२ ॥
pravāla-vaidūrya-mṛṇāla-varcasaḥ
parisphurat-kuṇḍala-mauli-mālinaḥ
Synonyms
pravāla — coral; vaidūrya — a special diamond; mṛṇāla — celestial lotus; varcasaḥ — rays; parisphurat — blooming; kuṇḍala — earring; mauli — heads; mālinaḥ — with garlands.

Translation
Some of them are effulgent like coral and diamonds in complexion and have garlands on their heads, blooming like lotus flowers, and some wear earrings.

Text 13
भ्राजिष्णुभिर्य: परितो विराजते
लसद्विमानावलिभिर्महात्मनाम् ।
विद्योतमान: प्रमदोत्तमाद्युभि:
सविद्युदभ्रावलिभिर्यथा नभ: ॥ १३ ॥
bhrājiṣṇubhir yaḥ parito virājate
lasad-vimānāvalibhir mahātmanām
vidyotamānaḥ pramadottamādyubhiḥ
savidyud-abhrāvalibhir yathā nabhaḥ
Synonyms
bhrājiṣṇubhiḥ — by the glowing; yaḥ — the Vaikuṇṭhalokas; paritaḥ — surrounded by; virājate — thus situated; lasat — brilliant; vimāna — airplanes; avalibhiḥ — assemblage; mahā-ātmanām — of the great devotees of the Lord; vidyotamānaḥ — beautiful like lightning; pramada — ladies; uttama — celestial; adyubhiḥ — by complexion; sa-vidyut — with electric lightning; abhrāvalibhiḥ — with clouds in the sky; yathā — as it were; nabhaḥ — the sky.

Translation
The Vaikuṇṭha planets are also surrounded by various airplanes, all glowing and brilliantly situated. These airplanes belong to the great mahātmās or devotees of the Lord. The ladies are as beautiful as lightning because of their celestial complexions, and all these combined together appear just like the sky decorated with both clouds and lightning.

Text 14
श्रीर्यत्र रूपिण्युरुगायपादयो:
करोति मानं बहुधा विभूतिभि: ।
प्रेङ्खं श्रिता या कुसुमाकरानुगै-
र्विगीयमाना प्रियकर्म गायती ॥ १४ ॥
śrīr yatra rūpiṇy urugāya-pādayoḥ
karoti mānaṁ bahudhā vibhūtibhiḥ
preṅkhaṁ śritā yā kusumākarānugair
vigīyamānā priya-karma-gāyatī
Synonyms
śrīḥ — the goddess of fortune; yatra — in the Vaikuṇṭha planets; rūpiṇī — in her transcendental form; urugāya — the Lord, who is sung of by the great devotees; pādayoḥ — under the lotus feet of the Lord; karoti — does; mānam — respectful services; bahudhā — in diverse paraphernalia; vibhūtibhiḥ — accompanied by her personal associates; preṅkham — movement of enjoyment; śritā — taken shelter of; yā — who; kusumākara — spring; anugaiḥ — by the black bees; vigīyamānā — being followed by the songs; priya-karma — activities of the dearmost; gāyatī — singing.

Translation
The goddess of fortune in her transcendental form is engaged in the loving service of the Lord’s lotus feet, and being moved by the black bees, followers of spring, she is not only engaged in variegated pleasure — service to the Lord, along with her constant companions — but is also engaged in singing the glories of the Lord’s activities.

Text 15
ददर्श तत्राखिलसात्वतां पतिं
श्रिय: पतिं यज्ञपतिं जगत्पतिम् ।
सुनन्दनन्दप्रबलार्हणादिभि:
स्वपार्षदाग्रै: परिसेवितं विभुम् ॥ १५ ॥
dadarśa tatrākhila-sātvatāṁ patiṁ
śriyaḥ patiṁ yajña-patiṁ jagat-patim
sunanda-nanda-prabalārhaṇādibhiḥ
sva-pārṣadāgraiḥ parisevitaṁ vibhum
Synonyms
dadarśa — Brahmā saw; tatra — there (in Vaikuṇṭhaloka); akhila — entire; sātvatām — of the great devotees; patim — the Lord; śriyaḥ — of the goddess of fortune; patim — the Lord; yajña — of sacrifice; patim — the Lord; jagat — of the universe; patim — the Lord; sunanda — Sunanda; nanda — Nanda; prabala — Prabala; arhaṇa — Arhaṇa; ādibhiḥ — by them; sva-pārṣada — own associates; agraiḥ — by the foremost; parisevitam — being served in transcendental love; vibhum — the great Almighty.

Translation
Lord Brahmā saw in the Vaikuṇṭha planets the Personality of Godhead, who is the Lord of the entire devotee community, the Lord of the goddess of fortune, the Lord of all sacrifices, and the Lord of the universe, and who is served by the foremost servitors like Nanda, Sunanda, Prabala and Arhaṇa, His immediate associates.

Text 16
भृत्यप्रसादाभिमुखं द‍ृगासवं
प्रसन्नहासारुणलोचनाननम् ।
किरीटिनं कुण्डलिनं चतुर्भुजं
पीतांशुकं वक्षसि लक्षितं श्रिया ॥ १६ ॥
bhṛtya-prasādābhimukhaṁ dṛg-āsavaṁ
prasanna-hāsāruṇa-locanānanam
kirīṭinaṁ kuṇḍalinaṁ catur-bhujaṁ
pītāṁśukaṁ vakṣasi lakṣitaṁ śriyā
Synonyms
bhṛtya — the servitor; prasāda — affection; abhimukham — favorably facing; dṛk — the very sight; āsavam — an intoxication; prasanna — very much pleased; hāsa — smile; aruṇa — reddish; locana — eyes; ānanam — face; kirīṭinam — with helmet; kuṇḍalinam — with earrings; catuḥ-bhujam — with four hands; pīta — yellow; aṁśukam — dress; vakṣasi — on the chest; lakṣitam — marked; śriyā — with the goddess of fortune.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead, seen leaning favorably towards His loving servitors, His very sight intoxicating and attractive, appeared to be very much satisfied. He had a smiling face decorated with an enchanting reddish hue. He was dressed in yellow robes and wore earrings and a helmet on his head. He had four hands, and His chest was marked with the lines of the goddess of fortune.

Text 17
अध्यर्हणीयासनमास्थितं परं
वृतं चतु:षोडशपञ्चशक्तिभि: ।
युक्तं भगै: स्वैरितरत्र चाध्रुवै:
स्व एव धामन् रममाणमीश्वरम् ॥ १७ ॥
adhyarhaṇīyāsanam āsthitaṁ paraṁ
vṛtaṁ catuḥ-ṣoḍaśa-pañca-śaktibhiḥ
yuktaṁ bhagaiḥ svair itaratra cādhruvaiḥ
sva eva dhāman ramamāṇam īśvaram
Synonyms
adhyarhaṇīya — greatly worshipable; āsanam — throne; āsthitam — seated on it; param — the Supreme; vṛtam — surrounded by; catuḥ — four, namely prakṛti, puruṣa, mahat and ego; ṣoḍaśa — the sixteen; pañca — the five; śaktibhiḥ — by the energies; yuktam — empowered with; bhagaiḥ — His opulences; svaiḥ — personal; itaratra — other minor prowesses; ca — also; adhruvaiḥ — temporary; sve — own; eva — certainly; dhāman — abode; ramamāṇam — enjoying; īśvaram — the Supreme Lord.

Translation
The Lord was seated on His throne and was surrounded by different energies like the four, the sixteen, the five, and the six natural opulences, along with other insignificant energies of the temporary character. But He was the factual Supreme Lord, enjoying His own abode.

Text 18
तद्दर्शनाह्लादपरिप्लुतान्तरो
हृष्यत्तनु: प्रेमभराश्रुलोचन: ।
ननाम पादाम्बुजमस्य विश्वसृग्
यत् पारमहंस्येन पथाधिगम्यते ॥ १८ ॥
tad-darśanāhlāda-pariplutāntaro
hṛṣyat-tanuḥ prema-bharāśru-locanaḥ
nanāma pādāmbujam asya viśva-sṛg
yat pāramahaṁsyena pathādhigamyate
Synonyms
tat — by that audience of the Lord; darśana — audience; āhlāda — joy; paripluta — overwhelmed; antaraḥ — within the heart; hṛṣyat — full in ecstasy; tanuḥ — body; prema-bhara — in full transcendental love; aśru — tears; locanaḥ — in the eyes; nanāma — bowed down; pāda-ambujam — under the lotus feet; asya — of the Lord; viśva-sṛk — the creator of the universe; yat — which; pāramahaṁsyena — by the great liberated soul; pathā — the path; adhigamyate — is followed.

Translation
Lord Brahmā, thus seeing the Personality of Godhead in His fullness, was overwhelmed with joy within his heart, and thus in full transcendental love and ecstasy, his eyes filled with tears of love. He thus bowed down before the Lord. That is the way of the highest perfection for the living being [paramahaṁsa].

Text 19
तं प्रीयमाणं समुपस्थितं कविं
प्रजाविसर्गे निजशासनार्हणम् ।
बभाष ईषत्स्मितशोचिषा गिरा
प्रिय: प्रियं प्रीतमना: करे स्पृशन् ॥ १९ ॥
taṁ prīyamāṇaṁ samupasthitaṁ kaviṁ
prajā-visarge nija-śāsanārhaṇam
babhāṣa īṣat-smita-śociṣā girā
priyaḥ priyaṁ prīta-manāḥ kare spṛśan
Synonyms
tam — unto Lord Brahmā; prīyamāṇam — worthy of being dear; samupasthitam — present before; kavim — the great scholar; prajā — living entities; visarge — in the matter of creation; nija — His own; śāsana — control; arhaṇam — just suitable; babhāṣe — addressed; īṣat — mild; smita — smiling; śociṣā — with enlightening; girā — words; priyaḥ — the beloved; priyam — the counterpart of love; prīta-manāḥ — being very much pleased; kare — by the hand; spṛśan — shaking.

Translation
And seeing Brahmā present before Him, the Lord accepted him as worthy to create living beings, to be controlled as He desired, and thus being much satisfied with him, the Lord shook hands with Brahmā and, slightly smiling, addressed him thus.

Text 20
श्रीभगवानुवाच
त्वयाहं तोषित: सम्यग् वेदगर्भ सिसृक्षया ।
चिरं भृतेन तपसा दुस्तोष: कूटयोगिनाम् ॥ २० ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
tvayāhaṁ toṣitaḥ samyag
veda-garbha sisṛkṣayā
ciraṁ bhṛtena tapasā
dustoṣaḥ kūṭa-yoginām
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the all-beautiful Personality of Godhead said; tvayā — by you; aham — I am; toṣitaḥ — pleased; samyak — complete; veda-garbha — impregnated with the Vedas; sisṛkṣayā — for creating; ciram — for a long time; bhṛtena — accumulated; tapasā — by penance; dustoṣaḥ — very hard to please; kūṭa-yoginām — for the pseudo mystics.

Translation
The beautiful Personality of Godhead addressed Lord Brahmā: O Brahmā, impregnated with the Vedas, I am very much pleased with your long-accumulated penance with the desire for creation. Hardly am I pleased with the pseudo mystics.

Text 21
वरं वरय भद्रं ते वरेशं माभिवाञ्छितम् ।
ब्रह्मञ्छ्रेय:परिश्राम: पुंसां मद्दर्शनावधि: ॥ २१ ॥
varaṁ varaya bhadraṁ te
vareśaṁ mābhivāñchitam
brahmañ chreyaḥ-pariśrāmaḥ
puṁsāṁ mad-darśanāvadhiḥ
Synonyms
varam — benediction; varaya — just ask from; bhadram — auspicious; te — unto you; vara-īśam — the giver of all benediction; mā (mām) — from Me; abhivāñchitam — wishing; brahman — O Brahmā; śreyaḥ — the ultimate success; pariśrāmaḥ — for all penances; puṁsām — for everyone; mat — My; darśana — realization; avadhiḥ — up to the limit of.

Translation
I wish you good luck. O Brahmā, you may ask from Me, the giver of all benediction, all that you may desire. You may know that the ultimate benediction, as the result of all penances, is to see Me by realization.

Text 22
मनीषितानुभावोऽयं मम लोकावलोकनम् ।
यदुपश्रुत्य रहसि चकर्थ परमं तप: ॥ २२ ॥
manīṣitānubhāvo ’yaṁ
mama lokāvalokanam
yad upaśrutya rahasi
cakartha paramaṁ tapaḥ
Synonyms
manīṣita — ingenuity; anubhāvaḥ — perception; ayam — this; mama — My; loka — abode; avalokanam — seeing by actual experience; yat — because; upaśrutya — hearing; rahasi — in great penance; cakartha — having performed; paramam — highest; tapaḥ — penance.

Translation
The highest perfectional ingenuity is the personal perception of My abodes, and this has been possible because of your submissive attitude in the performance of severe penance according to My order.

Text 23
प्रत्यादिष्टं मया तत्र त्वयि कर्मविमोहिते ।
तपो मे हृदयं साक्षादात्माहं तपसोऽनघ ॥ २३ ॥
pratyādiṣṭaṁ mayā tatra
tvayi karma-vimohite
tapo me hṛdayaṁ sākṣād
ātmāhaṁ tapaso ’nagha
Synonyms
pratyādiṣṭam — ordered; mayā — by Me; tatra — because of; tvayi — unto you; karma — duty; vimohite — being perplexed; tapaḥ — penance; me — Me; hṛdayam — heart; sākṣāt — directly; ātmā — life and soul; aham — Myself; tapasaḥ — of one who is engaged in penance; anagha — O sinless one.

Translation
O sinless Brahmā, you may know from Me that it was I who first ordered you to undergo penance when you were perplexed in your duty. Such penance is My heart and soul, and therefore penance and I are nondifferent.

Text 24
सृजामि तपसैवेदं ग्रसामि तपसा पुन: ।
बिभर्मि तपसा विश्वं वीर्यं मे दुश्चरं तप: ॥ २४ ॥
sṛjāmi tapasaivedaṁ
grasāmi tapasā punaḥ
bibharmi tapasā viśvaṁ
vīryaṁ me duścaraṁ tapaḥ
Synonyms
sṛjāmi — I create; tapasā — by the same energy of penance; eva — certainly; idam — this; grasāmi tapasā — I do withdraw also by the same energy; punaḥ — again; bibharmi — do maintain; tapasā — by penance; viśvam — the cosmos; vīryam — potency; me — My; duścaram — severe; tapaḥ — penance.

Translation
I create this cosmos by such penance, I maintain it by the same energy, and I withdraw it all by the same energy. Therefore the potency is penance only.

Text 25
ब्रह्मोवाच
भगवन् सर्वभूतानामध्यक्षोऽवस्थितो गुहाम् ।
वेद ह्यप्रतिरुद्धेन प्रज्ञानेन चिकीर्षितम् ॥ २५ ॥
brahmovāca
bhagavan sarva-bhūtānām
adhyakṣo ’vasthito guhām
veda hy apratiruddhena
prajñānena cikīrṣitam
Synonyms
brahmā uvāca — Lord Brahmā said; bhagavan — O my Lord; sarva-bhūtānām — of all living entities; adhyakṣaḥ — director; avasthitaḥ — situated; guhām — within the heart; veda — know; hi — certainly; apratiruddhena — without hindrance; prajñānena — by superintelligence; cikīrṣitam — endeavors.

Translation
Lord Brahmā said: O Personality of Godhead, You are situated in every living entity’s heart as the supreme director, and therefore You are aware of all endeavors by Your superior intelligence, without any hindrance whatsoever.

Text 26
तथापि नाथमानस्य नाथ नाथय नाथितम् ।
परावरे यथा रूपे जानीयां ते त्वरूपिण: ॥ २६ ॥
tathāpi nāthamānasya
nātha nāthaya nāthitam
parāvare yathā rūpe
jānīyāṁ te tv arūpiṇaḥ
Synonyms
tathā api — in spite of that; nāthamānasya — of the one who is asking for; nātha — O Lord; nāthaya — please award; nāthitam — as it is desired; para-avare — in the matter of mundane and transcendental; yathā — as it is; rūpe — in the form; jānīyām — may it be known; te — Your; tu — but; arūpiṇaḥ — one who is formless.

Translation
In spite of that, my Lord, I am praying to You to kindly fulfill my desire. May I please be informed how, in spite of Your transcendental form, You assume the mundane form, although You have no such form at all.

Text 27
यथात्ममायायोगेन नानाशक्त्युपबृंहितम् ।
विलुम्पन् विसृजन् गृह्णन् बिभ्रदात्मानमात्मना ॥ २७ ॥
yathātma-māyā-yogena
nānā-śakty-upabṛṁhitam
vilumpan visṛjan gṛhṇan
bibhrad ātmānam ātmanā
Synonyms
yathā — as much as; ātma — own; māyā — potency; yogena — by combination; nānā — various; śakti — energy; upabṛṁhitam — by combination and permutation; vilumpan — in the matter of annihilation; visṛjan — in the matter of generation; gṛhṇan — in the matter of acceptance; bibhrat — in the matter of maintenance; ātmānam — own self; ātmanā — by the self.

Translation
And [please inform me] how You, by Your own Self, manifest different energies for annihilation, generation, acceptance and maintenance by combination and permutation.

Text 28
क्रीडस्यमोघसङ्कल्प ऊर्णनाभिर्यथोर्णुते ।
तथा तद्विषयां धेहि मनीषां मयि माधव ॥ २८ ॥
krīḍasy amogha-saṅkalpa
ūrṇanābhir yathorṇute
tathā tad-viṣayāṁ dhehi
manīṣāṁ mayi mādhava
Synonyms
krīḍasi — as You play; amogha — infallible; saṅkalpa — determination; ūrṇanābhiḥ — the spider; yathā — as much as; ūrṇute — covers; tathā — so and so; tat-viṣayām — in the subject of all those; dhehi — do let me know; manīṣām — philosophically; mayi — unto me; mādhava — O master of all energies.

Translation
O master of all energies, please tell me philosophically all about them. You play like a spider that covers itself by its own energy, and Your determination is infallible.

Text 29
भगवच्छिक्षितमहं करवाणि ह्यतन्द्रित: ।
नेहमान: प्रजासर्गं बध्येयं यदनुग्रहात् ॥ २९ ॥
bhagavac-chikṣitam ahaṁ
karavāṇi hy atandritaḥ
nehamānaḥ prajā-sargaṁ
badhyeyaṁ yad-anugrahāt
Synonyms
bhagavat — by the Personality of Godhead; śikṣitam — taught; aham — myself; karavāṇi — by acting; hi — certainly; atandritaḥ — instrumental; na — never; ihamānaḥ — although acting; prajā-sargam — generation of the living entities; badhyeyam — be conditioned; yat — as a matter of fact; anugrahāt — by the mercy of.

Translation
Please tell me so that I may be taught in the matter by the instruction of the Personality of Godhead and may thus act instrumentally to generate living entities, without being conditioned by such activities.

Text 30
यावत् सखा सख्युरिवेश ते कृत:
प्रजाविसर्गे विभजामि भो जनम् ।
अविक्लवस्ते परिकर्मणि स्थितो
मा मे समुन्नद्धमदोऽजमानिन: ॥ ३० ॥
yāvat sakhā sakhyur iveśa te kṛtaḥ
prajā-visarge vibhajāmi bho janam
aviklavas te parikarmaṇi sthito
mā me samunnaddha-mado ’ja māninaḥ
Synonyms
yāvat — as it is; sakhā — friend; sakhyuḥ — unto the friend; iva — like that; īśa — O Lord; te — You; kṛtaḥ — have accepted; prajā — the living entities; visarge — in the matter of creation; vibhajāmi — as I shall do it differently; bhoḥ — O my Lord; janam — those who are born; aviklavaḥ — without being perturbed; te — Your; parikarmaṇi — in the matter of service; sthitaḥ — thus situated; mā — may it never be; me — unto me; samunnaddha — resulting arise; madaḥ — madness; aja — O unborn one; māninaḥ — thus being thought of.

Translation
O my Lord, the unborn, You have shaken hands with me just as a friend does with a friend [as if equal in position]. I shall be engaged in the creation of different types of living entities, and I shall be occupied in Your service. I shall have no perturbation, but I pray that all this may not give rise to pride, as if I were the Supreme.

Text 31
श्रीभगवानुवाच
ज्ञानं परमगुह्यं मे यद् विज्ञानसमन्वितम् ।
सरहस्यं तदङ्गं च गृहाण गदितं मया ॥ ३१ ॥
śrī-bhagavān uvāca
jñānaṁ parama-guhyaṁ me
yad vijñāna-samanvitam
sarahasyaṁ tad-aṅgaṁ ca
gṛhāṇa gaditaṁ mayā
Synonyms
śrī-bhagavān uvāca — the Personality of Godhead said; jñānam — knowledge acquired; parama — extremely; guhyam — confidential; me — of Me; yat — which is; vijñāna — realization; samanvitam — coordinated; sa-rahasyam — with devotional service; tat — of that; aṅgam ca — necessary paraphernalia; gṛhāṇa — just try to take up; gaditam — explained; mayā — by Me.

Translation
The Personality of Godhead said: Knowledge about Me as described in the scriptures is very confidential, and it has to be realized in conjunction with devotional service. The necessary paraphernalia for that process is being explained by Me. You may take it up carefully.

Text 32
यावानहं यथाभावो यद्रूपगुणकर्मक: ।
तथैव तत्त्वविज्ञानमस्तु ते मदनुग्रहात् ॥ ३२ ॥
yāvān ahaṁ yathā-bhāvo
yad-rūpa-guṇa-karmakaḥ
tathaiva tattva-vijñānam
astu te mad-anugrahāt
Synonyms
yāvān — as I am in eternal form; aham — Myself; yathā — as much as; bhāvaḥ — transcendental existence; yat — those; rūpa — various forms and colors; guṇa — qualities; karmakaḥ — activities; tathā — so and so; eva — certainly; tattva-vijñānam — factual realization; astu — let it be; te — unto you; mat — My; anugrahāt — by causeless mercy.

Translation
All of Me, namely My actual eternal form and My transcendental existence, color, qualities and activities — let all be awakened within you by factual realization, out of My causeless mercy.

Text 33
अहमेवासमेवाग्रे नान्यद् यत् सदसत् परम् ।
पश्चादहं यदेतच्च योऽवशिष्येत सोऽस्म्यहम् ॥ ३३ ॥
aham evāsam evāgre
nānyad yat sad-asat param
paścād ahaṁ yad etac ca
yo ’vaśiṣyeta so ’smy aham
Synonyms
aham — I, the Personality of Godhead; eva — certainly; āsam — existed; eva — only; agre — before the creation; na — never; anyat — anything else; yat — all those; sat — the effect; asat — the cause; param — the supreme; paścāt — at the end; aham — I, the Personality of Godhead; yat — all these; etat — creation; ca — also; yaḥ — everything; avaśiṣyeta — remains; saḥ — that; asmi — I am; aham — I, the Personality of Godhead.

Translation
Brahmā, it is I, the Personality of Godhead, who was existing before the creation, when there was nothing but Myself. Nor was there the material nature, the cause of this creation. That which you see now is also I, the Personality of Godhead, and after annihilation what remains will also be I, the Personality of Godhead.

Text 34
ऋतेऽर्थं यत् प्रतीयेत न प्रतीयेत चात्मनि ।
तद्विद्यादात्मनो मायां यथाभासो यथा तम: ॥ ३४ ॥
ṛte ’rthaṁ yat pratīyeta
na pratīyeta cātmani
tad vidyād ātmano māyāṁ
yathābhāso yathā tamaḥ
Synonyms
ṛte — without; artham — value; yat — that which; pratīyeta — appears to be; na — not; pratīyeta — appears to be; ca — and; ātmani — in relation to Me; tat — that; vidyāt — you must know; ātmanaḥ — My; māyām — illusory energy; yathā — just as; ābhāsaḥ — the reflection; yathā — as; tamaḥ — the darkness.

Translation
O Brahmā, whatever appears to be of any value, if it is without relation to Me, has no reality. Know it as My illusory energy, that reflection which appears to be in darkness.

Text 35
यथा महान्ति भूतानि भूतेषूच्चावचेष्वनु ।
प्रविष्टान्यप्रविष्टानि तथा तेषु न तेष्वहम् ॥ ३५ ॥
yathā mahānti bhūtāni
bhūteṣūccāvaceṣv anu
praviṣṭāny apraviṣṭāni
tathā teṣu na teṣv aham
Synonyms
yathā — just as; mahānti — the universal; bhūtāni — elements; bhūteṣu ucca-avaceṣu — in the minute and gigantic; anu — after; praviṣṭāni — entered; apraviṣṭāni — not entered; tathā — so; teṣu — in them; na — not; teṣu — in them; aham — Myself.

Translation
O Brahmā, please know that the universal elements enter into the cosmos and at the same time do not enter into the cosmos; similarly, I Myself also exist within everything created, and at the same time I am outside of everything.

Text 36
एतावदेव जिज्ञास्यं तत्त्वजिज्ञासुनात्मन: ।
अन्वयव्यतिरेकाभ्यां यत् स्यात् सर्वत्र सर्वदा ॥ ३६ ॥
etāvad eva jijñāsyaṁ
tattva-jijñāsunātmanaḥ
anvaya-vyatirekābhyāṁ
yat syāt sarvatra sarvadā
Synonyms
etāvat — up to this; eva — certainly; jijñāsyam — is to be inquired; tattva — the Absolute Truth; jijñāsunā — by the student; ātmanaḥ — of the Self; anvaya — directly; vyatirekābhyām — indirectly; yat — whatever; syāt — it may be; sarvatra — in all space and time; sarvadā — in all circumstances.

Translation
A person who is searching after the Supreme Absolute Truth, the Personality of Godhead, must certainly search for it up to this, in all circumstances, in all space and time, and both directly and indirectly.

Text 37
एतन्मतं समातिष्ठ परमेण समाधिना ।
भवान् कल्पविकल्पेषु न विमुह्यति कर्हिचित् ॥ ३७ ॥
etan mataṁ samātiṣṭha
parameṇa samādhinā
bhavān kalpa-vikalpeṣu
na vimuhyati karhicit
Synonyms
etat — this; matam — the conclusion; samātiṣṭha — remain fixed; parameṇa — by the supreme; samādhinā — concentration of the mind; bhavān — yourself; kalpa — intermediate devastation; vikalpeṣu — in the final devastation; na vimuhyati — will never bewilder; karhicit — anything like complacence.

Translation
O Brahmā, just follow this conclusion by fixed concentration of mind, and no pride will disturb you, neither in the partial nor in the final devastation.

Text 38
श्रीशुक उवाच
सम्प्रदिश्यैवमजनो जनानां परमेष्ठिनम् ।
पश्यतस्तस्य तद् रूपमात्मनो न्यरुणद्धरि: ॥ ३८ ॥
śrī-śuka uvāca
sampradiśyaivam ajano
janānāṁ parameṣṭhinam
paśyatas tasya tad rūpam
ātmano nyaruṇad dhariḥ
Synonyms
śrī-śukaḥ uvāca — Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī said; sampradiśya — fully instructing Brahmājī; evam — thus; ajanaḥ — the Supreme Lord; janānām — of the living entities; parameṣṭhinam — unto the supreme leader, Brahmā; paśyataḥ — while he was seeing; tasya — His; tat rūpam — that transcendental form; ātmanaḥ — of the Absolute; nyaruṇat — disappeared; hariḥ — the Lord, the Personality of Godhead.

Translation
Śukadeva Gosvāmī said to Mahārāja Parīkṣit: The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, after being seen in His transcendental form, instructing Brahmājī, the leader of the living entities, disappeared.

Text 39
अन्तर्हितेन्द्रियार्थाय हरये विहिताञ्जलि: ।
सर्वभूतमयो विश्वं ससर्जेदं स पूर्ववत् ॥ ३९ ॥
antarhitendriyārthāya
haraye vihitāñjaliḥ
sarva-bhūtamayo viśvaṁ
sasarjedaṁ sa pūrvavat
Synonyms
antarhita — on the disappearance; indriya-arthāya — unto the Personality of Godhead, the objective of all senses; haraye — unto the Lord; vihita-añjaliḥ — in folded hands; sarva-bhūta — all living entities; mayaḥ — full of; viśvam — the universe; sasarja — created; idam — this; saḥ — he (Brahmājī); pūrva-vat — exactly like before.

Translation
On the disappearance of the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Hari, who is the object of transcendental enjoyment for the senses of devotees, Brahmā, with folded hands, began to re-create the universe, full with living entities, as it was previously.

Text 40
प्रजापतिर्धर्मपतिरेकदा नियमान् यमान् ।
भद्रं प्रजानामन्विच्छन्नातिष्ठत् स्वार्थकाम्यया ॥ ४० ॥
prajāpatir dharma-patir
ekadā niyamān yamān
bhadraṁ prajānām anvicchann
ātiṣṭhat svārtha-kāmyayā
Synonyms
prajā-patiḥ — the forefather of all living entities; dharma-patiḥ — the father of religious life; ekadā — once upon a time; niyamān — rules and regulations; yamān — principles of control; bhadram — welfare; prajānām — of the living beings; anvicchan — desiring; ātiṣṭhat — situated; sva-artha — own interest; kāmyayā — so desiring.

Translation
Thus once upon a time the forefather of living entities and the father of religiousness, Lord Brahmā, situated himself in acts of regulative principles, desiring self-interest for the welfare of all living entities.

Text 41
तं नारद: प्रियतमो रिक्थादानामनुव्रत: ।
शुश्रूषमाण: शीलेन प्रश्रयेण दमेन च ॥ ४१ ॥
taṁ nāradaḥ priyatamo
rikthādānām anuvrataḥ
śuśrūṣamāṇaḥ śīlena
praśrayeṇa damena ca
Synonyms
tam — unto him; nāradaḥ — the great sage Nārada; priyatamaḥ — very dear; riktha-ādānām — of the inheritor sons; anuvrataḥ — very obedient; śuśrūṣamāṇaḥ — always ready to serve; śīlena — by good behavior; praśrayeṇa — by meekness; damena — by sense control; ca — also.

Translation
Nārada, the most dear of the inheritor sons of Brahmā, always ready to serve his father, strictly follows the instructions of his father by his mannerly behavior, meekness and sense control.

Text 42
मायां विविदिषन् विष्णोर्मायेशस्य महामुनि: ।
महाभागवतो राजन् पितरं पर्यतोषयत् ॥ ४२ ॥
māyāṁ vividiṣan viṣṇor
māyeśasya mahā-muniḥ
mahā-bhāgavato rājan
pitaraṁ paryatoṣayat
Synonyms
māyām — energies; vividiṣan — desiring to know; viṣṇoḥ — of the Personality of Godhead; māyā-īśasya — of the master of all energies; mahā-muniḥ — the great sage; mahā-bhāgavataḥ — the first-class devotee of the Lord; rājan — O King; pitaram — unto his father; paryatoṣayat — very much pleased.

Translation
Nārada very much pleased his father and desired to know all about the energies of Viṣṇu, the master of all energies, for Nārada was the greatest of all sages and greatest of all devotees, O King.

Text 43
तुष्टं निशाम्य पितरं लोकानां प्रपितामहम् ।
देवर्षि: परिपप्रच्छ भवान् यन्मानुपृच्छति ॥ ४३ ॥
tuṣṭaṁ niśāmya pitaraṁ
lokānāṁ prapitāmaham
devarṣiḥ paripapraccha
bhavān yan mānupṛcchati
Synonyms
tuṣṭam — satisfied; niśāmya — after seeing; pitaram — the father; lokānām — of the whole universe; prapitāmaham — the great-grandfather; devarṣiḥ — the great sage Nārada; paripapraccha — inquired; bhavān — yourself; yat — as it is; mā — from me; anupṛcchati — inquiring.

Translation
The great sage Nārada also inquired in detail from his father, Brahmā, the great-grandfather of all the universe, after seeing him well satisfied.

Text 44
तस्मा इदं भागवतं पुराणं दशलक्षणम् ।
प्रोक्तं भगवता प्राह प्रीत: पुत्राय भूतकृत् ॥ ४४ ॥
tasmā idaṁ bhāgavataṁ
purāṇaṁ daśa-lakṣaṇam
proktaṁ bhagavatā prāha
prītaḥ putrāya bhūta-kṛt
Synonyms
tasmai — thereupon; idam — this; bhāgavatam — the glories of the Lord or the science of the Lord; purāṇam — Vedic supplement; daśa-lakṣaṇam — ten characteristics; proktam — described; bhagavatā — by the Personality of Godhead; prāha — said; prītaḥ — in satisfaction; putrāya — unto the son; bhūta-kṛt — the creator of the universe.

Translation
Thereupon the supplementary Vedic literature, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which was described by the Personality of Godhead and which contains ten characteristics, was told with satisfaction by the father [Brahmā] to his son Nārada.

Text 45
नारद: प्राह मुनये सरस्वत्यास्तटे नृप ।
ध्यायते ब्रह्म परमं व्यासायामिततेजसे ॥ ४५ ॥
nāradaḥ prāha munaye
sarasvatyās taṭe nṛpa
dhyāyate brahma paramaṁ
vyāsāyāmita-tejase
Synonyms
nāradaḥ — the great sage Nārada; prāha — instructed; munaye — unto the great sage; sarasvatyāḥ — of the river Sarasvatī; taṭe — on the bank; nṛpa — O King; dhyāyate — unto the meditative; brahma — Absolute Truth; paramam — the Supreme; vyāsāya — unto Śrīla Vyāsadeva; amita — unlimited; tejase — unto the powerful.

Translation
In succession, O King, the great sage Nārada instructed Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam unto the unlimitedly powerful Vyāsadeva, who meditated in devotional service upon the Supreme Personality of Godhead, the Absolute Truth, on the bank of the river Sarasvatī.

Text 46
यदुताहं त्वया पृष्टो वैराजात् पुरुषादिदम् ।
यथासीत्तदुपाख्यास्ते प्रश्नानन्यांश्च कृत्‍स्‍नश: ॥ ४६ ॥
yad utāhaṁ tvayā pṛṣṭo
vairājāt puruṣād idam
yathāsīt tad upākhyāste
praśnān anyāṁś ca kṛtsnaśaḥ
Synonyms
yat — what; uta — is, however; aham — I; tvayā — by you; pṛṣṭaḥ — I am asked; vairājāt — from the universal form; puruṣāt — from the Personality of Godhead; idam — this world; yathā — as it; āsīt — was; tat — that; upākhyāste — I shall explain; praśnān — all the questions; anyān — others; ca — as well as; kṛtsnaśaḥ — in great detail.

Translation
O King, your questions as to how the universe became manifested from the gigantic form of the Personality of Godhead, as well as other questions, I shall answer in detail by explanation of the four verses already mentioned.